Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AJAP1 is dysregulated at an early stage of gliomagenesis and
suppresses invasion through cytoskeleton reorganization


BackgroundGlioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant primary brain
tumor in adults and is a leading cause of cancer-related death due to its
invasive nature. Despite advances in radiation and chemotherapy following
surgical resection of the tumor, the prognosis of GBM remains poor with
an average survival time of less than one year. Accumulating evidence
indicates the existence of tumor suppressor-like genes encoded on the
1p36 region. Recent investigations have reported Adherens Junctional
Associated Protein-1 (AJAP1, also known as Shrew1) as another tumor
suppressor-like gene on chromosome 1 in the 1p36 region. We and others
also demonstrated that the AJAP1 promoter was highly methylated in a wide
spectrum of glioma cell lines, and the loss of expression was associated
with poorer survival in gliomas patients. However, the altered expression
profiles of AJAP1 in gliomas as well as the underlying mechanisms of
AJAP1 on glial cell migration and invasion are still poorly
understood.MethodsThe gene profiles of AJAP1 in glioma patients were
studied among four independent cohorts. Confocal imaging was used to
analyze the AJAP1 localization. After AJAP1 over-expression in GBM cell
lines, cellular polarity, cytoskeleton distribution, and anti-tumor
effect were investigated in vitro and in vivo.ResultsAJAP1 expression was
significantly decreased in gliomas compared with normal brain in
REMBRANDT and CGCA cohorts. Additionally, low AJAP1 expression was
associated with worse survival in GBMs in REMBRANDT and TCGA U133A
cohorts and was significantly associated with classical and mesenchymal
subtypes of GBMs among four cohorts. Confocal imaging indicated AJAP1
localized in cell membranes in low-grade gliomas and AJAP1
over-expressing GBM cells, but difficult to assess in high-grade gliomas
due to its absence. AJAP1 over-expression altered the cytoskeleton and
cellular morphology in vitro, and inhibited the tumor growth in vivo.
ConclusionIn summary, gene profiling of gliomas showed that dysregulated
AJAP1 exists in the early stage of gliomagenesis. In particular, AJAP1
expression is associated with low and high tumor grades, as well as the
clinical outcome of patients with GBMs. Its over-expression predicts poor
clinical outcome and may serve as a promising biomarker for intensive
therapy, especially in Classical and Mesenchymal GBM patients. Few
studies have investigated the function of AJAP1 and cytoskeleton
regulation in gliomas. Further studies are warranted to explore the
biological functions of AJAP1 that may improve our understanding of the
initiation of gliomas and development of new biomarker and therapeutic
target for individualized therapy of GBM.

