Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study of childhood body fatness as a risk
factor of breast cancer


Girls with large body size have a 15-30% reduced risk of developing
breast cancer independent of both birth weight and adult body mass index
(BMI). The mechanisms underlying this association are poorly understood,
especially since large body size at young age is correlated with earlier
pubertal timing, a known risk factor for breast cancer. Self-reported
childhood body size, a phenotype which is described in the literature as
childhood body fatness, has an estimated heritability of 70-80% compared
to 40-70% for adult BMI and the correlation between childhood body
fatness and adult BMI is only modest (r=0.24-0.30). Still, the literature
on genetic associations in pediatric body size-related phenotypes is very
sparse.We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of childhood
body fatness in 10,560 individuals within the Nurses Health Study (NHS)
and the Health Professional Follow-up Study (HPFS). All subjects were
imputed using the 1000 Genomes Phase I v3 reference panel. Analysis was
adjusted for top principal components and study/gender. We observed three
regions with pGirls with large body size have a 15-30% reduced risk of
developing breast cancer independent of both birth weight and adult body
mass index (BMI). The mechanisms underlying this association are poorly
understood, especially since large body size at young age is correlated
with earlier pubertal timing, a known risk factor for breast cancer.
Self-reported childhood body size, a phenotype which is described in the
literature as childhood body fatness, has an estimated heritability of
70-80% compared to 40-70% for adult BMI and the correlation between
childhood body fatness and adult BMI is only modest (r=0.24-0.30). Still,
the literature on genetic associations in pediatric body size-related
phenotypes is very sparse.We conducted a genome-wide association study
(GWAS) of childhood body fatness in 10,560 individuals within the Nurses
Health Study (NHS) and the Health Professional Follow-up Study (HPFS).
All subjects were imputed using the 1000 Genomes Phase I v3 reference
panel. Analysis was adjusted for top principal components and
study/gender. We observed three regions with p<10-7. Two of the regions
(TNNI3K and BCDIN3D) have previously been identified as associated with
BMI, the former in adolescents. The third region (1p35.2, p=4.8x10-8)
constitutes a potential novel locus associated with childhood body
fatness. Five additional regions (4 novel) showed suggestive association
with childhood body fatness (pGirls with large body size have a 15-30%
reduced risk of developing breast cancer independent of both birth weight
and adult body mass index (BMI). The mechanisms underlying this
association are poorly understood, especially since large body size at
young age is correlated with earlier pubertal timing, a known risk factor
for breast cancer. Self-reported childhood body size, a phenotype which
is described in the literature as childhood body fatness, has an
estimated heritability of 70-80% compared to 40-70% for adult BMI and the
correlation between childhood body fatness and adult BMI is only modest
(r=0.24-0.30). Still, the literature on genetic associations in pediatric
body size-related phenotypes is very sparse.We conducted a genome-wide
association study (GWAS) of childhood body fatness in 10,560 individuals
within the Nurses Health Study (NHS) and the Health Professional
Follow-up Study (HPFS). All subjects were imputed using the 1000 Genomes
Phase I v3 reference panel. Analysis was adjusted for top principal
components and study/gender. We observed three regions with p<10-7. Two
of the regions (TNNI3K and BCDIN3D) have previously been identified as
associated with BMI, the former in adolescents. The third region (1p35.2,
p=4.8x10-8) constitutes a potential novel locus associated with childhood
body fatness. Five additional regions (4 novel) showed suggestive
association with childhood body fatness (p<10-6). We are currently
replicating these new regions in additional 9,800 subjects from NHS, HPFS
and SASBAC, a Swedish breast cancer case-control study. We will also
assess the association between identified loci and breast cancer risk.
Such analysis will help elucidate the shared genetic component between
childhood body fatness and breast cancer and increase our understanding
to why early life fatness decreases breast cancer risk.

