Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein palmitoylation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC):
DHHC5 palmitoyltransferase as a potential therapeutic target


Post-translational palmitoylation of intracellular proteins is mediated
by protein palmitoyltransferases (PAT) belonging to the DHHC family,
which share a common catalytic Asp-His-His-Cys (DHHC) motif. According to
a genome-wide siRNA screen scoring for growth suppression in over 50
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, DHHC family members are
strikingly over-represented. Among the tested DHHC palmitoyltransferases,
knockdown of DHHC5 showed cell growth inhibition in many cell lines in
the initial screen.To further investigate the growth suppression in
response to DHHC5 depletion, transient and stable knockdowns of DHHC5
were undertaken in a dozen of NSCLC cell lines identified in the
genome-wide screen using siRNAs and lentiviral shRNAs. Such knockdown was
also performed in three immortalized human lung bronchial epithelial cell
lines (HBECs). The gene expression and protein levels of DHHC5 were
analyzed by RT-PCR and immunoblotting, both of which showed efficient
knockdown levels. Cell proliferation and anchorage-dependent/independent
colony formation assays indicated that DHHC5 knockdown led to cell growth
arrest and decreased cell clonogenicity in most of the tested NSCLC cell
lines in vitro, but not in the HBECs. H1299, H358 and H2009 cell lines
were particularly dependent on DHHC5 expression and the
growth-suppression phenotype of DHHC5 stable knockdown H1299/H358/H2009
cells was rescued by overexpression of DHHC5. The catalytically inactive
DHHC5 mutant was not able to provide rescue. In vivo tumor formation
assays were then carried out by injecting H1299 and H358 control cells
and DHHC5 stable knockdown cells subcutaneously into NOD/SCID mice. DHHC5
knockdown led to absence or dramatically decreased tumor xenograft
formation. Furthermore, a Tet-On inducible system with TRIPZ shRNA
lentiviral delivery was established in H1299. Mouse xenografts using this
H1299 Tet-on inducible cell line showed similar results.As DHHC5 function
is needed for optimal lung cancer cell growth, it will be important to
identify physiologically relevant substrates in order to develop
inhibitors of DHHC5 function. Future plans include microarray and protein
kinase array analysis to distinguish possible signaling pathways in which
DHHC5 may be involved, as well as palmitoyl-protein profiling of normal
and knockdown DHHC5 cell lines by mass spectrometry.

