Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High degree of G2/M arrest induced by Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1)
inhibition is associated with radiosensitization


Inhibition of polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) seems to be a plausible avenue
for sensitizing cancer cells to radiation. It has been demonstrated that
normal cells tolerate PLK1 depletion well, when compared to cancer cells,
suggesting a wide therapeutic index. This has been confirmed with our
results from proliferation assays conducted with two primary human cell
lines and various cancer cell lines. Recently, it has been shown that
head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma and medulloblastoma cells can be
radiosensitized by PLK1 inhibition. Furthermore, PLK1 is involved in
repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Together, these results suggest that
PLK1 inhibition is a particularly attractive means of
radiosensitization.To further investigate the radiosensitization property
of PLK1 inhibition, clonogenic assays were carried out. Various cancer
cell lines were treated with specific PLK1 inhibitor BI 2536 and
subjected to various doses of ionizing radiation. The cancer cell lines
were of breast, colorectal, and pancreatic origin. We found that some,
but not all, cancer cells were radiosensitized by pre-treatment with BI
2536. Mutational statuses of p53 and KRAS were examined, but no
relationship between the mutational statuses and radiosensitization by BI
2536 treatment was found.Since PLK1 inhibition causes G2/M arrest, which
is the cell cycle phase that is known to be more sensitive to ionizing
radiation, we assessed the percentage of cancer cells at G2/M phase when
treated with or without BI 2536. Cells were treated with BI 2536 for 24
hrs before they were fixed, stained with propidium iodide, and analyzed
with flow cytometry. The degree of G2/M arrest induction was assessed by
G2/M induction index, as defined by % of G2/M cells before treatment / %
of G2/M cells after treatment. We found that the G2/M induction indices
were significantly higher with the cells that can be radiosensitized with
PLK1 inhibition, when compared to those of the cells that cannot be
radiosensitized. Therefore, we conclude that high G2/M induction index is
predictive of radiosensitization with PLK1 inhibition. Future experiments
of this project include determining the G2/M induction index threshold
required for achieving radiosensitization and indentifying the molecular
basis of such association.

