Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-6 expression is restricted to the prostate stromal
compartment and is not expressed by either primary or metastatic
prostatic adenocarcinoma cells


Background: Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pleiotropic cytokine that elicits
multiple physiological processes including immune responses,
hematopoiesis, and cellular proliferation and differentiation. IL-6 has
also been implicated in a number of pathophysiologic processes, including
carcinogenesis. Multiple studies suggest that IL-6 may contribute to the
development and/or progression of prostate cancer, and high systemic
levels of IL-6 are associated with a more aggressive clinical course. A
number of studies have indicated that prostatic adenocarcinoma cells
express IL-6; yet, the source of IL-6 production in the prostate tumor
microenvironment is debatable and it remains unclear if the cytokine acts
in an autocrine or paracrine manner. Understanding the cellular origin of
IL-6 is essential to establishing the mechanistic basis by which IL-6 may
promote prostate cancer progression.Methods: Quantitative PCR (qPCR) and
chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) were used to study IL-6
expression in primary clinical prostatic carcinomas. As an initial
approach, RNA derived from 11 prostate cell lines and 10 matched benign
and tumor frozen prostate tissue samples were analyzed for IL-6
expression by qPCR. Next, formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE)
samples from the 11 cell lines, 21 prostatectomy samples, and 12
metastatic prostate cancer biopsy or autopsy tissue samples were analyzed
by chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) for IL-6 mRNA (RNAscope,
Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Inc.).Results: Three of the prostate cell
lines (PrSC, RWPE, DU145) were found to be positive for IL-6 expression
by both qPCR and CISH, indicating complete concordance between the two
assays. Surprisingly, qPCR analyses revealed that benign prostate tissues
most often had higher expression of IL-6 than matched tumor. Subsequent
IL-6 CISH analysis indicated that prostate adenocarcinoma cells do not
express IL-6 mRNA in either primary or metastatic cancer cells; rather,
IL-6 mRNA expression was nearly exclusively restricted to the prostate
stromal compartment and was highly up-regulated in areas of acute
inflammation and prostatic atrophy.Conclusions: Our results are in
contrast to published literature that argues that prostate cancer cells
are the origin of IL-6 in the prostate tumor microenvironment and that
prostate cancer progression is mediated by autocrine IL-6 signaling. The
restriction of IL-6 expressing cells primarily to the prostate stromal
compartment may alter the current understanding of how IL-6 may mediate
the development and progression of prostate cancer.

