Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of localized cisplatin chemotherapy: from benchside to
investigational new drug application


Many cancers preferentially spread to the lymphatics before systemic
dissemination. The purpose of this study is to develop
intralymphatically-targeted cisplatin nanoparticles for treating locally
advanced head and neck cancer. This treatment methodology may
significantly reduce the side effects and increase the efficacy of
cisplatin-based chemotherapy in both humans and companion animals,
compared to conventional intravenous chemotherapies. Cisplatin was
chemically conjugated to hyaluronan (HA) to form hyaluronan-cisplatin
(HA-Pt) nanoparticles. The nanoparticles were purified and concentrated
using a tangential flow filtration system. The cisplatin substitution
degree, particle size, molecular weight, viscosity, osmolality,
sterility, bioburden, particulate content, impurity profiles, and
stability of the formulation in the presence of various excipients were
determined. All analytical methods utilized were fully validated
according to FDA and/or USP guidelines. The pharmacokinetics,
biodistribution and safety of subcutaneously injected HA-Pt were
evaluated in animals. Anti-cancer efficacy of HA-Pt was determined in
mice bearing cisplatin sensitive xenografts (1/wk for 3wks; 3.5mg/kg).
Canines with spontaneously-occurring limb lymphomas were given a single
0.85-mg/kg subcutaneous dose peritumorally. Canines with
spontaneously-occurring oral squamous cell carcinoma, oral melanoma, or
nasal tumors received 3 doses at 10 to 15 mg/m2, peritumorally. The
cisplatin conjugation degree on HA was 15-20 w/w%. HA-Pt demonstrated
antiproliferative efficacy similar to standard cisplatin in vitro with
sustained release of cisplatin (t1/2=10h). The characteristics of HA-Pt
meet FDA requirements for injectable formulations. HA-Pt resulted in
higher plasma area-under-the-curve (AUC) and lower Cmax in rats. Murine
xenografts demonstrated improved complete and partial responses to HA-Pt
treatment compared to standard cisplatin therapy. The HA-Pt reduced Cmax
5.5 fold and increased the canine plasma AUC of cisplatin 5.4 fold and
the lymph node concentration 18 fold compared to i.v. cisplatin. The
tumor:plasma ratio in canines was 429, indicating the nanoparticles
concentrated drug within the tumor. A single injection of HA-Pt resulted
in size reduction of the metastatic lymph nodes of canine oral melanoma.
After the completion of 3 treatments, the canine oral tumor was
completely eradicated (no recurrence within a year) and swelling was
greatly reduced. Stable disease was observed for most of the dogs. This
study demonstrates that subcutaneous delivery of HA-Pt formulations may
be a promising treatment regimen to improve tumor drug accumulation and
therapeutic efficacy. The successful completion of a series of GLP rodent
and canine study will warrant a submission of an Investigational New Drug
Application to the FDA.

