Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor DNA: FOXL2 402C-G mutation can be identified in
plasma from adult granulosa cell tumor patients with recurrent disease


Adult granulosa cell tumors (aGCT) represent 2-5% of all ovarian cancers.
Most patients present with stage 1 disease and have a good prognosis,
however up to 30% of aGCTs will recur (median=7 years), and 50% of these
patients die of aGCT. These women require prolonged surveillance for
serum tumor markers. In recent years, the detection of somatic mutations
in free circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in plasma has been investigated as
a non-invasive method to diagnose and monitor different cancers. The
analysis of plasma DNA, which is a mixture of ctDNA and normal DNA, can
be extended to aGCT patients that are at risk to recur, which would
involve testing for the presence of the FOXL2 402C->G mutation. This
mutation is known to be present in 95% of aGCTs; FOXL2 mutation testing
is currently being used to aid in tumor differential diagnosis.FOXL2
mutations in free ctDNA can be detected in the plasma of aGCT patients
and may aid in diagnosis and monitoring of patients.Plasma samples
(1-2mL) were extracted for ctDNA using the Qiagen circulating nucleic
acid kit. The ctDNA was preamplified for 10 cycles using the C134W FOXL2
Taqman primer/probe, ABI genotyping mix, followed by a 1:5 dilution.
Preamplified ctDNA products were subjected to droplet formation and
counted on the Raindance Raindrop digital PCR instruments to detect wild
type or mutant alleles. All analysis was performed using the Raindrop
Analyst V2 software.Of two aGCT cases tested, both showed detectable
plasma ctDNA FOXL2 mutations using Raindance Raindrop digital PCR. For
case 1, plasma from two subsequent time points were tested. The FOXL2
mutation was not detected in the first time point, 12 years from
diagnosis, at which time the patient had relapsed disease and underwent
chemotherapy. Surgery for extensive tumor burden was performed at the
second time point, 6 months later, and a 16% allelic frequency of the
FOXL2 mutation was detected in the plasma DNA. For case 2, two plasma
samples were tested, the first from the primary surgery, the second at
relapse two years later. The FOXL2 ctDNA mutation was present at 6% in
the recurrent plasma sample, but not at primary diagnosis. The recurrence
was originally diagnosed as a high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma,
however the tumor was FOXL2 mutation positive and later re-diagnosed as a
relapsed aGCT.The analysis of two cases of aGCT plasma suggests that the
pathognomonic aGCT associated FOXL2 mutation is present in recurrent
disease. We also show that the presence of a ctDNA FOXL2 mutation
confirms the differential diagnosis of recurrent disease. This is the
first proof of principle that plasma DNA may be a non-invasive method to
detect recurrent aGCT. Plasma samples from a large prospective cohort
with primary or recurrent aGCT will be analyzed to test the sensitive of
FOXL2 ctDNA to predict tumor burden. These studies will be imperative to
determine the utilization of the plasma FOXL2 ctDNA mutation in routine
diagnosis.

