Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of AKT negates the pro-apoptotic function of Par-4 in
castration resistant prostate cancer cells


Activation of AKT signaling pathway is a common aberrations in advanced
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). PTEN, a tumor suppressor is
known to negatively regulate AKT function, however, in most cancer
deletion or mutation of PTEN facilitates AKT mediated survival signaling
in most cancer types. In this study, we have determined the clinical and
pathological significance of AKT signaling in CaP tissues and CRPC cell
lines. AKT and pAKT (ser473) were measured in prostate tumor tissues
(Normal = 23, Grade I=13, Grade II-24 and Grade III=26) by
immunohistochemistry analysis. Phosphorylated AKT is significantly higher
in tumors (Grades-I, II and III) as compared to the normal/hyperplastic
tissues; however, there no significant differences were seen in AKT
expression between normal and tumor tissues. In CRPC cell lines, stable
expression of AKT increases proliferation, epithelial mesenchymal
transition and angiogenesis in cancer cells. Injection of over expressed
AKT, CRPC cells resulted in tumor growth in athymic mice as compared to
vector cells. We observed AKT tumors grow rapidly, are larger in size and
showed 100% tumorigenecity as compared to the control tumors (40%), which
had slow growth, as well as small tumors. Interestingly, subcutaneous
injection of AKT/CRPC cells in athymic mice showed hyperplasia in
anterior and a ventral lateral lobe of the prostate, which was absent in
control tumors. We also found that AKT tumors are highly vascularized
than the control tumors; however no micrometastasis were observed in our
H &E analysis.Our in vitro studies have revealed that treatment of
Withaferin-A, an herbal compound inhibits AKT activation and up regulates
Par-4 mediated apoptosis by activating caspase cascades in CRPC cells. In
addition, WA overcomes AKT induced resistance in CRPC cells and restores
Par-4 function that resulted in growth inhibition in AKT over expressed
CRPC (DU-145 and C4-2B) cells. Similarly, oral administration of WA
(4mg/kg) significantly inhibited the growth of both control and AKT over
expressed tumors (PActivation of AKT signaling pathway is a common
aberrations in advanced castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
PTEN, a tumor suppressor is known to negatively regulate AKT function,
however, in most cancer deletion or mutation of PTEN facilitates AKT
mediated survival signaling in most cancer types. In this study, we have
determined the clinical and pathological significance of AKT signaling in
CaP tissues and CRPC cell lines. AKT and pAKT (ser473) were measured in
prostate tumor tissues (Normal = 23, Grade I=13, Grade II-24 and Grade
III=26) by immunohistochemistry analysis. Phosphorylated AKT is
significantly higher in tumors (Grades-I, II and III) as compared to the
normal/hyperplastic tissues; however, there no significant differences
were seen in AKT expression between normal and tumor tissues. In CRPC
cell lines, stable expression of AKT increases proliferation, epithelial
mesenchymal transition and angiogenesis in cancer cells. Injection of
over expressed AKT, CRPC cells resulted in tumor growth in athymic mice
as compared to vector cells. We observed AKT tumors grow rapidly, are
larger in size and showed 100% tumorigenecity as compared to the control
tumors (40%), which had slow growth, as well as small tumors.
Interestingly, subcutaneous injection of AKT/CRPC cells in athymic mice
showed hyperplasia in anterior and a ventral lateral lobe of the
prostate, which was absent in control tumors. We also found that AKT
tumors are highly vascularized than the control tumors; however no
micrometastasis were observed in our H &E analysis.Our in vitro studies
have revealed that treatment of Withaferin-A, an herbal compound inhibits
AKT activation and up regulates Par-4 mediated apoptosis by activating
caspase cascades in CRPC cells. In addition, WA overcomes AKT induced
resistance in CRPC cells and restores Par-4 function that resulted in
growth inhibition in AKT over expressed CRPC (DU-145 and C4-2B) cells.
Similarly, oral administration of WA (4mg/kg) significantly inhibited the
growth of both control and AKT over expressed tumors (P< 0.001).
Currently, we are observing tumor regrowth after stopping the WA
treatment and immunohistochemistry analysis to confirm AKT mediated
pro-survival signaling and EMT markers in the tumor tissues. These
finding suggest WA could be a potent agent which overrides AKT mediated
pro-survival and EMT signaling in CRPC cells, hence it can be used as a
chemopreventive and/or chemotherapeutic agent for highly aggressive and
metastatic prostate cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

