Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How does the tumor microenvironment affect macrophage
aggressiveness


The immune system plays an important role in the development and
progression of cancer. In fact, immune cell infiltration can affect
malignancy progression and metastasis. Infiltration of macrophages to the
tumor site has been shown to account for more than 50% of the tumor mass
in some breast cancers suggesting macrophages have a significant role in
tumor progression. Macrophages are cells derived from the myeloid lineage
and belong to the innate immune system. They differentiate from blood
monocytes in tissue and one of their main functions is to phagocytose
microbes and clear cellular debris. Macrophages also play an important
role in inflammation and the resolution of inflammation. They exhibit a
variety of responses depending on the type of stimuli they receive,
varying from pro-inflammatory to anti-inflammatory. Two major macrophage
phenotypes have been proposed: M1 and M2. M1 macrophages, or classically
activated macrophages, show a pro-inflammatory profile that is
characterized by aggressive phagocytosis and anti-microbial properties.
M2 macrophages, also known as alternatively activated macrophages,
exhibit immunomodulatory, repair, and angiogenic properties.This project
explored macrophage function by studying the aggressiveness of
macrophages exposed to different cancer cell lines (Raji, H460, MCF7,
MDA-MB-231, HT-29, SW620, and PC3) and their spent media. We used
PMA-stimulated U937 cells and monocyte-derived macrophages from human
blood as phagocytes. Macrophage aggressiveness was measured through flow
cytometry by quantification of macrophage engulfment rates of fluorescent
spherical beads. We found that cancer cell lines with higher
aggressiveness had a more radical suppression of macrophage engulfment
(81% engulfment reduction compared to control) than less aggressive cell
lines (1% engulfment reduction compared to control). We also found that
spent media had a lower effect on macrophage engulfment overall,
indicating cell to cell contact is important to suppress macrophage
engulfment. Spent media from aggressive cell lines had a similar effect
to the cells themselves, suggesting cytokine and vesicle communication.
We also studied how these cell lines affected macrophage polarization by
qPCR, finding that lower engulfment rates correlate with an M2 cytokine
profile (high IL-10, low IL-12) and higher engulfment rates correlate
with an M1 cytokine profile (low IL-10, high IL-12). Further studies will
help us understand more of the signals that cancer cells give to their
environment to prevent macrophage engulfment and to help maintain an M2
phenotype.

