Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibulin-5 as a regulator of integrin-induced ROS production and
potential target for pancreatic cancer


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) function as signaling molecules in
pathological and normal molecular pathways. Redox homeostasis is
maintained by a balance between the ROS production and ROS scavenging
capacity of the cell. Extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as
fibronectin have been shown to induce ROS upon binding to cell surface
integrins, such as 51 integrin. Solid tumors rich in ECM such as
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) display with higher levels of ROS
compared to normal tissue. An attractive strategy to improve therapeutic
response in PDAC is to further increase the level of ROS, thereby
producing irreversible stress to tumor cells and surrounding stromal
cells. Furthermore, increased ROS production has been shown to enhance
the efficacy of some chemotherapeutics and might also improve the potency
of anti-angiogenic therapy.We propose a novel function of the
matricellular protein Fibulin-5 (Fbln5) is to regulate ROS levels during
angiogenesis. Fbln5 is expressed highly in human PDAC tissue and in
murine models of pancreatic cancer. We have seen that the genetic
ablation of of Fbln5 results in decreased tumor growth in implant and
genetic models of pancreatic cancer. Furthermore, this decrease in tumor
growth is accompanied by a decrease in microvessel density. Our lab has
discovered that Fbln5 reduces integrin-mediated ROS generation by
competing with fibronectin for binding to 51 integrin. Fbln5 binds to 51
integrin via an RGD motif, mutation of which to RGE abolishes the Fbln5 -
integrin interaction. Knock-in Fbln5RGE/RGE mice have been produced and
crossed into the background of KIC mice (p48Cre/+; LSL- KrasG12D;
Ink4a/Arflox/lox). By utilizing this in vivo model we will be able to
elucidate the mechanism by which Fbln5 regulates tumor angiogenesis and
specifically integrin-induced ROS production. In the present study, our
goal is to investigate the molecular mechanism leading to increased ROS
production in tumors in Fbln5RGE/RGE animals. These targeted experiments
will advance our understanding of the biology of Fbln5 in pancreatic
cancer and ultimately contribute to its development as a potential
therapeutic target.

