Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling cross-talks in obesity-associated pancreatic cancer:
Interaction between prostaglandin E2 signaling and mTOR pathway


Obesity is a known risk factor for human cancers, including pancreatic
cancer, and is associated with inflammation and insulin-resistance. The
pro-inflammatory eicosanoid prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which signals via EP
receptors and cAMP, and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), which is
elevated in insulin resistance and activates the Akt/mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling module, have both been shown to
play critical roles in pancreatic cancer development and growth. The aim
of this study was to investigate an unexplored crosstalk between the
PGE2/EP/cAMP and IGF-1/Akt/mTORC1 signaling pathways in pancreatic
cancer, which may be a key to unraveling the obesity-cancer link. In our
studies, human pancreatic cancer cell lines were used, and the activation
of signaling molecules was mainly assessed by Western blotting analysis.
In multiple cell lines (Capan-2, HPAF-II, Mia PaCa-2, and PANC-1), PGE2
exposure increased intracellular cAMP levels measured by enzyme
immunoassay, indicating the activation of Gs alpha-coupled EP receptors
(EP2 and/or EP4). In PANC-1 cells, which showed the greatest
responsiveness of cAMP induction, PGE2 dose- and time-dependently
increased the phosphorylation of S6 ribosomal protein (S6rpSer235/236)
that is downstream of mTORC1, suggesting a crosstalk between PGE2/cAMP
and mTORC1. In addition, the effect of PGE2 on phospho-S6rp was mimicked
by Forskolin, a pharmacological cAMP stimulator. Importantly, PGE2
enhanced the effect of IGF-1 on S6rp phosphorylation, supporting the
existence of a positive reinforcement by the interaction between the two
pathways. Interestingly, PGE2 and forskolin had no effect on Akt
phosphorylation (Thr308 and Ser473), suggesting a link downstream of Akt.
The activation of the mTORC-1 pathway upon PGE2 treatment paralleled an
increase in the phosphorylation of cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB), a substrate of protein kinase A (PKA). In the presence of the PKA
inhibitor H89, baseline phosphorylation of S6rp and PGE2-activated S6rp
phosphorylation were reduced, indicating a role of PKA in the crosstalk.
In summary, our data provide the first evidence of a crosstalk between
the PGE2/EP2/cAMP and IGF-1/Akt/mTORC1 signaling pathways. Since both
pathways are over-activated in obesity-associated cancers, this
interaction may be of great importance in elucidating the tumor-promoting
effects of obesity in pancreatic cancer. Ultimately, a detailed
understanding of these molecular links may provide mechanistic targets
for novel efficacious interventions devoid of adverse effects for
pancreatic cancer in an increasingly obese population.

