Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A highly sensitive and reliable methodology (ARMS-PM system) for
detection of K-ras mutations in FFPE samples


The association between the activating mutations of K-ras gene and poor
clinical response to current targeted therapies against epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR ) such as cetuximab (Erbitux) and panitumumab
(Vectibix) in colorectal cancer (CRC) has been well documented. Therefore
detection of K-ras mutation status will guide effective therapeutical
options for patients with CRC. Here we developed a new method for the
rapid and reliable detection of K-ras mutations by using a combination of
the modified mutation-specific ARMS primers, peptide nucleic acid (PNA)
clamping and taqman-MGB probes, named ARMS-PM system. In the ARMS-PM
system, the wild-type K-ras DNA is completely blocked by PNA at a higher
annealing temperature, and the mutant gene is selectively amplified by
the modified ARMS primers and the amplicon extending signals are
collected by the taqman-MGB probe at the same time. The ARMS-PM system
can detect approximately 10 copies of the mutant gene stably in somatic
cells at the background of 10ng genomic DNA. In addition, the premixed
reaction was introduced into this system to allow the assay to be
completed in only one step of sample loading, which minimizes the
potential contamination significantly.By using this assay, we analyzed
the K-ras mutations in 1014 Chinese CRC and 205 Chinese lung cancer FFPE
samples in comparison with Sanger sequencing. Our results showed that the
positive rates were 38.6% and 10.2% 38.0% in CRC and lung cancer samples
respectively, which were higher than that measured by Sanger sequencing
(38.0% and 7.1%). The coincidence rates of the two methods were 97.3% for
the positive samples and 97.7 for the negative samples. The total
coincidence rate was 97.8%. In conclusion, our study provides a basis for
the detection of somatic mutations in K-ras in a routine clinical
setting. The ARMS-PM assay allows the detection of the activating K-ras
mutations in FFPE samples with better sensitivity and feasibility than
the current assays used in clinic.

