Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune-based therapy with human tumor lysate, expressing -gal
epitopes induce significant B cell response and in vivo tumor destruction
against pancreatic cancer


Current strategies in the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer (PC)
offer little hope for a cure. Now treatment modalities, including
immunotherapy are warranted for PC, which easily metastasizes in many
organs. Although MUC1 and Mesothelin are potential targets for the
immunotherapy, vaccination against a single tumor-associated antigen
(TAA) seems to be insufficient. In our previous study, we showed the in
vitro and in vivo effectiveness of immunotherapy though vaccination with
whole PC cells engineered to express -gal epitopes (Cancer Res; 70(13);
5259-69, 2010). It was thought that the immunogenicity of well-known as
well as unknown multiple TAAs in cancer cells was upregulated by addition
of -gal epitopes and these TAAs ultimately lead to polyclonal expansion
of both B and T cells. For clinical development of more effective
immunotherapy, we proposed that human tumor lysate originated from
resected PC is more suitable because it contains several TAAs that could
elicit a marked anti-tumor response. The present study addresses the
effectiveness of elicitation of both antibody production and in vivo
destruction against PC by vaccination with human tumor lysate from PC
patients, expressing -gal epitopes enzymatically. Tumor specimens were
obtained from 11 patients at the time of surgical resection. To express
-gal epitopes, we cloned the 1,3galactosyltransferas (1,3GT) from a New
World Monkey and expressed it in a soluble form in the yeast expression
system of Pichia pastoris. For synthesis of -gal epitopes, tumor tissues
were homogenized in MES buffer, and incubated with MnCl2, UDP-Gal and
1,3GT for 4 hours at 37C. 1,3GT KO mice were immunized with pig tissue to
generate anti-Gal Ab in their sera. These mice were vaccinated
intraperitoneally by either unsynthesized (control group) or -gal tumor
lysate (-gal group). Production of anti-PC cell Ab in -gal group was
48-fold higher than that of control group. Anti-TAA Ab production was
also markedly increased in comparison with that in control group
(anti-MUC1 2-fold, anti-Mesothelin 4-fold). Expansion of TAAs-specific B
cells was significantly higher [number of spots at 1106 splenocytes:
MUC1: -gal vs. control; 41426 vs. 17846 (p=0.015), Mesothelin: 40156 vs.
20919 (p=0.03)]. To demonstrate in vivo tumor destruction, an animal
experiment was performed. Splenocytes from vaccinated KO mice were
prepared, and then transferred intraperitoneally (90106 cells) into
NOD/SCID mice. Followed by transferring, mice were challenged with 1107
of live PANC-1 cells. In mice from -gal group, regrowth of tumors was
significantly prevented and survival period was significantly prolonged
[-gal vs. control: 91.5 vs. 43.3 days (p=0.03)]. We conclude that
immunotherapy with -gal tumor lysate obtained from PC patients with
enzymatic engineering could be more effective and practicable methods for
PC treatment.

