Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amanitin-based antibody-drug conjugates targeting the
prostate-specific membrane antigen


Antitumoral activity of monoclonal antibodies can be dramatically
enhanced by conjugation to toxic small molecules. Beside the recent
approval of Kadcyla (T-DM1) and Adcetris (SGN-35) more than 30
antibody-drug conjugates (ADC) have entered clinical trials, promising to
strengthen the therapeutic capabilities for cancer treatment in the next
decade. Surprisingly most ADCs are based on one of few toxic compounds
only and on an even smaller number of toxicity mechanisms: Most
antibodies are coupled to the microtubuli-targeting auristatins and
maytansines. Toxins that operate through such a mechanism could suffer
from limited activity in different cancer indications and in cells
expressing resistance mechanisms. Accordingly the use of new drugs that
function via alternative toxicity mechanisms could enhance the
therapeutic potential of ADCs.In the present study we evaluated the
antitumoral potency of a monoclonal antibody targeting the
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) conjugated to small molecules
from the amatoxin family. PSMA is a membrane antigen overexpressed in
prostate cancer and an attractive target for an ADC approach, as it shows
low expression by most normal tissues and sufficient internalization
after antibody binding. Amanitin, the most well-known toxin of the
amatoxin family, binds to the eukaryotic RNA pol II and thereby inhibits
the cellular transcription at very low concentrations. In our
experiments, we tested several random- and site-specific strategies to
covalently conjugate amanitin to the antibody and generated conjugates
with low aggregation and high affinity for the target antigen. Using a
series of PSMA-expressing cells we compared the cytotoxic activity of
stable and cleavable linker ADCs and the stability of such constructs in
plasma. Overall we observed picomolar activity of ADCs after incubation
for three to five days with PSMA-positive prostate cancer cells
independent of the hormone-sensitivity status. Moreover we demonstrated
high activity of amanitin-based anti-PSMA ADCs in prostate cancer
xenograft models. The data encourage the evaluation of these agents in a
clinical advanced prostate cancer study.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

