Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rise and fall of subclones from diagnosis to relapse in pediatric
B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL): A report from the children's
oncology group (COG) - Target - St. Jude Pediatric Cancer Genome Project


Tumor clonal heterogeneity has been demonstrated in several cancers;
however, the rise and fall of subclones under therapy have not been well
characterized. To gain insight into the subclonal population architecture
of pediatric B-ALL, we analyzed somatic lesions including sequence
mutations, structural alterations and DNA copy number abnormalities
derived from high coverage (200X) exome sequencing, whole-genome
sequencing and SNP arrays of diagnosis (Dx)-remission-relapse DNA from 20
patients (median 7 yrs, range 2 to 19) treated on recent COG B-ALL
trials. Cases were selected for analysis based upon occurrence of an
early bone marrow relapse (median 19.2 months, range 3.8 to 35.7), which
is associated with poor survival. We identified a high frequency of
mutations in B-cell development (80%, e.g. PAX5, IKZF1, TCF3, BTG1, TOX,
and EBF1 ), RAS signaling (65%, e.g. NRAS, KRAS, PTPN11 and FLT3), TP53
(60%, e.g. CDKN2A, TP53 and RB1), kinase signaling (25%, e.g. JAK2, CRLF2
and SH2B3) and chromatin remodeling (60%, e.g. WHSC1, MLL2, CREBBP, ARID2
and SETD2) pathways. Somatic lesions in these pathways were mostly
retained (68%) between Dx and relapse. In contrast, mutations in the
purine metabolism genes NT5C2 (45%) and NT5CB1 (15%) were
relapse-specific. We constructed clonal lineage of somatic lesions for 15
cases based on subclonal population fractions estimated by a binomial
mixture model that adjusts for sequence coverage of mutant alleles. The
subclone number (median 3, range 1-5) at Dx was comparable to that at
relapse (median=3, range 2-4). Notably, 6 Dx samples were observed with
multiple subclones harboring distinct driver mutations in the same
oncogene (e.g. NRAS, KRAS and JAK2). In almost all cases only one
subclone from Dx arose to be the predominant clone present at relapse.
Moreover, the mutation burden in an emergent subclone was comparable to
those eradicated by therapy (P=0.43, Wilcoxon rank sum). In 80% of cases,
the predominant clone at relapse originated from the smallest Dx
subclone; in 45% of those cases, mutant allele present in relapse was
detectable in remission DNA (0.1%) obtained at the end of the 1st month
of therapy. Clonal lineage shows that the earliest acquired mutations at
relapse are NT5C2 (n=5), NRAS (n=3), USH2A (n=3), WHSC1 (n=2), TP53
(n=2), IKZF1 (n=1) and CREBBP (n=1). Our study is the first that analyzes
the genetic composition and population architecture of subclones that
rise or fall after B-ALL therapy. The majority of the rising subclones
are oligoclonal at Dx, which may explain acquisition of mutations such as
those found in NT5C2 to confer growth advantage in relapse. Additional
studies of patients who were cured of B-ALL are needed to determine if
the presence of mutant clone at end induction might help to predict risk
and tempo of relapse.

