Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of exosome-encapsulated microRNA secretion in breast
cancer


Intercellular communication between breast tumour cells and stromal cells
plays a fundamental role in cancer initiation and progression.
Mesenchymal Stem Cells(MSCs) are multipotent cells with the proven
ability to home to the site of breast tumours and integrate into the
tumour architecture. The mechanisms of MSC interaction with breast cancer
cells are poorly defined. Exosomes are microvesicles secreted by cells
that have the capacity to transport genetic material including
microRNAs(miRNAs), which are important regulators of gene expression.
However, the miRNAs selectively packaged into exosomes, and their true
role in the tumour microenvironment, is poorly understood.Aim:
Investigate the presence of MSCs in primary breast tumours, and identify
exosome-encapsulated miRNAs secreted by breast cancer cells and MSCs in
vitro.Methods: Stromal cells were isolated from primary breast tumours
and characterized based on MSC-associated cell surface antigens. Tumour
stromal cells were cultured in appropriate conditions to investigate
potential for differentiation into osteoblasts or adipocytes, followed by
Von Kossa staining of calcium deposition, and Oil Red O staining of fat
droplets respectively. MSCs isolated from healthy volunteers and breast
cancer cell lines were cultured in exosome-depleted media for 48 hrs, and
secreted exosomes isolated using ultracentrifugation. Transmission
Electron Microscopy(TEM) and Western Blot were performed to confirm the
presence of exosomes in the purified fraction. Extracted miRNA was
subjected to global miRNA expression analysis using the Exiqon miRCURY
LNA Array.Results: A subpopulation of tumour stromal cells expressed the
full panel of surface markers associated with MSCs. This subpopulation
also had the capacity to differentiate into osteoblasts and adipocytes,
demonstrated by calcium deposition and formation of fat droplets.
Exosomes were successfully isolated from conditioned media of breast
cancer cell lines and MSCs. TEM revealed microvesicles with the
appropriate size of 40-100nm. Western Blot confirmed the presence of the
exosome-associated protein CD63. miRNA array analysis identified 413
miRNAs encapsulated in MSC-secreted exosomes from a panel of 2089
analysed, while each of the breast cancer cell lines secreted from 381 to
394 miRNAs in exosomes. Of these, 287 were common to all four breast
cancer cell lines. Interestingly, a subset of these miRNAs are known to
target genes associated with cell cycle regulation and apoptosis (e.g.
miR-15a, miR-204, miR-221, miR-223). A panel of the miRNAs also appeared
to have differential expression with reference to epithelial
subtype.Conclusion: MSCs are present in primary breast tumours, and
elucidating their interaction with breast cancer cells will be
fundamental to understanding their role in the tumour microenvironment.
Bidirectional transfer of exosome-encapsulated miRNAs may play an
important role in this intercellular communication.

