Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of PIM1 kinase in the prostate tumor microenvironment


Prostate cancer (PCa) remains the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in men. The prostate is a tubulo-alveolar gland composed of
epithelial tissues embedded in stromal components. PCa includes reactive
stroma which consists of myofibroblasts and extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling. Increasing evidence suggests that myofibroblasts may refine
the prognostic assessment of tumors. The PIM1 serine/threonine protein
kinase is a true oncogene and has been implicated in the initiation and
progression of multiple cancer types including PCa. The level of PIM1
correlates with the disease state and Gleason grade and has been shown to
stimulate growth of murine prostate cancer. The role of PIM1 in prostate
stromal cells has never been investigated. Using human prostate tissue
microarray analysis we now demonstrate that (1) the PIM1 protein is
detected in human stroma adjacent to cancer tissue; (2) stromal cells
isolated from PIM1 knockout mice contain a decreased number of
myofibroblasts and expose slow growth rate when compared with wild type
control, suggesting that kinase expression can alter stromal cell
composition and proliferation; (3) elevated level of PIM1 kinase in human
benign prostate stromal cells increases migration and growth of prostate
epithelial cells and this effect can be reversed by PIM inhibitors; (4)
PIM1 over-expressing stromal cells increase epithelial cell growth in
tissue regeneration model; (5) stromal cells with elevated level of PIM1
expose increased number of myofibroblasts when co-cultivated with
prostate epithelial cells. These data suggest that PIM1 kinase may
contribute in formation of a reactive stroma phenotype. We used the
conditioning media analysis to decipher the PIM1 specific signal
transduction pathways that may lead to stroma activation and drive
prostate cancer growth. Using cytokine/chemokine arrays and ECM protein
analysis we found that overexpression of PIM1 kinase in stromal cells is
associated with elevated level of CCL5 chemokine and increased secretion
of collagen1. Examination of the pathways involved in formation of
myofibroblasts revealed that PIM1 can modulate activation of PDGFR
leading to the increased CCL5 expression. We are suggesting that PIM1 is
a modulator of stromal cells response to the stimuli produced by prostate
epithelial cells through increase of matrix stiffness, receptor
activation and accumulation of myofibroblasts which induce further ECM
remodeling and expression of the growth factors leading to epithelial
cells transformation and cancer propagation.

