Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSC305787 inhibits specific proteinprotein interactions involving
ezrin in osteosarcoma cells


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the malignant tumor of bone that is most common in
children and adolescents. OS is characterized by a high propensity for
metastasis, especially to lungs, which is the main cause of death. The
membrane-cytoskeleton cross-linker ezrin plays a key role in the
metastatic progression of OS. In our earlier studies, we discovered that
a small molecule, NSC305787, directly binds to ezrin and inhibits its
function related to metastatic phenotype. In order to gain a better
insight into the molecular mechanisms of NSC30787 action, an affinity
pull-down coupled mass spectrometry was conducted to find the putative
ezrin-interacting proteins whose interaction with ezrin is decreased or
lost in the presence of NSC305787. Detailed mass spectrometry analysis
identified 78 proteins after filtering for the potential background
contaminants. Out of 78 proteins, 9 proteins were known ezrin-binding
proteins including ezrin, radixin, moesin, polyadenylate-binding protein
1 (PABP-1), Na(+)/H(+) exchange regulatory cofactor (NHERF1/EPB-50),
calpains, epidermal growth factor receptor kinase substrate 8 (EPS8),
protein kinase C ioto (PKC-ioto) and focal adhesion kinase (FAK). For the
remaining 69 proteins, we immunoprecipitated ezrin from K7M2 OS cells,
and then western blotted for 8 selected functionally relevant proteins in
order to test the validity of our approach. Of these 8 candidate
proteins, Co-IP experiments verified binding of ezrin to 5 novel binding
partners including DDX3 RNA helicase, caprin-1, AEG-1/MTDH/LYRIC, Rho
guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (GEFH1) and catenin delta-1
(p120-catenin). NSC305787 effectively reduced the binding of DDX3 RNA
helicase, AEG-1/MTDH/LYRIC and GEFH1 to ezrin in Co-IP experiments.
Direct binding of ezrin to DDX3 RNA helicase was also demonstrated by
surface plasmon resonance analysis using Biacore instrument. In
conclusion, our results suggest that NSC305787 can modulate ezrin
function through blocking its interaction with crucial proteins involved
in adhesion, migration, invasion and survival. We also identified novel
ezrin interactors that are involved in different levels of mRNA
metabolism suggesting a completely new molecular function of ezrin that
is independent from its classic role as a membrane cytoskeletal
cross-linker at the plasma membrane. Thus, these results highlight novel
molecular mechanisms for ezrin in cancer metastasis.

