Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNAs involved in BRAF inhibitor resistance


BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) have shown remarkable clinical activity in
advanced metastatic melanomas with mutant BRAF(V600E). However, there is
considerable variability in both the extent and the duration of patient
responses, and acquired resistance invariably emerges. To date, a number
of mechanisms underlying acquired resistance to BRAF inhibitors have been
identified, most of which reactivate ERK signaling while simultaneously
engaging parallel survival pathways. However, these mechanisms account
for only a fraction of progressed melanoma and do not explain the large
variability of initial response rates and time to progression of melanoma
patients subjected to these therapies. We hypothesize that in addition to
genetic events, non-genetic alterations such as microRNA changes are
critical in mediating time to progression in melanoma tumors treated with
BRAF inhibitors. In order to identify microRNAs involved in BRAF
inhibitor resistance we performed a functional screen approach utilizing
a novel lentiviral-based library of microRNA decoys. These constructs are
better able to stably suppress endogenous microRNA activity than the
hairpin RNAs traditionally used. This pooled parallel loss-of-microRNA
function analysis in BRAF(V600E) mutant melanoma cells showed enrichment
and loss of specific decoys after drug treatment, corresponding to
microRNAs that may enhance or compromise the response, respectively.
MicroRNA decoys that are positively or negatively selected during drug
treatment are being validated using single decoy constructs for their
ability to modulate BRAFi response. MicroRNA target genes will be
determined by a combination of microarray analysis, in silico predictive
algorithms, and 3UTR-luciferase reporter assay. MicroRNAs and target
genes are being validated on human samples from treated patients. Those
potentially involved in processes/pathways known to influence drug
resistance (i.e. survival genes) will be examined for their ability to
mimic or counteract microRNA effects in BRAFi resistance when silenced or
overexpressed, respectively. Identification of novel modulators of drug
resistance provides the opportunity to design rational combinatorial
approaches that will enhance and prolong the effect of these therapies,
with the ultimate goal of achieving cures.

