Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel treatment for triple-negative breast cancer using
intrinsic magnetized paclitaxel


Background: We previously reported the identification of a novel
nano-organic compound, EI236, an anti-cancer agent with intrinsic
magnetic property. In addition to anti-cancer effect, its ferromagnetic
property contributes to unique features.1) It can be attracted by a
magnet. 2) It can be visualized by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Hereby, we have identified the key mechanism that contributes to
magnetism by X-ray crystallographic analysis, and succeeded in generating
a novel paclitaxel with intrinsic magnetism; this is a single paclitaxel
compound, and is not a paclitaxel encapsulated in micelle with magnetic
particles. Our aim is to examine its effect on triple negative-breast
cancer (TNBC) cells. Material and Method: The magnetization of the
magnetized paclitaxel was measured with a superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) (Quantum Design MPMS7 system). Breast cancer
cells, MDA-MB-453 (TNBC) and MCF7 (Non-TNBC), were obtained from RIKEN
Bioresource center. Cell proliferation assay was performed using a
commercially available kit, XTT Cell Proliferation Assay Kit. Apoptotic
cells were stained with Annexin V, allophycocyanin conjugate and
7-amino-actinomycin D, and measured by fluorescence activated cell
sorting (FACS), to evaluate early and late apoptosis. Cell cycle analysis
was performed using The Cycletest Plus DNA Reagent Kit and assessed using
FACS. Results: Plots of magnetization versus magnetic field revealed that
the magnetized paclitaxel exhibits magnetic property in SQUID. Magnetized
paclitaxel was easily attracted by a commercial bar magnet. Magnetized
paclitaxel exhibits greater anti-cancer effect than original paclitaxel
in TNBC and Non-TNBC cells in a dose-dependent manner. Magnetized
paclitaxel induced apoptosis and G2/M arrest in cell cycle analysis in a
dose-dependent manner, suggesting that magnetized paclitaxel retained the
original anti-cancer property. In MRI T2 -weighted imaging, signal
intensity was changed in a concentration-dependent manner with magnetized
paclitaxel, but not with commercial available paclitaxel. Conclusion:
These results suggested that various conventional anti-cancer drugs might
be similarly magnetized, leading to novel drug development in future
cancer chemotherapy.

