Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A DKK1 dependent crosstalk between TGF2-snail1 and miRNAs
contributes to chemoresistance in mesenchymal-like breast cancer


The role of TGF in chemoresponse and progression of breast cancer (BC)
remains unclarified, here we investigated the role of TGF2 in BC by
taking into account BC heterogeneity. mRNA microarray identified TGF2 was
upregulated in 5-Fu resistant MCF-7 BC cells (MCF-7/5-Fu) with EMT
phenotype. TGF2 in mRNA and protein from MCF-7/5-Fu and triple-negative
BC (TN-BC) cell lines MDA-MB-231, HCC38 and BT-549 with mesenchymal
morphology was higher than luminal BC cell lines MCF-7, T47D, BT-474 and
SKBR3. TGF signal was more active in mesenchymal BC cells than luminal BC
cells charactered by p-smad2, p-smad3 and snial1 upregulated. TGF signal
inhibition with TGF receptor (TGFR) inhibitor SD208 or TGFRI targeted
shRNA reversed the mesenchymal phenotype accompanied with invasion
inhibition, BC stem cell (BCSC) traits measured by CD44+CD24-
subpopulation analysis and mammosphere assay, and resistance to 5-Fu and
Paclitaxel, but played limited effect on MCF-7/5-Fu cells. As the same,
TGF2 only partially induced EMT phenotype in MCF-7, T47D, BT474 and SKBR3
cells. miRNA microarray indentified downregulation of miR-141, miR-145
and miR-200a (T2-miRNAs) in mesenchymal BC cells compared to lumial BC
cells. Lentivirus system with two pre-miRNA units enhanced T2-miRNAs
expression accompanied with TGF2 downregulation and reversion of
mesenchymal phenotype and drug resistance in mesenchymal BC cells.
Luciferase activity assay also strongly suggested T2-miRNAs directly
target TGF2 synergistically. TGF signal inhibition and snail1 knockdown
upregulated T2-miRNAs in mesenchymal BC cells. ChIP assay showed snail1
bound to promoters of T2-miRNAs, combined with promoter luciferase assay
suggested snail1 transcriptionaly repress T2-miRNAs expression in
mesenchymal BC cells. However, DKK1 upregulated T2-miRNAs expression in
mesenchymal BC cells, but with limited effect in snail1 knockdown cells,
suggesting DKK1 could reverse the repressive effect of snail1 on miRNAs
expression. TGF2 upregulated T2-miRNAs expression in MCF-7 and T47D cells
with normal DKK1 expression, and snail1 konckdown abolished the effect of
TGF2. In addition, using a tissue microarray of 93 BC biopsies containing
42 TN-BC, we found TGF2 and snail1 protein were present at higher levels
in TN-BC than in luminal BC, and miRNAs measured by ISH and DKK1 protein
were present at lower levels. Furthermore, the result of T2-miRNAs
detection in the serum samples from 76 BC patients including 34 TN-BC
showed T2-miRNAs abundance in serum samples from TN-BC was much lower. In
conclusion, the role of TGF in BC is cell type dependent and our findings
suggest TGF2 protein and T2-miRNAs levels in serum will be valuable
prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic strategies for mesenchymal BC.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

