Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 17-Estradiol-ER axis confers proliferation and migration through
IGF-1R-dependent expression of TMPRSS2 in castration-resistant PC-3 cells


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common and the second leading cause of
cancer-related death among males in the Western world. TMPRSS2, a gene
that encodes serine-protease type II transmembrane domain, has been shown
to be frequently prevalent as a TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion during early
event in the genesis of PCa. However, TMPRESS2 function remains largely
unknown, especially in castration-resistant PCa cells. While TMPRESS2 has
previously been shown to be an androgen-regulated gene, TMPRSS2-ERG
expression is regulated by a novel ER-dependent mechanism. The objectives
of this study are to determine the mechanisms of expression and the
functional significance of TMPRSS2 in growth and migration of
castration-resistant AR-null PC-3 cells. 17-Estradiol (E2; 10nM) induced
TMPRSS2 expression (4-fold higher) in an ER-dependent manner as evidenced
by shRNA silencing, but not by ER-specific shRNA, in PC-3 cells.
Intriguingly, the E2-induced TMPRSS2 expression was blocked by AG1024
(IGF-1R inhibitor) or knockdown of IGF-1R by siRNA, but not by AG1478
(EGFR inhibitor), suggesting that IGF-1R mediates expression of TMPRESS2
by the E2-ER axis in PC-3 cells. Moreover, TMPRSS2-specific siRNA
markedly attenuated E2-induced cell growth and migration of PC-3 cells,
suggesting that TMPRSS2 may be pivotal to E2-mediated progression of
castration-resistant disease in vivo. The effects of TMPRSS2 silencing
seem to be mediated through inhibition of E2-induced activation of
NF-B-signaling in these cells. Taken together, our results unraveled the
underlying mechanisms that govern the expression and function of TMPRSS2
in mediating E2-induced growth and migration of castration-resistant PC-3
cells. Delineation of such critical players may culminate in identifying
therapeutic targets to selectively circumvent castration-resistant
outgrowth in PCa patients.

