Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiogenesis-related cytokine secretion pattern in tumor
interstitial fluid and its relationship with VEGF expression and
metastatic profile


The tumor microenvironment (TME) contributes significantly to the
phenotypic characteristics of cancer. Unraveling the roles of the TME in
cancer growth and treatment, as well as mining the TME for treatment
strategies is increasingly occupying center-stage. One of the least
examined, and yet critically important factors in the TME is the tumor
interstitial fluid (IF). This fluid surrounds cancer and stromal cells
within the tumor, and contains various cytokines, and nutritional and
molecular factors that shape the outcome of nearly all aspects of tumor
growth, metastasis, and response to treatment. Here we have characterized
IF from human breast cancer xenografts in SCID mice. The IF was obtained
from the tumor using a small custom-built diffusion chamber (outer
diameter 6.2 mm, inner volume approx. 40 l) implanted in the subcutaneous
space. The chamber was surrounded by 4-6 tumor pieces that were allowed
to grow for 4-6 weeks that resulted in the chamber being incorporated
within the tumor. Three different human breast carcinoma cell lines were
used to analyze tumor IF content: invasive, highly metastatic MDA-MB-231
cells, less invasive MCF-7 cells and MCF-7 cells engineered to
overexpress vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). After IF, plasma
and tumor collection, IF samples were analyzed using a multiple cytokine
assay (Proteome Profiler Human Angiogenesis Kit, R & D Systems Inc.,
Minneapolis MN). With this kit, 55 human angiogenesis-related cytokines
were investigated for relative secretion levels. Our results identified
differences in cytokine content in tumors derived from these cells. Out
of the 55 cytokines tested, 24 were detected in the IF. Of these, more
than 80% (20) were detected in MDA-MB-231 tumors only. Additionally,
MDA-MB-231 derived tumor IF showed increased levels of TIMP
metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (TIMP-1), urokinase plasminogen activator
(uPA) and Serpin E1 compared to MCF-7 cells. As expected, high VEGF
levels were detected in the IF of tumors derived from VEGF-overexpressing
MCF-7 cells compared to wild type cells. VEGF overexpression also
influenced the levels of TIMP-1, Serpin E1 and uPA in the IF. Variations
in IF cytokine content of cancers with different metastatic and
angiogenic abilities provide further understanding of the TME.
Measurement of cytokine content is only the first step towards the
correlation of tumor IF cytokine levels with tumor vascular properties
and anti-angiogenic treatments. A better understanding of the TME through
characterization of the IF may identify new targets for cancer treatment
and allow for optimization of therapeutic strategies.Supported by NIH
R01CA138264 and R01CA136576.

