Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitizing tumors to pro-oxidant therapy by inhibiting
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase


We have reported that 73% of ovarian tumors express the cell surface
enzyme gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT). Clinical studies have shown a
poorer prognosis for ovarian tumors that are GGT-positive compared to
GGT-negative tumors. GGT-positive tumors are able to use the glutathione
in the interstitial fluid as an additional source of cysteine, the
limiting component of intracellular glutathione synthesis in tumors. The
concentration of cysteine/cystine in standard tissue culture media is
more than 3 times the concentration in interstitial fluid. In this study
we show that in studies of cultured cells, the high concentration of
cysteine in tissue culture media obscured the role of GGT expression in
drug resistance. However, culturing human ovarian tumor cells in tissue
culture media containing physiological concentrations of cystine and
glutathione demonstrated that the supply of cysteine/cystine regulates
intracellular glutathione concentrations. In these studies, inhibition of
GGT blocked the use of extracellular glutathione as a source of cysteine
and sensitized the tumors to cisplatin, carboplatin and melphalan.
Inhibiting GGT in patients would also inhibit GGT in the kidney resulting
in the excretion of glutathione in the urine and depletion of cysteine
from serum and interstitial fluid. As a result, inhibition of GGT in
patients would sensitize both GGT-positive and GGT-negative tumors to
pro-oxidant chemotherapy. Clinical application of this therapeutic
strategy is limited by the fact that most inhibitors of GGT are glutamate
analogs and too toxic for use in humans. We discovered a non-glutamate
analog that is an uncompetitive inhibitor of GGT, and are developing more
potent, non-toxic GGT inhibitors. We recently published the crystal
structure of human GGT. We have now also solved the structure of the
substrate-bound enzyme, the form of the enzyme to which our uncompetitive
inhibitors bind. Using structure-based drug design and our
physiologically relevant tissue culture system we are designing new GGT
inhibitors and evaluating them for their ability to sensitize tumors to
chemotherapy regimens used in the clinic. Supported by an Institutional
Development Award (IDeA) from the National Institutes of Health under
grant P20GM103640.

