Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation: efficacy of DI17E6, a therapeutic antibody
against alpha v integrins, compared to cilengitide in sensitizing human
cancers to radiation therapy


Purpose: Integrins are implicated in resistance of solid tumors to
radiation therapy, suggesting that their inhibition would enhance
therapeutic efficacy. We investigated the efficacy of DI17E6, a
therapeutic antibody targeting alpha v (v) integrins, in enhancing the
radiosensitivity of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) and head & neck
cancer (HNSCC) cells using in vitro and in vivo models, and compared to
the previously reported effects of the cyclic peptide cilengitide
(inhibits v3 and v5 integrins).Methods: NSCLC lines (A549 and H460) and
HNSCC lines (FaDu and HN-5) were examined. Basal level of v integrin was
assessed by viable cell flow-cytometry and by Western blot. The effects
of DI17E6 on cell viability were determined by MTS assay, and on cellular
radiosensitivity by clonogenic cell survival assay after exposing the
cells to -radiation with or without DI17E6. In vivo effect of DI17E6 on
radioresponse of xenografts was evaluated by tumor growth delay assay.
DI17E6 was given i.p.; as a single loading dose of 180 mg/kg followed by
weekly doses of 10, 30 or 100 mg/kg given for 6 weeks; fractionated doses
of local tumor irradiation was delivered using 137Cs -ray source (2 Gy
daily for 7 days). When combined, the loading dose of DI17E6 was given
either 4 h before or after the first radiation dose.Results: DI17E6
(0.01-10 g/ml, 24 h) had a minimal effect on the cell viability. However,
DI17E6 reduced the plating efficiency of A549, H460 and FaDu with no
effect on HN-5 cells. When combined with radiation, DI17E6 enhanced the
radiosensitivity of NSCLC cells but not the HNSCC cells. These data are
consistent with previously observed effects of cilengitide in vitro. In
vivo experiments with A549 xenografts showed that DI17E6 as a single
agent had no antitumor activity, but in combination with radiation it
suppressed the tumor growth in a schedule- and dose-dependent manner.
These data were compared to the previously reported effect of
cilengitide, which did not enhance the response of A549 xenografts to
radiation therapy. DI17E6 has an extended pharmacokinetics (with a
half-life of >7 days) and blocks more v integrins than cilengitide. The
results imply that when v3 and v5 integrins were inhibited by cilengitide
either the duration of blockade was insufficient, or that other v
integrins may have provided tumor growth advantage. In vivo studies on
other tumor types are underway.Conclusions: Inhibition of v integrins by
DI17E6 in combination with radiation enhanced radiosensitivity of NSCLC
cell lines in vitro and in vivo enhanced A549 tumor xenograft response to
radiation in mice. These results suggest that DI17E6 may improve the
treatment outcome of patients with NSCLC when combined with radiotherapy
in a clinical setting.Supported by EMD Serono Merck KGaA, Germany

