Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-509 inhibits human leukemia cell growth


Even though the majority of children with precursor B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) can be cured, ALL is still the most
frequent cause of cancer-related deaths and causes significant
treatment-related toxicity in pediatrics. Thus, there is a need for more
effective and less toxic therapies for B-ALL. Specific microRNAs (miRs)
may be useful as therapeutics, or to identify downstream therapeutic
targets, since miRs regulate essentially all cellular processes. We
identified miR-509 via a human genome-wide screen (Cheng WC et al.
BioTechniques 2013;54:77. PMC3671589) for miRs that inhibit growth of the
NALM6 human B-ALL cell line (harboring the ETV6-PDGFRB fusion gene). MiR
microarray expression analysis revealed low endogenous levels of miR-509
in multiple acute leukemia cell lines, CD34+ hematopoietic
stem-progenitor cells from normal human donors, and normal B and T
lymphocytes. Therefore, enforced expression of miR-509 was used for our
mechanistic studies in leukemia cells. Since NALM6 cannot be easily
transfected, the precursor miR-509 sequence was cloned downstream of
green fluorescence protein (GFP) into a lentiviral vector construct.
Enforced lentivector-mediated miR-509 expression was confirmed using
RT-qPCR. In a confirmatory growth competition assay measuring the percent
GFP-expressing cells by flow cytometry, NALM6 cells transduced with
lentiviral miR-509 were progressively outnumbered by mock-transduced
cells over five weeks. MiR-509's growth inhibitory effect in NALM6 was
further confirmed by orthogonal assays employing trypan blue dye
exclusion and alamarBlue fluorescence. MiR-509 similarly inhibited growth
of another B-ALL cell line, RCH-ACV (harboring the TCF3-PBX1 fusion
gene). In addition, NOD-SCID IL2rg-/- (NSG) mice transplanted
miR-509-transduced NALM6 cells had increased survival as compared to
empty vector. In order to elucidate the cellular mechanism by which
miR-509 exerts its growth inhibitory effects, we performed cell cycle
analysis using BrdU/7-AAD staining. MiR-509-transduced NALM6 cells had
reduced numbers of S-phase cells, as compared to empty vector-transduced
cells. We also observed an increase in apoptotic cell death in
miR-509-transduced NALM6 cells, as compared to empty vector-transduced
cells. To identify potential targets of miR-509, we used TargetScan to
predict targets. We then focused on mRNAs that were expressed in NALM6
cells, as determined by gene expression data in the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia. RAB5C was reduced in miR-509 transduced cells as evidenced
by qPCR and western blot; luciferase assays indicate that RAB5C is a
direct miR-509-3p target. Knockdown of RAB5C by shRNA lentiviral
constructs recapitulated the growth inhibitory phenotype induced by
miR-509 overexpression in NALM6 cells. In summary, miR-509 suppresses
B-ALL cell growth by inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing
apoptosis, and miR-509 and RAB5C may be new therapeutic targets for B-ALL.

