Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D multicellular pancreatic cancer spheroids as drug screening
tool for pharmacological evaluation of EHT 5372 and other Mirk/DYRK1B
inhibitors


The dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylated and regulated kinase
Mirk/DYRK1B belongs to an evolutionary conserved family of kinases
involved in the control of growth and development. DYRK1B has low level
of expression in most normal cell types but is amplified or
over-expressed in a number of human cancers. DYRK1B regulates the exit of
cancer cells from quiescence through regulating cyclin D turnover and
p27kip1 stabilization, thus participating as substantial actor in the
control of cancer cell cycle progression. Diaxonhit has developed a novel
class of DYRK inhibitors with potent in vitro efficacy. Among them, EHT
5372 reduces tumor growth in a PANC-1 xenograft model and reduces ascites
spheroids to single cells and induces their apoptosis.Three-dimensional
(3D) multicellular spheroids are symmetrical cellular aggregates that
model an in vitro system of intermediate complexity between monolayer
cultures and tumors in vivo. Here, we have conducted genome-wide analysis
of transcriptional changes between normal (monolayer, 2D) and 3D culture
conditions of pancreatic PANC-1 cells using Diaxonhit's GWSATM platform
to identify tumor-relevant genes and pathways. The PANC-1 multicellular
spheroid model was first characterized based on phenotypical and
functional properties and we then analyzed the pharmacological response
of spheroids to EHT 5372 and other DYRK inhibitors treatment. A strong
up-regulation of DYRK1B was evidenced and confirmed at the protein level.
Stemness-related markers were investigated and some were also found much
higher in the spheroids than within the monolayer cultures and further
increased in a culture time-dependent manner. Stem-like cancer cells may
be the cause of therapy-resistance and relapse in patients and sphere
forming ability is one of properties of this quiescent cancer-initiating
cells. As DYRK1B contributes to G0 arrest to maintain the viability of
quiescent cancer cells, pharmacological DYRK inhibition would reduce the
capacity of cells to enter into quiescence and sensitize cancer cells to
conventional chemotherapeutic agents or radiation.Molecular and
physiological consequences of inhibiting DYRK1B with EHT 5372 are now
being investigated along with genes expression changes in
stemness-related markers and in biological pathways involved in tumor
cell growth regulation.A molecular characterization of pancreatic cancer
cell spheroids is currently undertaken to determine the utility of the 3D
assay as a surrogate tool enriched in cancer stem cells. Spheroids also
enable the study of quiescence, chemoresistance and metastasis. DYRK1B
inhibitors screening in 3D models is a powerful approach that can help
focus on compounds active on these crucial mechanisms of cancer cell
biology. The most active compounds identified in this program are likely
good candidates for in vivo xenograft studies.

