Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor receptors and penile carcinoma: The role
of EGFR and HER2 expression as prognostic and predictive markers


BACKGROUND: Growth factor receptors have recently been described as
potential therapeutic targets for penile carcinoma patients, and there
are reports on benefits from the clinical use of monoclonal antibodies
against EGFR. However, knowledge on the molecular basis of the disease is
scarce. For that, we have addressed the expression of EGFR and HER2, as
well as mutational and amplification status of EGFR in samples from
penile squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) patients.METHODS: Clinicopathologic
features and survival data from 183 PSCC patients were reviewed from
hospital records and immunohistochemistry (IHC) against EGFR and HER2 was
performed. Positive cases were those showing strong and complete membrane
staining in more than 10% of the tumor cells. HER2 was also classified as
positive according to the presence of cytoplasmic staining (cHER2). Sixty
cases were submitted to dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and were classified as unaltered (those harboring 2 signals for
each probe) or FISH positive (either if polysomic - harboring more than 2
signals for each probe - or amplified - cases with an EGFR
signal:centromeric signal ratio exceeding 2). EGFR exons 18, 19, 20 and
21 from 27 independent frozen cases were sequenced. Variables were
compared by the Pearson chi-square or Fishers exact test. Survival rates
were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared by log-rank
test. Alpha error was set at 5%.RESULTS: IHC analysis showed that, for
EGFR expression, 91 cases (49.7%) were positive and 92 negative, out of
which 9 (4,9%) showed no staining at all. Positive cases were associated
with higher incidence of recurrence and exophytic growth (p=0.031 and
p=0.023, respectively). Membrane staining of HER2 was not seen in any
case whereas cHER2 was found in 20.3% (29) of cases, all of them high
grade tumors. No low grade tumor presented this staining pattern. cHER2
was also associated with EGFR expression (p=0.017). Regarding FISH, 36
cases were unaltered whereas 32 were FISH positive (out of which 16
presented chromosome 7 polysomy and 6 EGFR amplifications). FISH
positivity did not associate with EGFR expression (p=0.403). No mutation
in the studied EGFR exons was observed. A polymorphism without clinical
significance (p.Q787Q in exon 20) was found in 19/27 cases. cHER2
expression and FISH positivity were an independent risk factor for
cancer-specific and overall survival, respectively.CONCLUSIONS: Success
of targeted therapies is highly linked to appropriate patients selection
and our findings might indicate that EGFR has a key role in penile
carcinogenesis, making PSCC patients potential candidates for
EGFR-targeted therapies since both EGFR expression and chromosome 7
polysomy are associated with poor prognosis. A possible interaction
between membranous EGFR and cytoplasmic HER2 could favor the use of
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors instead of monoclonal antibodies.

