Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomeres and survival in stage III colon cancers: Findings from
NCCTG N0147 (Alliance) study


Introduction: Peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) telomere length is
associated with colon cancer (CC) risk, but the relationship of PBL
telomere length to survival in CC patients receiving chemotherapy is
unknown.Methods: We measured relative telomere length (RTL) by qPCR of
PBL DNA from 2,748 cases (53% male, 85% white, median age 58 yrs) in the
North American Phase III Intergroup Trial N0147 that compared
disease-free survival (DFS) among completely resected Stage III CC
treated with mFOLFOX6 +/- cetuximab. Tumor markers were assessed, and 12%
were BRAF mutant; 35% Kras mutant, and 12% deficient mismatch repair
(dMMR). Linear and non-linear prognostic associations of PBL RTL to the
primary endpoint of DFS were assessed by Cox models. Optimal categories
of RTL were developed using cumulative martingale residual plots,
designated from shortest to longest RTL (Table 1).Results: Never smokers
had longer PBL RTL (p = 0.0006) than past or current smokers. Those with
diabetes mellitus (DM) had longer PBL RTL than those without DM (p =
0.0165). PBL RTL was not associated with any tumor markers (MMR status; p
= 0.7174; BRAF mutant vs wild-type (wt); p =0.4039; Kras mutant vs wt; p=
0.1149). PBL RTL was significantly associated with DFS in a non-linear
form (p = 0.0389). Cases in the longer RTL category had more favorable
DFS than those with shorter or longest RTL, (Table), which remained after
adjusting for age, sex , T/N stage, grade, tumor markers, and treatment
(p = 0.0230). We observed no significant interaction (p = 0.1490) between
RTL categories and treatment.Conclusion: We observed a non-linear
association between RTL and DFS in stage III CC, suggesting that an
optimal range telomere length can influence tumor behavior in CC
patients. Future studies of telomere maintenance mechanisms may help to
explain the association of RTL with improved DFS. RTL is associated with
smoking and DM in CC cases but further studies are needed to determine if
either tobacco use or DM affect survival from CC by modulating PBL
telomere length.

