Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fasting chemosensitizes tumor cells by affecting their metabolism


Background/AimThe metabolic properties of cancer cells are significantly
different from those of normal cells. Energy production in cancer cells
is dependent on aerobic glycolysis, fatty acid synthesis and increased
rates of glutamine metabolism. Emerging evidences indicate that these
features are linked to therapeutic resistance in cancer treatment. Thus,
novel therapeutic strategies able to modify tumor metabolism are
warranted.Aim of this study is to investigate the effects and underlying
mechanisms of fasting in combination with chemotherapy on tumor
metabolism.MethodsThe in vitro citotoxicity of chemodrugs in combination
with short-term-starvation (STS) was tested in various colon cancer cell
lines by Trypan Blue staining and Annexin V apoptosis assay. Cancer cell
proliferation by BrdUdr and CFSE staining was also evaluated. Reactive
oxygen species production were evaluated by DCFDA staining. The effects
of STS on the regulation of tumor metabolism were evaluated by
2-[(18)F]-Fluoro-2-deoxyglucose uptake. Expression of different proteins
involved in metabolic and signaling pathways were studied by western blot
and proteomic analyses. In vivo studies were performed using syngeneic
BALB/c mice which were subcutaneously injected with CT26 cells. The in
vivo STS protocol allowed mice to consume water but not food for 48 hours
before chemotherapy. All mice were monitored daily for weight loss and
side effects. Tumor growth was monitored every two days by caliper. The
effects of STS in combination with chemotherapy (CT), in terms of glucose
uptake/consumption and tumor growth inhibition were also evaluated by
dynamic micro-Positron Emission Tomography (micro-PET).ResultsIn vitro
experiments showed that STS+CT maximally reduced cell viability and
glucose uptake. A metabolic switch from anaerobic glycolysis to oxidative
phosphorilation (OXPHOSPH) and beta-lipidic oxidation was induced by
STS+CT. Down-regulation of PI3K/AKT pathway by STS+CT was found to be
involved in the reduction of different glycolytic enzymes including
hexokinases, phosphofructokinase and piruvate kinase. Furthermore, tumor
cells treated with STS+CT exhibited a significant induction of
respiratory chain complexes I, III, IV associated to a striking
uncoupling between oxygen consumption which was induced and ATP synthesis
that was reduced. This latter event was related to significant increase
of ROS generation by STS+CT, leading to tumor cell apoptosis.
Accordingly, in vivo experiments demonstrated that STS in combination
with high-dose CT maximally reduced tumor glucose consumption in parallel
with tumor cell growth.ConclusionsTaken together, these results
demonstrated that STS+CT affected tumor metabolism leading to a
significant decrease of tumor growth. These findings open a novel
scenario in cancer treatment.

