Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glucose metabolism by 2-deoxyglucose in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors


IntroductionMost patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST)
respond to imatinib (IM) but eventually progress with then limited
therapeutic options. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is used for visualizing
tumors by positron emission tomography (PET) and has been particularly
helpful for predicting tumor response in highly FDG-avid GIST.
2-deoxy-glucose (2DG) inhibits glucose metabolism in cancer cells, which
depend exclusively on aerobe glycolysis for ATP production (Warburg
Effect). 2DG is currently investigated in several clinical trials. Here
we evaluated the therapeutic potential of 2DG in GIST in vitro and in
vivo.MethodsTwo IM-sensitive (IM-S; GIST-T1, GIST882) and 3 IM-resistant
(IM-R; GIST430, GIST48, GIST48B) cell lines were studied. Cell viability
was evaluated by Sulforhodamin B (SRB) assay after 6 days of 2DG
treatment and combinations with IM and ABT-263, a BH3-mimetic.
Immunoblotting was done for KIT- and KIT-downstream signaling and markers
of apoptosis. For in vivo experiments nude mice bearing GIST-T1
xenografts were treated for 21 days with 500mg/kg/d 2DG or vehicle
control.ResultsCell viability assays in KIT-expressing cell lines
displayed IC50 values for 2DG between 0.5mM (GIST882) and 2.5mM (GIST48),
while KIT-negative GIST48B was less sensitive (6mM). Notably, treating
GIST-T1 in low-glucose media (1g/L, LG) reduced IC50 (1.1mM to 0.33mM) in
a glucose dependent manner. Immunoblot studies revealed a dose- and
glucose dependent inhibition of KIT glycosylation by 2DG with complete
inhibition at 1mM in LG, which coincided with inhibition of
KIT-phosphorylation and KIT-downstream signaling. The combination of 2DG
with IM had additive antiproliferative effects in IM-S cell lines. In
IM-R GIST430 a synergistic induction of apoptosis could be observed when
combining KIT-inhibiting concentrations of 2DG with ABT-263 1M. Treatment
of mice with 2DG alone did not affect tumor growth. At this dose 2DG
dependent inhibition of KIT-glycosylation or -phosphorylation was not
observed.Conclusions2DG shows promising GIST-specific antiproliferative
effects by inhibiting KIT-glycosylation and -phosphorylation in vitro.
These effects were additive when combined with imatinib. Further studies
will investigate alternate treatment schedules as well as drug
combinations with the aim of translating 2DG into a clinical trial in
GIST.

