Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The carcinogenesis rate is increased in MAL knock-out mice


Background:The MAL gene was originally identified by Alonso during a
study for differentially expressed genes in T-cell development. The MAL
protein, which spans the membrane four times, is involved in normal
apical transport and accurate sorting in distinct epithelial cells. The
recent study on MAL gene down-regulation in primary human epithelial
malignancies suggest that the loss of the MAL gene may be closely linked
with a variety of human epithelial malignancies. In our previous study,
we revealed that MAL was remarkably down-regulated in human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma. Exogenous expression of MAL in HNSCC cell lines
could inhibit the proliferation, invasion, and induce apoptosis of cancer
cells in vitro and suppress tumor growth in vivo. These data support that
MAL, as a candidate tumor suppressor, contributes to carcinogenesis and
development of HNSCC.Methods:To further confirm the role of MAL gene in
development of carcinoma, a MAL gene knockout mouse model was produced.
And the genotype and phenotype was investigated by our study group. The
genotypes of MAL-/- and MAL+/+ mice were identified by RT-PCR, Western
blot and Immunohistochemistry. The histopathology of main organs and
tissues (esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, oral mucosa, etc.)
were analyzed with H & E staining. Chemical carcinogenesis agent
(4-nitroquinoline-N-oxide, 4NQO) was used to induce oral mucosa
carcinomas.Results: MAL gene knockout mouse model was successfully
established and passed on from generation to generation more than 3
years. The genotypes of MAL-/-, MAL+/-, MAL+/+ mice were identified.
Phenotypic investigation found that MAL-/- mice raised no obvious
spontaneous phenotype in 12 months and the incidence of spontaneous tumor
was zero. Nevertheless, we found that there were significant differences
between MAL-/- and MAL+/+ mice in the incidence rate, occurrence time and
growth speed of tongue and esophageal squamous carcinoma which induced by
a low dose of 4NQO water feeding for 16 weeks (PBackground:The MAL gene
was originally identified by Alonso during a study for differentially
expressed genes in T-cell development. The MAL protein, which spans the
membrane four times, is involved in normal apical transport and accurate
sorting in distinct epithelial cells. The recent study on MAL gene
down-regulation in primary human epithelial malignancies suggest that the
loss of the MAL gene may be closely linked with a variety of human
epithelial malignancies. In our previous study, we revealed that MAL was
remarkably down-regulated in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Exogenous expression of MAL in HNSCC cell lines could inhibit the
proliferation, invasion, and induce apoptosis of cancer cells in vitro
and suppress tumor growth in vivo. These data support that MAL, as a
candidate tumor suppressor, contributes to carcinogenesis and development
of HNSCC.Methods:To further confirm the role of MAL gene in development
of carcinoma, a MAL gene knockout mouse model was produced. And the
genotype and phenotype was investigated by our study group. The genotypes
of MAL-/- and MAL+/+ mice were identified by RT-PCR, Western blot and
Immunohistochemistry. The histopathology of main organs and tissues
(esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, oral mucosa, etc.) were
analyzed with H & E staining. Chemical carcinogenesis agent
(4-nitroquinoline-N-oxide, 4NQO) was used to induce oral mucosa
carcinomas.Results: MAL gene knockout mouse model was successfully
established and passed on from generation to generation more than 3
years. The genotypes of MAL-/-, MAL+/-, MAL+/+ mice were identified.
Phenotypic investigation found that MAL-/- mice raised no obvious
spontaneous phenotype in 12 months and the incidence of spontaneous tumor
was zero. Nevertheless, we found that there were significant differences
between MAL-/- and MAL+/+ mice in the incidence rate, occurrence time and
growth speed of tongue and esophageal squamous carcinoma which induced by
a low dose of 4NQO water feeding for 16 weeks (P<0.01). We also found
that the occurrence of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma performed the
same changes as oral mucosa.Conclusions: Our results suggest that MAL
gene knockout mouse significantly increased the susceptibility of cancer.
The molecular mechanism about the tumor susceptibility becomes more
important, and will be significant for developing cancer prevention and
treatment methods.

