Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel Mer tyrosine kinase inhibitor mediates increased cell
killing in combination with FGFR inhibition


Purpose of Study:Although therapies targeting recently identified
oncogenic drivers of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are in clinical
use, a significant proportion of patients still lack a
molecularly-targeted therapeutic option. Therefore, there is a continued
need for development of new therapeutic strategies. We recently
demonstrated oncogenic roles for Mer receptor tyrosine kinase in NSCLC.
More specifically, we showed aberrant expression of Mer in approximately
70% of NSCLC patient samples compared to normal lung. Additionally,
shRNA-mediated Mer inhibition resulted in increased cell death, decreased
colony formation in clonogenic assays, increased chemosensitivity, and
decreased tumorigenesis in murine xenografts. These data validate Mer as
a potential therapeutic target in NSCLC. Fibroblast growth factor
receptors (FGFR) are another class of tyrosine kinases that are
aberrantly expressed and function to promote tumorigenesis in NSCLC. FGFR
inhibition has been validated as a therapeutic strategy in preclinical
NSCLC models and several FGFR inhibitors are currently in clinical
development for treatment of NSCLC. Although Mer can signal through both
the MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways, in NSCLC Mer signals mainly through
PI3K/AKT. Because Mer and FGFR signal primarily through complementary
pathways that mediate survival and proliferation (PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK,
respectively), we hypothesized that dual inhibition of FGFR and Mer may
provide a therapeutic advantage relative to inhibition of either kinase
alone. In this study we investigated the interaction between a novel
Mer-selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) and
AZD-4547, an FGFR TKI, in NSCLC cell lines.Methods Used:Colo699 (Mer+,
FGFR+) and H226 (Mer+, FGFR+) NSCLC cells were cultured for 14 days in
soft agar in the presence of Mer TKI and/or AZD-4547, alone or in
combination, and colonies were stained and counted. Changes in the
activity of downstream signaling pathways, including PI3K/AKT, MEK/ERK,
and STAT proteins were evaluated by immunoblotting.Results and
Conclusions:In the soft agar assay, Colo699 and H226 colony formation was
inhibited in the presence of Mer TKI and AZD-4547, both as single agents
and in combination. Importantly, concurrent treatment with Mer TKI and
AZD-4547 resulted in a greater decrease in colony-formation relative to
either single agent. Immunoblotting revealed increased inhibition of
pro-survival signaling in cells treated with both inhibitors relative to
the single agents. Taken together, these data suggest that combination
therapies targeting Mer kinase and FGFR may be effective for treatment of
NSCLC and indicate biochemical mechanisms by which the combination
therapy may mediate increased anti-tumor activity.

