Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of vulnerabilities in lung cancer via pooled short
hairpin RNA screening


A major goal of cancer research is to identify tumor-specific
vulnerabilities by which cancer cells can be selectively killed. The
clinical success of targeted therapies along with technological advances
in genome-wide profiling have spurred large-scale, on-going efforts to
systematically map the molecular landscapes of human cancers. These
approaches nominate candidate essential or tumor suppressor genes, but
are not able to identify all types of acquired vulnerabilities, such as
synthetic lethal relationships between aberrantly regulated pathways.
Functional studies are therefore an essential complement to these
approaches, serving both to confirm the biological roles of candidate
cancer genes, and also to identify other vulnerabilities that are
acquired as a consequence of observed genetic
alterations.Loss-of-function studies using pooled short hairpin RNAi
screening is proving to be a powerful method by which new cancer targets
can be identified. In order to identify new vulnerabilities in lung
cancer, we have chosen a focused approach using mini-libraries of short
hairpins against selected genes of interest. Nuclear hormone receptors
and their co-regulators are aberrantly regulated in many cancers, and
therapies targeting these receptors are currently used in treatment of
breast and prostate cancers. Quantitative PCR expression data across a
panel of lung cancer cell lines suggests that nuclear hormone receptors
may be useful as prognostic biomarkers in lung cancer patients, but the
role of these receptors in lung tumor biology is not fully understood.We
have used a lentiviral pooled short hairpin library of 1062 shRNAs
against 120 nuclear hormone receptor and co-regulator genes to identify
lung cancer-specific vulnerabilities, both in vitro and in vivo. Briefly,
cells were transduced with the library, allowed to undergo a period of
selection and expansion, and then injected subcutaneously into NOD-SCID
mice. Tumors were harvested after reaching a volume of 300 mm3. A
parallel in vitro screen was also performed, in which transduced cells
were cultured for 20 population doublings. The relative abundance of
individual shRNAs was quantified by next generation sequencing, and genes
for which 3 or more shRNAs exhibited depletion either in vitro or in vivo
were nominated as candidate essential genes. A screen performed in the
lung adenocarcinoma cell line H1819 identified 10 genes that were
required for in vitro survival, including BRCA1 and PHB. Five genes were
also identified as being required in vivo but not in vitro, including
HDAC1 and NCOR2. None of these were found to be mutated by exome
sequencing of H1819. Validation studies and investigations into the role
for each of these genes in lung cancer are currently on-going. We
conclude that our shRNA mini-library screen identifies unsuspected
synthetic lethal relationships and thus new therapeutic targets in lung
cancer, including some that are only detected by in vivo screening.

