Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MEK-inhibitor pimasertib in B-cell lymphomas: Evaluation of
the pre-clinical activity as single agent or in combination and
identification of biomarkers of response


Treatment of patients with lymphomas resistant/refractory to standard
chemotherapy is challenging. Development and identification of new
compounds targeting components of relevant pathways is needed. Pimasertib
is a potent and highly selective ATP noncompetitive MEK1/2 inhibitor,
which has been shown able to induce G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
different pre-clinical cancer models and potent antitumor activity in
xenograft models with mainly BRAF and KRAS activating mutations. Here, we
report data on the evaluation of pimasertib in a large panel of B-cell
lymphoma cell lines.Methods.Cell lines from diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL, n=16), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL, n=4), splenic marginal zone
lymphoma (SMZL, n=3) underwent 72 hrs exposure to increasing doses of
pimasertib (EMD Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) to assess
anti-proliferative activity by MTT assay. Apoptosis was assessed by
Annexin-V/7-AAD staining, gene expression profiling (GEP) with Illumina
HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChips at baseline on all the cell lines.
GEP/IC50 correlation was assessed by Spearman correlation. Cell lines
with IC50 Treatment of patients with lymphomas resistant/refractory to
standard chemotherapy is challenging. Development and identification of
new compounds targeting components of relevant pathways is needed.
Pimasertib is a potent and highly selective ATP noncompetitive MEK1/2
inhibitor, which has been shown able to induce G1 cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in different pre-clinical cancer models and potent antitumor
activity in xenograft models with mainly BRAF and KRAS activating
mutations. Here, we report data on the evaluation of pimasertib in a
large panel of B-cell lymphoma cell lines.Methods.Cell lines from diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL, n=16), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL, n=4),
splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL, n=3) underwent 72 hrs exposure to
increasing doses of pimasertib (EMD Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) to
assess anti-proliferative activity by MTT assay. Apoptosis was assessed
by Annexin-V/7-AAD staining, gene expression profiling (GEP) with
Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChips at baseline on all the cell
lines. GEP/IC50 correlation was assessed by Spearman correlation. Cell
lines with IC50 < 15M were defined as sensitive; data mining included
LIMMA, GSEA and Metacore. Three DLBCL cell lines were exposed to
increasing doses of pimasertib in combination with other drugs, and
synergy was assessed by Chou-Talalay combination index (CI).Results. The
median IC50 value was 26.1 M (range, 1.4-100 M). The effect was largely
cytostatic, with apoptosis detected in 1/5 cell lines and only at high
doses (80 M). DLBCL and SMZL cells appeared more sensitive than MCL
(P=0.047 and P=0.039). No differences were observed between germinal
center B-cell or activated B-cell (ABC) DLBCL. TP53 (P=0.0283) and
TNFAIP3 (P=0.012) inactivation negatively affected the response to
pimasertib. Transcripts significantly associated with higher sensitivity
to pimasertib were enriched of MEK and RAS regulated genes, E2F target
genes, genes expressed in germinal center B cells. Transcripts associated
with resistance were enriched of IFN target genes (including TNFAIP3) and
genes down-regulated in the presence of active MEK or RAS.Pimasertib
showed synergism combined with PI3K inhibitor idelalisib (median
CI=0.34), and the effect was strong in 2/3 cell lines (OCI-Ly10, CI=
0.03; TMD8, CI= 0.25). Synergism was observed with BTK-inhibitor
ibrutinib in the ABC-DLBCL cell lines (OCI-Ly10, CI=0.32; TMD8, CI=0.63).
Less synergistic effects were observed with pimasertib in combination
with anti-CD20 moAb rituximab (CI=0.78) and with MDM2 inhibitor nutlin-3
(CI=0.67).Conclusions. Pimasertib showed promising activity in
combination with PI3K and BTK inhibitors in preclinical models of mature
lymphomas, worth of being further evaluated. GEP signatures associated
with the response to pimasertib were identified.

