Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin inhibits angiogenesis, local and metastatic growth of
triple-negative breast cancer by targeting two classes of adipose tissue
progenitors


We have recently reported that human white adipose tissue (WAT) contains
two classes of CD45-CD34+ progenitors with cooperative roles in triple
negative breast cancer progression. In orthotopic murine models we found
that 1) purified human WAT CD34+CD13+ mesenchymal adipose stromal cell
progenitors (ASCs) were not able to migrate but promoted local tumor
growth in the mammary fat pad and 2) purified human WAT CD34+CD31+
endothelial progenitors (EPCs) were able to migrate towards lymph nodes
and blood and promoted breast cancer cell EMT, migration, invasion and
metastatic growth (Orecchioni et al, 2013). Here we report that in
several in vitro and in vivo models the biguanide Metformin, a drug
commonly used in type 2 diabetes management, is able to inhibit
angiogenesis, local and metastatic growth of triple negative breast
cancer by targeting WAT progenitors. First, we and others (Dallaglio et
al, in press) have found in collaborative studies that Metformin inhibits
the formation of capillary-like networks by HUVEC cells. This effect was
partially AMPK-dependent. Metformin inhibited VEGF-dependent activation
of ERK1/2, angiogenesis in matrigel pellets in vivo, and decreased
microvessel density in tumor-free mice. The effect of Metformin on WAT
progenitors was then studied in vivo in several immune-competent and
immune-deficient murine strains with and without triple negative breast
cancer. In immune-competent mice, low-dose Metformin (2mg/mL drinking
water) induced apoptosis and increased hypoxia of CD34+CD31+ WAT EPCs. As
a result of low-dose Metformin administration, WAT and cancer vessels
were quantitatively reduced, had a significant impairment of the
pericyte/endothelial cell ratio and displayed a branching and dysplastic
phenotype. This effect was also observed in immune-competent mice on high
fat diet receiving Metformin. WAT CD34+ ASC were targeted by higher doses
of Metformin, which were associated with a reduced pericyte coverage of
new blood vessels. As Metformin is frequently administered along with
aspirin and beta-blockers in diabetic and obese patients, we studied in
vivo the association of these three drugs in murine models of triple
negative breast cancer. In several immune-deficient murine models, the
beta-blocker Atenolol significantly synergized with Metformin in
inhibiting both local and metastatic breast cancer growth. In
immune-competent murine strains, the anti-metastatic effect of Metformin
and Atenolol was further enhanced by the addition of aspirin. These
effects were observed in several murine models generated by both p53
mutated or p53 wild type triple negative breast cancer cells. We are
currently investigating the molecular mechanisms used by Metformin to
inhibit WAT progenitors and the most efficient schedules of
administration of Metformin, Atenolol and Aspirin to target local and
metastatic breast cancer growth.

