Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational study on circulating markers in advanced melanoma
patients undergoing Dacarbazine and Bevacizumab treatment


Purpose:Chemotherapy (CT) with Dacarbazine (DTIC) in association with an
anti-VEGF treatment could be an intriguing exploiting path, since
metastatic melanoma (MM) in vitro models showed VEGF as a possible
target, due to its transcription up-regulation by DTIC. The purpose of
this study was to indentify modulated circulating factors which may be
used as specific biomarkers in patients (pts) affected by MM undergoing
DTIC plus Bevacizumab (B = Avastin) combination and to test its
tolerability and efficacy.Patients and Methods:Between July
2006-September 2009, 40 untreated MM pts underwent CT with DTIC (800mg/mq
q4w) + B (10mg/kg q2w). Clinical benefit, response duration, safety and
feasibility were analyzed. Moreover, 13 pts participating to the clinical
study agreed to provide blood for translational research. The blood
samples for this study were drawn at the same time points as for regular
follow-up tests and were evaluated for the following several soluble
factors: vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, VEGF-C, VEGF-R1,
VEGF-R2, angiopoietin (Ang)-2, E-cadherin, E-selectin, intercellular
adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1,
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and -9, tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 and -2. Correlations with pts clinical outcome
were performed as well.Results:36/40 pts were evaluated at the
analysis-time. Median age was 57yr (male 60yr; female 47yr) and 23 were
male. Three pts (8.3%) experienced a complete remission (CR), 3 pts
(8.3%) developed partial response (PR), 13 (36.1%) stable disease (SD);
17 (47.2%) progressive disease (PD). Clinical benefit (CR+PR+SD) was
52.7% and treatment was well tolerated. Time to progression (months) was
10.9, respectively 22.6 for PR pts, 8.2 for SD pts and 2 for PD pts.
Median-survival in the whole group was 16.5 months (PR pts 22.6; SD pts
17; PD pts 4.23). DTIC/B treatment modulates not only VEGF-A, but also
VEGF-C, Ang-2 VEGF-R1 and VEGF-R2. Among soluble adhesion molecules, we
observed an increase of VCAM-1 in non responder
pts.Conclusions:Long-lasting responses obtained in both SD and CR/PR pts
and mild side effects make DTIC/B a promising combination in advanced
melanoma. The companion translational study partially clarified these
clinical results by molecularly characterizing and profiling responders
vs non-responders pts.

