Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance of colorectal cancer cells to 5-FU treatment in three
dimensional cell culture models under perfusion involves BCL-2


Assessment of the effectiveness of chemotherapeutic compounds in
bidimensional cell cultures poorly mimics resistance development and the
tumor-microenvironment complexity in vivo. In this study we addressed the
suitability of a perfused bioreactor to sustain colorectal cancer cell
growth and to test established treatment regimens in an in-vitro setting
as compared to normal cell culture or xenografts of the same cell line.By
culturing the HT29 colorectal cancer cell line in 3D on collagen
scaffolds tissue-like structures characterized by a heterogeneous pattern
of proliferating and apoptotic cells closely resembling xenografts from
the same cell line as generated in immunodeficient mice could be
successfully established. CDX2, a colorectal cancer tumor-marker , was
expressed in 3D static and perfused cultures, but not in 2D cultures.
Upon perfusion, homogeneous seeding on scaffolds could be obtained and
significantly higher numbers of tumor cells were recovered, as compared
to static cultures (13.7 fold increase, pAssessment of the effectiveness
of chemotherapeutic compounds in bidimensional cell cultures poorly
mimics resistance development and the tumor-microenvironment complexity
in vivo. In this study we addressed the suitability of a perfused
bioreactor to sustain colorectal cancer cell growth and to test
established treatment regimens in an in-vitro setting as compared to
normal cell culture or xenografts of the same cell line.By culturing the
HT29 colorectal cancer cell line in 3D on collagen scaffolds tissue-like
structures characterized by a heterogeneous pattern of proliferating and
apoptotic cells closely resembling xenografts from the same cell line as
generated in immunodeficient mice could be successfully established.
CDX2, a colorectal cancer tumor-marker , was expressed in 3D static and
perfused cultures, but not in 2D cultures. Upon perfusion, homogeneous
seeding on scaffolds could be obtained and significantly higher numbers
of tumor cells were recovered, as compared to static cultures (13.7 fold
increase, p<0.0001).After 48 hours treatment with clinically relevant
concentrations of 5-FU no effect on numbers of cells cultured in 3D under
perfusionand as xenografts was observed, as compared to a 55.8%
inhibition of 2D cultures. The fraction of Ki67 negative cells (G0 cell
phase), was increased after a 48 hours treatment in the 3D perfused and
xenografts, but it reached again levels similar to untreated cells after
96 hours. In contrast,cells surviving n 2D cell cultures remained largely
positive for Ki67. Importantly, in perfused cultures we could only
observe a marginal effect on the expression of BCL-2, TRAF1, FLIP
apoptosis resistance genes, as compared to a significant down regulation
of their expression in 2D cell cultures and 3D static conditions. In the
same line, a combination of ABT-199, a new clinically approved BCL-2
inhibitor, and 5-FU induced additional cytostatic and cytotoxic effects
in 3D perfused but not in 2D cell cultures (83.3% inhibition vs. 39.8%
p=0.003).Notably, we found that BCL-2 expression in tissues from
neoadjuvant treated patients with resistance to treatment was higher than
in stage and grade matched colorectal cancers from untreated patients or
patients responding to treatment.Cultures in perfused bioreactors offer
the possibility of generating tumour tissue-like structures over a short
time period. These structures are characterized by sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic treatments similar to that of xenografted tumors and
significantly different from standard 2D cellular assays.In particular,
our data suggest that inhibition of BCL-2 in combination with 5-FU
treatment in colorectal cancer could be endowed with therapeutic
potential.

