Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunomodulatory effects of VEGF on human lymph node
antigen-presenting and lymphoid cells


Background: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent
pro-angiogenic signal associated with the growth and metastasis of
tumors. In addition, VEGF has also been implicated in the suppression of
immune cell function. The purpose of this study was to characterize VEGF
secretion, receptor expression and effect of soluble VEGF neutralization
in human lymph node cells both at rest and during activation.Methods:
Human lymph nodes derived from patients with melanoma (IRB CASE 3610)
containing T cells, B cells, monocyte/macrophages and dendritic cells
were cultured with anti-CD3/CD28 beads and IL-2 in order to induce an
inflammatory response in vitro. Culture supernatant was assayed for the
presence of soluble VEGF on days 4, 7, 11 and 14 of culture.
Multiparameter FACS analysis was performed to assess the cell surface
expression of VEGF receptor subtypes 1 and 2 over the 14-day culture
period. In addition, intracellular expression of cytokines within
effector T cells was assessed at the end of the culture. Finally, a
parallel culture containing a VEGF neutralizing antibody was performed to
assess the effect of VEGF neutralization on effector T cell phenotype.
High-throughput T cell receptor CDR3 sequencing was used to determine the
molecular sequence of the variable region of the T cell receptors
(ImmunoSEQ, Seattle, WA).Results: VEGF was measureable in the culture
supernatant on days 4 and beyond. The proportion of cells expressing
intracellular VEGF peaked at day 4 and subsequently decreased.
CD11b+(monocyte/macrophage), CD11c+ (dendritic cells) and CD19+ (B) cells
had the highest proportion of cells which expressed intracellular VEGF.
VEGF R1 and R2 were not constitutively expressed on resting immune cells,
but receptor expression was upregulated upon activation of the T cells in
vitro. Day 14 T cells demonstrated intracellular IFN-, IL-2 and TNF-. The
addition of VEGF-blocking antibody in the culture of MDLN cells
effectively neutralized the amount of soluble VEGF detected in the
culture supernatant at all days. The addition of the VEGF-blocking
antibody also increased the proportion of T cells expressing
intracellular IFN- as compared T cells in the non-VEGF blocked culture
and resulted in distinct molecularly defined T cell clones.Conclusion:
These results confirm that soluble VEGF is produced by immune cells
during activation, even in the absence of tumor. VEGF receptor expression
on lymph node immune cell subsets is constitutive, but low, and then
upregulated during in vitro activation of T cells, presumably due to
secondary cytokine production. Neutralization of soluble VEGF resulted in
qualitative differences in effector cytokine expression and T cell
receptor sequences. Whether the effect on these T cells is direct via
VEGF interaction with the cognate receptor or from an indirect effect on
antigen-presenting cells is currently under investigation.

