Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-existence of epithelioid and fibroblastoid subsets in a
sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma: Comparative studies between clonal
sublines and cytofluorometrically sorted cells


Currently, understanding of the pathobiology of sarcomatoid renal cell
carcinoma (sRCC) is incomplete. We previously reported the co-existence
of epithelioid and fibroblastoid subsets in the sRCC cell line known as
RCC52 with total loss of HLA class I expression through genetic and
clonal cell studies (Cancer Immunol Immunother, 2009;58:395-408;
Anticancer Res, 2013;35:4875-90). We argued that the conclusions drawn
from data generated by clonal studies might have not been objective,
since only a limited number of sublines from each morphologically
distinct cell type were investigated. In this study, using anti-CD44 and
anti-CD24 mAbs, we have been able to sort out the two subsets revealing
that the CD44+/CD24- phenotype is for the epithelioid subset and the
CD44+/CD24+ phenotype is for the fibroblastoid subset. The differential
expression of two markers could also be used to identify the two
morphologically distinct clonal sublines and the phenotypic results
turned out to be consistent with those of sorted cell subsets, for
examples: (i) in both differently prepared subsets, the respective
phenotypic features in terms of the differential expression of CD44 and
CD24 remained persistently stable after 12 in vitro passages; (ii) only
epithelioid but not fibroblastoid cells expressed surface E-Cadherin;
(iii) expression of surface CD105 was found much more abundant in
epithelioid cells as compared with fibroblastoid ones; (iv) epithelioid
cells exhibited stronger clonogenicity in semisolid agar as compared with
fibroblastoid ones; and (v) fibroblastoid cells displayed greater
migratory/invasive ability than epithelioid ones in in vitro assays.
However, one inconsistent result between clonal and sorted cells was
found that in xenotransplantation experiments with NOD/SCID
immunodeficient mice, only epithelioid, but not fibroblastoid clonal
sublines, developed tumors at the injection site, in contrast to sorted
fibroblastoid cells which gave rise to larger tumor masses and faster
growth rates than sorted epithelioid cells. The results obtained with
sorted cells were more reflective of the whole tumor population and in
vivo situations. Our findings highlight the difference in the functional
properties of the two distinct subsets in this sRCC cell line. Further
investigations with additional sRCC cell lines/tumors are needed to
determine if the co-existence of epithelioid and fibroblastoid subsets,
the total loss of HLA class I and other noted characteristics are indeed
the common features of all sRCCs. Improved understanding of tumor
heterogeneity, metastatic niche and stromal progression may have a
profound consequence on disease progression and metastasis, and promises
to open up new strategies for therapy of this type of malignancy.

