Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted treatment of metastatic melanoma through interference
with Pin1-FOXM1 signaling


Malignant melanoma is the most lethal form of skin cancer. Inhibition of
BRAF/MEK signaling or activation of T-cell signaling are the current
options for therapeutic intervention. These therapies however only
provide a short term clinical benefit and development of complementary
strategies is still needed. We set out to identify new molecular targets
to improve therapeutic intervention in melanoma.Database meta-analysis
revealed the pro-proliferative and pro-survival protein FOXM1 to be
strongly elevated in malignant melanoma and progressively expressed with
advances disease state. A follow-up search for potential enzymes that may
regulate FOXM1 activity identified the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 to
be closely associated with FOXM1 expression and FOXM1 activity. Pin1 and
active FOXM1 signaling proved to be indicative for poor disease outcome
and as such we set out to address whether modulation of Pin1-FOXM1
signaling could be beneficial against melanoma.Here, we show that
Pin1-FOXM1 signaling is a targetable point of intervention in melanoma.
We observed that Pin1 is essential for FOXM1 activity through physical
interaction in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. The Pin1-FOXM1
interaction is dependent on MEK-mediated phosphorylation of FOXM1 and
mutation of the MEK phosphorylated residues in FOXM1 abrogated the
interaction with Pin1. The Pin1-FOXM1 interaction is enhanced by
BRAFV600E, the driver oncogene in the majority of melanomas, which
prompted us to investigate the consequence of Pin1 inhibition on FOXM1
activity and tumor progression in BRAFV600E-driven melanoma. Excitingly,
in that background we observed that interference with Pin1 strongly
inhibited FOXM1 activity and tumor outgrowth.In order to repress
Pin1-FOXM1 signaling in a clinically applicable manner, we designed a
targeted therapy. Importantly, interference with Pin1-FOXM1 signaling in
this manner markedly repressed growth of melanoma cells and human
metastatic melanoma ex vivo. Thus, we observed here that elevated
Pin1-FOXM1 signaling is indicative of poor prognosis in melanoma and
therapeutic inhibition of Pin1-FOXM1 signaling shows promising results as
melanoma treatment opening new perspectives for clinical
intervention.This work is supported by post-doctoral fellowship Buit-4649
of the Dutch Cancer Society awarded to PLJDK

