Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of everolimus-resistant cell lines
established from estrogen depletion-resistant MCF-7


mTOR inhibitor everolimus has been considered as a promising agent for
breast cancer treatment especially among estrogen receptor (ER) positive
postmenopausal advanced breast cancer. As expected, combination therapy
of everolimus and steroidal aromatase inhibitor (AI) showed remarkable
clinical efficacy for the first line nonsteroidal AI treatment failure
patients in BOLERO-2 trial. However, the subsequent treatment after
refractory to that therapy remains a great matter. We already reported
several types of long term estrogen-depletion resistant (EDR) cell lines
from MCF-7-E10, which has been constitutively ERE-GFP-transfected to
monitor ER activity in living cells (Fujiki N et al., J Steroid Biochem
Mol Biol. 2013 Oct 13;139C:61-72). They mimic AI resistance and these EDR
cells have been characterized as the followings. 1) Type 1 as ER positive
(ERE-GFP positive), constitutive ER overexpression without estrogen, and
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway upregulated. 2) Type 2 as ER negative conversion
(ERE-GFP negative) and IGF-1R/JNK signaling pathway upregulated. Then
with those two types of sub-cell lines, we generated everolimus resistant
cells after long term exposure to everolimus in estrogen depleted medium.
Those everolimus resistant (EVR) cells are equivalent to resistance to
the combination therapy of AI and everolimus as the second line endocrine
treatment after the first line AI treatment failure. Though everolimus
extremely inhibited cell proliferation of two EDR cell lines, everolimus
resistant cells named as Type 1-EVR, Type 2-EVR no longer responded to
everolimus. ER expression and estrogen sensitivity of two types of EVR
cells were similar to those of the parental cells, respectively. Pure
anti-estrogen fulvestrant inhibited cell proliferation of Type1-EVR
cells. On the other hand, Type2-EVR did not respond to fulvestrant but
JNK inhibitor inhibited the cell growth. Phosphorylation status of p70S6K
and 4E-BP1 were different among individual parental EDR cells and EVR
cells. Type1-EVR showed much higher expression of phosphorylation of
MAP-kinase than the parental cells. In contrast, Type2-EVR expressed
phosphorylation of MAP-kinase less than the parental cells. As above, the
mechanism of acquired resistance to everolimus was likely to be different
between those two sub-cell lines. This finding implies that different
mechanisms of AI resistance follow different types of everolimus
resistance.

