Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic alteration of bromodomain protein ATAD2 in cancer


ATPase family, AAA domain containing 2 (ATAD2), is a member of the
bromodomain-containing protein family. ATAD2 associates with co-factors
such as hormone receptors, E2Fs and c-Myc to control a specific subset of
genes. Overexpression and copy number alteration of ATAD2 are observed in
many types of cancer, and these alterations are correlated with poor
clinical outcome in breast, lung, and endometrial cancers. Here, we
present an integrated genomic analysis of ATAD2 using the Oncomine
database that shows cancer-associated features of ATAD2. In The Cancer
Genome Atlas, amplifications of ATAD2 are observed in 63% of ovarian, 52%
of breast, 39% of colorectal, and 18% of lung cancer patients. By
contrast, no amplification of ATAD2 is observed in corresponding normal
tissues. In most cases, amplifications are modest ranging up to a copy
number of six. Moreover, a high correlation between ATAD2 mRNA expression
levels and its copy number is observed in cultured cell lines. In order
to investigate the role of the bromodomain in ATAD2, we conducted a
cell-free physicochemical binding analysis and in vitro physiological
studies using human colon cancer cells (HCT-116). To identify binding
partners for the ATAD2 bromodomain, we constructed ATAD2 AlphaScreen
systems and examined the binding activity of the ATAD2 bromodomain
protein to various acetylated or non-acetylated histone peptides. The
ATAD2 bromodomain interacted with histone H4 acetylated at lysine 5, 8 or
12, but not with other acetylated and non-acetylated histone peptides.
Subcellular localization analysis by immunofluorescence, demonstrated
that ATAD2 is mainly localizes to nucleus and that treatment with
trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylases increased nuclear
ATAD2 protein levels, suggesting that the acetylation level of histone
tails may affect ATAD2 expression or localization. In in silico
expression analysis using the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia, showed most
genes that correlated with ATAD2 expression have a role in proliferation
or survival. To determine if the ATAD2 protein directly controls
transcription of these genes, we performed ChIP-PCR assays and found that
ATAD2 protein occupies the DNA promoter regions of downstream targets,
eg. TOP2A, but does not occupy the promoters of non-target negative
controls, such as -actin. In conclusion, we show ATAD2 copy number
alteration in a large number of cancer patients, suggesting that ATAD2
expression, or genomic alteration, may be useful prognostic markers of
cancer. We also show that physicochemical binding of the ATAD2
bromodomain to specific acetylated histone peptides suggesting a
physiological function of ATAD2 in nucleus as a transcriptional regulator
of tumor-related genes. These results suggest that a blockade of ATAD2
bromodomain binding to specific acetylated histone tails may provide a
novel approach to anti-tumor drug development.

