Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESRP1 regulated alternative splicing of CD44mRNA enhances lung
colonization of metastatic cancer cell


Cancer metastasis is established by the seeding and successful
colonization of stem-like cancer cells which show tumor-initiating
ability at distant organs. CD44 is a cell surface marker protein which is
highly expressed in stem-like cells of several human cancers including
breast cancer. CD44 exists in various isoforms produced through
alternative splicing of mRNA. Increased expression of CD44 variant
isoform (CD44v) has been shown to correlate with metastatic potential and
aggressive clinical behavior of various human cancers. We recently showed
that CD44v contributes to reactive oxygen species (ROS)-defense in cancer
cells by enhancing cystine uptake by the cystine transporter xCT.
However, the functional relevance of CD44v and xCT in the metastatic
spread of stem-like cancer cells has remained elusive.In the present
study, we show that metastatic breast cancer 4T1 cells consist of CD44v+
and CD44v- cells. The orthotopic transplantation of CD44v+ population but
not that of CD44v-, in mice resulted in efficient lung metastasis. We
found that CD44v expressing metastatic cancer cells highly express xCT
and thereby maintain high reduced glutathione (GSH) level. A specific xCT
inhibitor sulfasalazine suppressed lung metastatsis of CD44v+ cells.
Alternative splicing of CD44mRNA in such metastatic cancer cells is
regulated by Epithelial Splicing Related Protein1 (ESRP1) and short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting ESRP1 switched isoform from CD44v to CD44
standard (CD44s), leading to the suppression of lung metastasis.
Furthermore, we found that ESRP1 expression is regulated epigenetically
through histone modification by performing chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) sequencing analysis of the ESRP1 locus in CD44v+ and CD44v-
cells.These findings establish a novel role of ESRP1-regulated
alternative splicing program in the regulation of antioxidant status of
stem-like cancer cells which is crucial for the metastatic ability.

