Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smart brachytherapy spacers eluting nanoencapsulated
radiosensitizers for chemo-radiation therapy


Introduction: We have developed a new approach for chemoradiation therapy
(CRT), termed Biological In-Situ Image Guided Radiation Therapy BIS-IGRT,
which involves the coating of spacers routinely used during prostate
I-125-based brachytherapy with radiosensitizing drugs (e.g. docetaxel DTX
and gold nanoparticles). This approach provides localized in-situ
delivery of the sensitizer to the tumor and avoids the toxicity
associated with current systemic delivery of radiosensitizers. BIS-IGRT
adds radiosensitization capability to the standard brachytherapy
procedure providing sustained delivery and drug concentration and with
minimal additional inconvenience to the patient. Thereby BIS-IGRT
improves the therapeutic ratio of radiation therapy without introducing
additional patient interventions over current brachytherapy
procedures.Methods: We have fabricated a nanoparticles based smart INCeRT
(Implantable Nanoplatform for Chemo-Radiation Therapy) implant for
localized delivery of radiosensitizing nanoparticles/ drugs in prostate
cancer in conjunction with brachytherapy. These implants are physically
similar to the clinically used brachytherapy spacers but have the added
capability of imaging and local drug delivery. We have fabricated INCeRT
spacers with biocompatible and biodegradable polymer, PLGA impregnated
with nanoparticles encapsulating imaging probe (Cyanine 7.5) and
chemotherapeutic drug, docetaxel (DTX). Using a similar approach, we have
also fabricated PLGA spacers impregnated with high Z (atomic number) gold
nanoparticles (Hi-Z-CuRE: High Z-Customizable Radiotherapy Enhancement)
for effectively boosting the radiation dose locally. The morphology,
composition and nanoparticle's distribution inside the spacers was
studied by SEM (scanning electron microscopy) and EDS (Energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy). Further, preliminary in vivo imaging experiments
with subcutaneous prostate cancer tumored mice implanted with INCeRT
spacers showed a size dependent diffusion of nanoparticles from the
spacers in the tumor matrix. Also, from in vivo therapeutic studies with
these spacers showed a sustained and slow release of the DTX from the
spacers and showed a better response in suppressing the tumor as opposed
to control mice with saline injections. Further experiments for studying
the combined chemo-radiation therapy are underway.Conclusions: BIS-IGRT
is a powerful approach to locally radio-sensitize the prostate to enable
prostate cancer (PCa) cure with the use of lower radiation doses, thereby
leading to less rectal toxicity. This new treatment approach would be of
crucial benefit for patients with local relapse who require salvage
radiotherapy but have reached their radiotherapy normal tissue dose
limits. This work was supported partially by NSF-DGE-0965843,
HHS/1U54CA151881 CORE1, 1R03 CA164645-01 and a seed grant from the BWH
Biomedical Research Institute.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

