Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma heat shock protein 90kDa beta member 1 levels predict both
early stage and advanced stage ovarian cancer independently from cancer
antigen 125 in patients with an indeterminate adnexal mass


Background: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most common cause of death among
gynecologic cancers. A key reason for the high lethality of OC is that
early detection of OC is uncommon, and the majority of OC patients have
advanced stage disease at diagnosis. Current non-invasive tests do not
adequately distinguish benign from malignant adnexal masses. Diagnostic
tests that reliably distinguish early stage OC from benign conditions may
lead to earlier diagnosis of OC and improved survival.Methods: We
designed a cohort study of plasma biomarkers in ovarian cancer patients.
Specimens were analyzed from 100 patients with advanced OC (AJCC Stage
III and IV), 50 patients with early stage OC (Stage I and II), and 50
patients with benign surgical conditions from the Mayo Ovarian SPORE
Biospecimens Core. Presurgical plasma samples were assayed for multiple
toll-like receptor agonists, cytokines, and vascular growth factors by
ELISA and electrochemiluminescence. Biomarkers that were reliably
detected in plasma were analyzed for association with OC. Differences in
plasma biomarker levels between benign, early, and advanced OC patient
groups were assessed using plate-adjusted logistic regression
models.Results: Out of 23 biomarkers tested, 7 were excluded due to
unreliable plasma detection. Of the remaining 16 biomarkers, 6_including
interferon gamma (IFN), interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-8, IL-10, tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF), and placental growth factor (PlGF)_were univariately
associated with OC (all pBackground: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most
common cause of death among gynecologic cancers. A key reason for the
high lethality of OC is that early detection of OC is uncommon, and the
majority of OC patients have advanced stage disease at diagnosis. Current
non-invasive tests do not adequately distinguish benign from malignant
adnexal masses. Diagnostic tests that reliably distinguish early stage OC
from benign conditions may lead to earlier diagnosis of OC and improved
survival.Methods: We designed a cohort study of plasma biomarkers in
ovarian cancer patients. Specimens were analyzed from 100 patients with
advanced OC (AJCC Stage III and IV), 50 patients with early stage OC
(Stage I and II), and 50 patients with benign surgical conditions from
the Mayo Ovarian SPORE Biospecimens Core. Presurgical plasma samples were
assayed for multiple toll-like receptor agonists, cytokines, and vascular
growth factors by ELISA and electrochemiluminescence. Biomarkers that
were reliably detected in plasma were analyzed for association with OC.
Differences in plasma biomarker levels between benign, early, and
advanced OC patient groups were assessed using plate-adjusted logistic
regression models.Results: Out of 23 biomarkers tested, 7 were excluded
due to unreliable plasma detection. Of the remaining 16 biomarkers,
6_including interferon gamma (IFN), interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-8, IL-10,
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF), and placental growth factor
(PlGF)_were univariately associated with OC (all p<0.005), and
one_IL-6_was associated with early stage OC (p Background: Ovarian cancer
(OC) is the most common cause of death among gynecologic cancers. A key
reason for the high lethality of OC is that early detection of OC is
uncommon, and the majority of OC patients have advanced stage disease at
diagnosis. Current non-invasive tests do not adequately distinguish
benign from malignant adnexal masses. Diagnostic tests that reliably
distinguish early stage OC from benign conditions may lead to earlier
diagnosis of OC and improved survival.Methods: We designed a cohort study
of plasma biomarkers in ovarian cancer patients. Specimens were analyzed
from 100 patients with advanced OC (AJCC Stage III and IV), 50 patients
with early stage OC (Stage I and II), and 50 patients with benign
surgical conditions from the Mayo Ovarian SPORE Biospecimens Core.
Presurgical plasma samples were assayed for multiple toll-like receptor
agonists, cytokines, and vascular growth factors by ELISA and
electrochemiluminescence. Biomarkers that were reliably detected in
plasma were analyzed for association with OC. Differences in plasma
biomarker levels between benign, early, and advanced OC patient groups
were assessed using plate-adjusted logistic regression models.Results:
Out of 23 biomarkers tested, 7 were excluded due to unreliable plasma
detection. Of the remaining 16 biomarkers, 6_including interferon gamma
(IFN), interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-8, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF), and placental growth factor (PlGF)_were univariately associated
with OC (all p<0.005), and one_IL-6_was associated with early stage OC (p
< 0.0001). Heat shock protein 90kDa beta member 1 (HSP90B1, gp96) was
associated with OC and early stage OC with borderline statistical
significance (p = 0.039 and p = 0.026, respectively). However, when
adjusted for cancer antigen 125 (CA-125), only HSP90B1 independently
predicted OC (p = 0.008), as well as early stage OC (p =
0.014).Conclusions: The plasma cytokines IFN, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, TNF, and
PlGF are associated with OC. However, after adjusting for CA-125, only
HSP90B1 independently predicts OC, including early stage OC. These data
warrant further investigation to determine whether measuring plasma
HSP90B1 can aid in patient evaluation.

