Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulated IRE1-dependent mRNA decay occurs under extreme
proteotoxic stress in myeloma, but not under conditions that would affect
therapeutic targeting of IRE1


Many secretory cancers rely on cellular mechanisms such as the unfolded
protein response (UPR) to survive under conditions that lead to
proteotoxic stress. Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy
that is particularly reliant on this pathway as it controls cell survival
under proteotoxic stress. One branch of the UPR is IRE1, a receptor in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane that senses misfolded protein and
stimulates cell adaptation and survival under proteotoxic stress. The
ribonuclease domain of IRE1 cleaves XBP1 mRNA, which is ligated to code
for the active transcription factor XBP1s. IRE1 also cleaves other mRNAs
resulting in their degradation, termed regulated IRE1-dependent mRNA
decay (RIDD). While IRE1 is a potential therapeutic target in MM and
other secretory cancers, little is known about the role of RIDD in
malignancy. We set out to determine whether RIDD occurs in MM, and how it
would contribute to the mechanism of IRE1-targeting therapeutics. We
cross-referenced published expression data to identify consistent RIDD
targets and found that 11 transcripts were regulated by RIDD in more than
one experimental system. To determine if these were RIDD targets in MM,
cell lines were treated with DTT to induce strong proteotoxic stress in
the presence or absence of an IRE1 RNAse inhibitor. Transcripts were
measured using qPCR. Only BLOC1S1 was regulated by RIDD in this system.
Interestingly, BLOC1S1 was only degraded after complete splicing of XBP1
mRNA, suggesting that RIDD occurs when a cell has exhausted its natural
substrate and not recovered from ER-stress. Importantly, using
bioinformatic analysis we identified a conserved stem loop structure in
BLOC1S1 that may be cleaved by IRE1, adding further weight to its
potential as a RIDD target. The effect of mutation of this stem loop to
an IRE1-resistant form was analysed. In order to determine the clinical
significance of RIDD, we tested whether RIDD occurred as a consequence of
drug treatment. A standard treatment for MM, that is believed to induce
ER-stress, is the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib. To test whether this
treatment might induce RIDD, MM cell lines were treated with a timecourse
of Bortezomib and BLOC1S1 mRNA was measured. Bortezomib did not induce
BLOC1S1 degradation, and hence RIDD. Finally, in order to assess whether
RIDD occurs in MM patients, we used data from primary patient cells from
over 250 patients and correlated expression of conserved RIDD target
genes with the ratio of spliced to unspliced XBP1 mRNA (XBP1s/u), as a
measure of IRE1 activity. No correlation was found, suggesting that RIDD
is not present in clinical samples. Taken together, these data suggest
that while RIDD occurs under extreme stress in MM cells in vitro, it is
not clinically significant in this disease. Therefore, RIDD should not
affect the action of IRE1-targeting therapeutics in MM or other secretory
cancers.

