Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lineage-specific metabolic reprogramming in BCR-ABL1-driven
leukemia


Background & Hypothesis: The serine-threonine liver kinase B1 (LKB1)
activates AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and negatively regulates
aerobic glycoloysis (Warburg effect). LKB1 and AMPK have long been
established as tumor suppressors, leading to clinical trials that test
the efficacy of AMPK activators as cancer therapeutics. Paradoxically, we
found that high expression levels of LKB1 and subunits of AMPK at
diagnosis correlate with poor clinical outcome in patients with high risk
B precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) (n = 207). These findings
seem to contradict the historical notion of LKB1-AMPK as a tumor
suppressor pathway, suggesting that the functions of LKB1-AMPK pathway
may depend on cellular and genetic contexts.Results: Here, we focus on
the role of LKB1 in BCR-ABL1-driven leukemia - chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) and B cell lineage Ph+ ALL. To do so, genetic mouse models for
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT)-inducible deletion of Lkb1 in
BCR-ABL1-transformed hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (CML-like)
and B cell progenitors (Ph+ ALL) were developed. In agreement with
previous findings in solid tumors, Cre-mediated Lkb1 deletion in CML-like
cells resulted in enhanced proliferation. Unexpectedly, deletion of Lkb1
in Ph+ ALL cells led to apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Moreover,
Lkb1deletion delayed the onset of Ph+ ALL development as well as
prolonged overall survival of transplant recipient mice in vivo.
Consistent with the above observations, Arf, p53 and p27 levels were
reduced in Lkb1-deficient CML cells, while Lkb1 deletion in Ph+ ALL cells
up-regulated Arf, p53 and p27 levels. Decreases in glucose consumption
and lactate production were also observed in Lkb1-deificient Ph+ ALL
cells; however, increases in the levels of glucose consumed and lactate
produced were detected in CML cells following Lkb1 deletion.Importantly,
inhibition of AMPK using Compound C (an ATP-competitive inhibitor)
resulted in apoptosis in patient-derived Ph+ ALL cells, while Compound C
had no significant effects on the viability of a panel of lymphoma and
multiple myeloma cell lines tested. Furthermore, patient-derived Ph+ ALL
cells were resistant to treatment with various AMPK activators
(metformin, phenformin and AICAR). Finally, Compound C showed synergistic
responses in combination with Imatinib and different PI3K/AKT inhibitors
(BKM120, AZD5363 and GSK690693) in Ph+ ALL. In vivo, Compound C in
combination with BKM120, a PI3K inhibitor, exerted significantly more
potent inhibitory effect on leukemia progression than each agent alone,
prolonging the overall survival of recipient mice.Conclusions: Taken
together, our findings demonstrate that LKB1 plays divergent roles in
myeloid lineage CML and B cell lineage Ph+ ALL. While AMPK activators
were shown to be effective against CML cells in previous studies,
inhibiting the LKB1-AMPK pathway may provide a better therapeutic avenue
for treatment of Ph+ ALL.

