Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The histone demethylase KDM2A is a new promoter of tumorigenesis,
drug target and negative prognostic biomarker for non-small cell lung
cancer


The molecular etiology of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
heterogeneous and mostly dominated by alterations in kinase signaling
pathways (i.e. KRAS, EGFR, EML4-ALK, PI3K, MEK1). Epigenetic modifiers,
including histone methyltransferase and demethylases, have emerged as
important regulators of oncogenic phenotypes in a small but growing
number of tumor types, but the pathogenic role of histone methylation
modifiers in NSCLC is largely unknown. We found that the histone H3
lysine 36 (H3K36) demethylase KDM2A is a novel oncogenic promoter of
NSCLC. In our analysis KDM2A is frequently overexpressed in NSCLC cell
lines and patient samples (14% in NSCLC tumors), and high expression
levels of KDM2A correlate with poor prognosis in three independent
patient populations from the USA and Asia.KDM2A knockdown by RNAi in
KDM2A overexpressing cell lines inhibits proliferation and invasiveness
of NSCLC cells in vitro and in three mouse xenograft models
(subcutaneous, intravenous, and orthotopic models). Consistently, KDM2A
overexpression promotes these cellular characteristics in NSCLC cell
lines with low endogenous KDM2A levels. Rescue experiments using
KDM2A-depleted cells showed that ectopic expression of wild-type KDM2A,
but not its catalytic mutant mKDM2A, restored proliferation and invasion.
These results indicate that the effect of KDM2A on oncogenic phenotypes
is largely dependent on its catalytic activity and validate it as drug
target for development of small molecule inhibitors. Mechanistically, we
uncovered, that KDM2A activates the MAPK signaling pathway (ERK1/2) by
transcriptionally repressing the MAPK phosphatase DUSP3.In summary, these
novel findings indicate that KDM2A overexpression promotes NSCLC tumor
growth and invasion. Our results provide new insights into how the
dysregulation of an epigenetic enzyme can be coupled to activation of the
ERK1/2 signaling pathway to promote NSCLC tumorigenesis and suggest that
KDM2A is a promising anti-cancer therapeutic drug target for
KDM2A-overexpressing NSCLC patients.

