Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin selectively targets tumor initiating cells in erbb-2
overexpressing breast cancer models


Metformin is an oral biguanide used for type II diabetes. Epidemiologic
studies suggest a link between metformin use and reduced risk of breast
and other types of cancers. erbB-2 expressing breast cancer is a subgroup
of tumors with poor prognosis. Previous studies demonstrated that
metformin is a potent inhibitor of erbB-2 overexpressing breast cancer
cells; metformin treatment extends the life span and impedes mammary
tumor development in ErbB-2 transgenic mice in vivo. However, the
mechanisms of metformin associated anti-tumor activity, especially in
prevention models, remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the
mechanisms of metformin associated prevention/inhibition of ErbB-2
mediated breast cancer development by focusing on the potential effect of
metformin on tumor initiating cells (TICs)/cancer stem cells (CSCs) in
the MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic mouse model and its context with existing in
vitro models. We report here for the first time that systemic
administration of metformin (250 mg/kg/day, ip, between 8- and 18-week of
age) selectively inhibits CD61high/CD49fhigh subpopulation, a group of
TICs of MMTV-ErbB-2 mammary tumors, in preneoplastic mammary glands.
Metformin also inhibited CD61high/CD49fhigh subpopulation in MMTV-erbB-2
tumor-derived cells, which was correlated with their compromised tumor
initiation/development in a syngeneic tumor graft model. Molecular
analysis indicated that metformin induced downregulation of erbB-2 and
EGFR expression and inhibited the phosphorylation of erbB family members,
IGF1R, Akt, mTOR and Stat3 in vivo. In vitro data indicate that low doses
(1 mM) of metformin inhibited the self-renewal/proliferation of CSCs/TICs
in ErbB-2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. We further demonstrated
that the expression and activation of ErbB-2 were preferentially
increased in CSC/TIC-enriched tumorsphere cells, which promoted their
self-renewal/proliferation and rendered them more sensitive to metformin.
Our results, especially the in vivo data, provide fundamental support for
developing metformin-mediated preventive strategies targeting
erbB-2-associated carcinogenesis.

