Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Id4 and FKBP52 interaction regulates androgen receptor activity in
normal prostate and prostate cancer


The androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand activated transcription factor and
important member of the steroid hormone nuclear receptors. Androgen
signaling through AR plays a critical role in prostate tumorigenesis. AR
transcriptional enhancement normally requires FKBP52 mediated
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) activity as well as
HSP90-binding ability. FK506 binding protein 4 (FKBP52) is an AR folding
factor that has critically important physiological roles in male
reproductive tissues. Despite several experimental evidences, the
molecular mechanism by which FKBP52 promotes AR signaling in prostate
cancer still remains to be investigated. Our previous lab studies have
demonstrated that Id4 is regulated by androgens in normal prostate
epithelial and LNCaP cells. However, the interaction of Id4 and with the
androgen receptor pathway in regulating the development and function of
the normal prostate still remains elusive. Here we demonstrate that Id4
(inhibitor of differentiation-4) a dominant negative regulator of bHLH
transcription factors can physically interact with AR, FKBP52 and HSP90
in early stage prostate cancer LNCaP cells and thereby selectively
regulating AR transcriptional activity. Id4 is highly expressed in the
normal prostate and decreased in prostate cancer due to promoter
hypermethylation. Loss of Id4 in LNCaP cells resulted in ligand
independent AR activation characterized by increased AR nuclear
translocation and expression of PSA, FKBP51, FKBP52 and ARD1, the
transcriptional targets of AR. Differential protein expression between
LNCaP and LNCaP-Id4 demonstrated that loss of Id4 cells significantly
elevated the levels of FBKP52 and Hsp27, the two known transcriptional
regulators and nuclear transporters of AR. More importantly, LNCaP-Id4
cells were able to synthesize significantly higher levels of testosterone
as compared to the androgen-dependent LNCaP cells. In conclusion, we
demonstrate that loss of Id4 in LNCaP cells elevates FKBP52 levels,
transcriptionally potentiates AR activity which in turn then leads to
progression of androgen-independent prostate cancer. NIH grant
#R01CA128914

