Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YK-4-279 is a small molecule inhibitor of ETV1 and inhibits
metastasis in a mouse model


The erythroblastosis virus E26 transforming sequences (ETS) family of
transcription factors consists of a highly conserved group of genes that
play important roles in cellular proliferation, differentiation,
migration and invasion. Chromosomal translocations fusing ETS factors to
promoters of androgen responsive genes have been found in a majority of
prostate cancers, including the most clinically aggressive forms. ERG and
ETV1 are the most commonly translocated ETS proteins. Over-expression of
these proteins in prostate cancer cells results in a more invasive
phenotype. The high prevalence of these rearrangements, and their
biological significance represents a novel therapeutic target for the
treatment of prostate cancer.We recently demonstrated that the small
molecule YK-4-279 inhibits ERG and ETV1 biological activity in
fusion-positive prostate cancer cells leading to decreased motility and
invasion in-vitro. Here, we present our findings in an in-vivo mouse
xenograft model. SCID-beige mice were subcutaneously implanted with
fusion-positive LNCaP and fusion-negative PC-3 tumors. Animals were
treated with YK-4-279 and its effect on tumor size, lung metastasis and
survival were observed. YK-4-279 treatment resulted in decreased tumor
size in the LNCaP cohort only. A reduction in tumor metastasis to the
lungs was observed in compound treated LNCaP animals with comparable
tumor sizes. YK-4-279 also increased survival in LNCaP mice. Expression
of ETV1 target genes MMP7, FKBP10 and GLYATL2 was reduced as well. ETS
fusion-negative PC-3 xenografts were unresponsive to the compound.
YK-4-279 is a chiral molecule that exists as a racemic mixture of R and S
enantiomers. As part of this study, we also established that (S)
-YK-4-279 is the active enantiomer in prostate cancer cells. (S)
-YK-4-279 binds to ETV1 with comparable kinetics as the racemic mixture
and inhibits ETV1 activity. (R) -YK-4-279 does not demonstrate ETV1
binding or inhibition.Our results demonstrate that YK-4-279 is a potent
inhibitor of ETV1 and should be further evaluated for its clinical
applications in prostate cancer.

