Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of CDK1/2 but not CDK4/6 cooperates with tamoxifen to
induce apoptosis


As essential drivers of cell cycle progression and transcription,
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) often become dysregulated during
tumorigenesis, thus motivating extensive efforts towards development of
CDK inhibitors as a new class of promising anticancer agents with clear
CDK specificity including those targeting mainly CDK4 and CDK6 (e.g.
PD0332991, LY2835219) vs. those primarily targeting CDK1 and CDK2 (e.g.
BMS265246, Dinaciclib). Given there different cyclin dependencies and
mitotic phase mechanisms, including the relative cell cycle independence
of some CDKs, specific CDK inhibitors are expected to exhibit different
anticancer activities, side effects, and interactions with other
anticancer agents, and require different clinical biomarkers. With regard
to breast cancers in which at least 75% overexpress estrogen receptor
(ER, alpha isoform), it is particularly important to establish the type
of CDK inhibitor most effective in combination with anti-estrogenic
agents like tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors. To preclinically determine
the potential added efficacy of specific CDK inhibition in combination
with anti-estrogen therapy, the ER-positive human breast cancer cell line
MCF7 was used to compare the relative efficacy of CDK1/2 inhibition vs.
CDK4/6 inhibition in combination with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (Tam) in
promoting breast cancer cell death (apoptosis). These studies were also
designed based on our recent evidence that CDK1/2 inhibition, but not
CDK4/6 inhibition, suppressed transcriptional upregulation of ER
inducible genes by impairing ER hinge domain phosphorylation at Ser294,
suggesting that CDK1/2 inhibition would preferentially cooperate with Tam
to impair ER-positive breast cancer viability by their convergent
suppression of ligand-dependent ER transcription. We confirmed this
hypothesis by demonstrating that CDK1/2 inhibitors, but not CDK4/6
inhibitors, suppressed ligand induced ER phosphorylation at Ser294,
without altering Ser118 phosphorylation which remained constant despite
either CDK1/2 or CDK4/6 inhibition. Consistent with its ability to
suppress ER phosphorylation at Ser294, CDK1/2 inhibition, in combination
with Tam, enhanced MCF7 apoptosis, while CDK4/6 inhibition had no such
cooperative effect. These ER-positive breast cancer cell line and
molecular studies should guide further preclinical and clinical efforts
in evaluating the optimal choice of CDK inhibitor for use in combination
with endocrine agents. These findings also suggest that clinical emphasis
should be placed on the evaluation of CDK1/2 inhibitors in combination
with anti-estrogens like tamoxifen, where loss of ER phosphorylation at
Ser294 can also be used as an early biomarker of response to monitor this
therapeutic combination.

