Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COSMIC: Enhancing the world's knowledge of somatic mutations in
human cancer


COSMIC, the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk) is the world's largest and most
comprehensive online resource for exploring the impact of somatic
mutations in human cancer. Now running for over 10 years, the 67th
release (Oct 2013) describes 1592109 mutations in 947213 tumour samples
across 25606 genes. This information is curated manually from the
scientific literature, and automatically from genome resequencing
consortium data portals. Full curation of the scientific literature
provides in-depth understanding of the impact that each gene has in human
cancer, and this has been achieved for 127 point-mutated cancer genes,
and 185 fusion gene pairs. Curated genes are selected from the Cancer
Gene Census (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census), a listing of all genes
with substantial evidence implicating them in cancer promotion, currently
numbering 513 and updated frequently.The mutations discovered in the
re-sequencing of over 8000 tumour genomes are now present in COSMIC
(viewable in isolation from the genic curations,
http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/wgs). In addition, the Sanger has now fully
exome sequenced 1015 common cancer cell lines, identifying 1146874 coding
mutations annotated for functional significance, and this is available
exclusively in COSMIC at (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cell_lines). While
COSMIC has focused on point mutations and gene fusions, many other
mutation mechanisms cause oncogenesis and these are now being integrated.
The 67th COSMIC release includes copy number mutations integrated into
the database and major web page views. To allow easy graphical
examination of this data, copy number information was reduced to gain and
loss annotations for inclusion in histograms and tables, with much more
precise detail available with a further click. Copy number data is
available in detail for every gene in COSMIC, and also for every tissue.
Exploring cancer via COSMICs Cancer Browser
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/browse/tissue), results not just in a
plot of the most mutated genes, but now also a circular genome plot
summarizing the copy number gains and losses across all the samples from
that tumour type, all explorable in more detail via clicks on the
pictures.As the genomic data increases in COSMIC, it is becoming more
important to qualitatively annotate the information, indicating which is
more important or significant to oncogenesis. We are now building systems
to better highlight known or putative functional mutations, improving the
signal-to-noise ratio of cancer genome resequencing.

