Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel approaches for dynamic tumor microenvironment imaging by
Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT)


In designing new biomarker imaging approaches for cancer research, the
heterogeneity and dynamics of the tumor microenvironment cannot be
disregarded. The interplay between the different components of the tumor
stroma and parenchyma play a significant role in tumor progression,
invasion and treatment response. In order to study such dynamic processes
by (molecular) imaging, volumetric imaging modalities with a high
temporal and spatial resolution need to be combined with contrast agents
that possess appropriate pharmacokinetic parameters.In this work, we
assessed tumor heterogeneity and specific cell-populations within the
tumor microenvironment by combining Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography
(MSOT) with three different fast-clearing contrast agents. MSOT is a
biomedical imaging modality based on the photoacoustic effect. In the
used setup, mice are illuminated at multiple wavelengths in the NIR range
(680 - 980nm) and by detecting the acoustic waves with a 5MHz tomographic
ultrasound array, cross-sectional images can be obtained at a resolution
of 150m in less than a second. Imaging multiple cross-sections allows for
volumetric reconstruction of the data and multispectral data analysis
enables the specific identification of endogenous absorbers (hemoglobin
and melanin) and/or multiple injected contrast agents. The
pharmacokinetic parameters of the imaging agents were optimized to allow
for relatively fast imaging regimens (In designing new biomarker imaging
approaches for cancer research, the heterogeneity and dynamics of the
tumor microenvironment cannot be disregarded. The interplay between the
different components of the tumor stroma and parenchyma play a
significant role in tumor progression, invasion and treatment response.
In order to study such dynamic processes by (molecular) imaging,
volumetric imaging modalities with a high temporal and spatial resolution
need to be combined with contrast agents that possess appropriate
pharmacokinetic parameters.In this work, we assessed tumor heterogeneity
and specific cell-populations within the tumor microenvironment by
combining Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT) with three
different fast-clearing contrast agents. MSOT is a biomedical imaging
modality based on the photoacoustic effect. In the used setup, mice are
illuminated at multiple wavelengths in the NIR range (680 - 980nm) and by
detecting the acoustic waves with a 5MHz tomographic ultrasound array,
cross-sectional images can be obtained at a resolution of 150m in less
than a second. Imaging multiple cross-sections allows for volumetric
reconstruction of the data and multispectral data analysis enables the
specific identification of endogenous absorbers (hemoglobin and melanin)
and/or multiple injected contrast agents. The pharmacokinetic parameters
of the imaging agents were optimized to allow for relatively fast imaging
regimens (<1 hour) that can be employed daily.Firstly, we assessed inter-
and intra-tumoral heterogeneity in tumor perfusion and vascular
permeability by systemically administering novel formulations of
Indocyanine Green (ICG). Pixel-by-pixel analysis was then performed to
create parametric maps, thereby revealing a high degree of heterogeneity
in dynamic contrast enhancement between and within tumors. Secondly,
apoptotic regions within orthotopic tumors were visualized using a
caspase-targeted probe and compared to the hypoxia status of each tumor
region, before and after treatment. Before treatment, maximal
apoptosis-signal was co-localized with more hypoxic regions in the tumor.
However, overall signal intensity was significantly increased after
systemic treatment with doxorubicin. Lastly, the tumor associated
macrophage (TAM) cell population within the tumor stroma was visualized
by a novel NIR marker specific for macrophage. Again, intra-tumoral
distribution of TAM-specific signal was compared to images of Hb and
HbO2, revealing higher TAM densities in areas of relative hypoxia.In
summary, MSOT offers an imaging modality that can provide anatomical,
functional, molecular and kinetic information at high temporal and
spatial resolution. When combined with (molecular) imaging agents that
possess appropriate pharmacokinetic properties, this modality can be
leveraged for new biomarker imaging approaches in cancer research.

