Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping peptides critical for association of the androgen receptor
with Elk1


Both early stage and advanced prostate tumors are generally dependent on
the androgen receptor (AR) for growth. Indeed a major clinical approach
in management of the disease is to disrupt the AR signaling in the tumors
by androgen ablation and the use of anti-androgen drugs. However, these
options present major drawbacks including limited efficacy in advanced
disease and many undesirable side effects on non-target tissues.
Therefore a more tactical therapy approach would be one that could
disrupt a functional arm of AR signaling that is critical for prostate
tumor growth but not for the essential physiological roles of AR in
normal adult tissues.A considerable amount of evidence suggests that in
prostate cancer, androgen/AR signaling is redirected to support tumor
growth through the association of AR with critical growth promoting genes
via tethering proteins. Our previous studies have identified Elk1, a
genetically redundant DNA binding transcription factor, as an AR
tethering protein essential for AR-dependent growth in established models
of both hormone-dependent prostate cancer and castration recurrent
prostate cancer. Elk1 recruits AR to chromatin sites to upregulate a
major subset of genes that is strongly and primarily enriched for cell
growth functions. Further studies in the lab demonstrate that the A/B
domain of the AR alone is capable of co-activation of Elk1, suggesting
that Elk1 may also mediate the hormone-independent growth supporting
function of AR splice variants. Peptide or small molecule inhibitors of
the Elk1-AR interaction may therefore selectively target the growth
supporting function of AR in the spectrum of prostate tumors, obviating
the need for androgen ablation. Toward this end we undertook to map
peptide segment(s) of Elk1and AR that are essential for the Elk1-AR
synergy.In this study we used deletional and mutational analysis together
with a promotor-reporter assay and a mammalian two-hybrid assay. The
results demonstrate that the ability to recruit AR resides largely in the
C-terminal activation domain of Elk1 (amino acids 307-428) and that
residues within segments 367-428 and 307-337 are essential for this
interaction. They also demonstrate that the recruitment of AR by Elk1
does not require Elk1 phosphorylation. Critical sites within the AR-A/B
domain required for its association with Elk1 reside in the N-terminal
region that is distal to known sites of co-regulator binding. This
information will guide the development of peptide inhibitors of
Elk1-dependent growth induction by androgen/AR and set the stage for
future development of small molecule inhibitors.

