Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagic regulation of the Met receptor tyrosine kinase in
breast cancer


The Met receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and its ligand, hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF), are potent mediators of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and an invasive growth program. The HGF-Met signaling axis plays a
significant role in the development or progression of many human cancers,
and elevated Met expression is associated with poor prognosis and the
basal subtype in breast cancer. Met signaling is regulated temporally and
spatially through endocytic trafficking to degradative or recycling
compartments, and delayed Met trafficking to the degradative pathway
promotes enhanced cell migration, adhesion-independent growth and
tumorigenesis. It is now recognized that autophagy, an intracellular
degradative process, utilizes the endocytic system in both formation and
maturation of double-membraned autophagosomes. Autophagy can have both
tumor promoting and tumor suppressor roles in different contexts or
stages of disease. We hypothesized that reprogramming of endocytic
membrane system to support an autophagic starvation response may alter
Met RTK trafficking, and therefore modulate tumorigenic signaling. To
test this, we utilized MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 triple-negative breast
cancer cell lines, as well as Hela cells, as models to study the
trafficking and signaling of the Met RTK under conditions of autophagic
stimulation or inhibition. Following HGF stimulation and receptor
internalization, Met engages with core autophagic machinery in a
starvation-dependent manner. Increased autophagosome formation decreases
Met recycling to the plasma membrane, which can be rescued by
shRNA-mediated knockdown of genes required for autophagy initiation. We
demonstrate that the autophagic process negatively regulates signaling of
Met through the PI3K/Akt and MAPK pathways and decreases Met-dependent
cellular responses. These findings identify Met RTK regulation as a
potential tumor-suppressive function of autophagy.

