Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer therapy by resuscitating Notch immune surveillance


The immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment perturbs numerous immune
regulatory networks and usurps host anti-tumor immunity. We discovered
that tumor interferes with host hematopoietic Notch system in lung cancer
patients. The resultant decrease in immune Notch signaling could be a
major causative link in the inadequate induction of anti-tumor immunity.
Interestingly, we found that tumor-induced decrease in immune Notch in
various mouse solid tumor models could be restored therapeutically by the
following two agents. Administration of a novel Delta-like ligand 1
(DLL1) multivalent cluster and the FDA-approved proteasome inhibitor drug
bortezomib - which also sensitizes tumors to death signals - could
activate Notch 1 signaling in lymphoid cells of tumor-bearing mice
without increasing tumor cell proliferation or clonogenicity. Systemic
activation of DLL1-Notch signaling could attenuate tumor vascularization
as well as increase T cell infiltration in tumor, decrease proportion of
regulatory T cells and enhance antitumor T cell function and memory in
multiple mouse tumor models. New data also show that bortezomib affects
the expression of notch receptors and ligands differentially in
lymphocytes and in a wide range of solid tumor cells. Moreover,
bortezomib administration increased the expression of Notch target genes
Hes 1 and Hey 1 in thymus, lymph node, and spleen, as well as decreased
the proportion of regulatory T cells and enhanced T cell production of
IFN- in tumor-bearing mice. Results indicate that bortezomib-induced
activation of Notch target genes Hes 1 and Hey 1 is through its
inhibition of NFkB while its activation of another Notch target gene
Deltex 1 is mediated via PI3K. The findings suggest a potential
synergistic action of bortezomib and DLL1 activation of Notch signaling.
The potential of modulating anti-tumor Notch signaling by the prototypic
DLL1 cluster in combination with bortezomib presents exciting
opportunities to uncover multi-pronged immune stimulatory regimens.
Therapeutic restoration of immune Notch signaling could provide effective
treatment and recurrence-free survival in cancer patients by breaking
tumor resistance, enhancing immune surveillance, and sustaining robust
anti-tumor immunity.

