Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) growth is mediated
through gamma-aminobutyric acid a receptor (GABAAR)


The GABAergic signaling and growth factor pathways have been implicated
in neuroendocrine differentiation and CRPC progression. We hypothesized
that the GABAergic signaling and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
pathway worked together to promote prostate cancer (PCa) progression.
Using androgen receptor (AR)-negative PC-3 cells and AR-positive LNCaP
cells derived from human PCa patients, we demonstrated that both cell
lines responded to GABA(10-7M - 10-14M) and isoguvacine [a GABAAR
antagonist] (10-7M - 10-11M) treatments over two days with elevated
growth in a concentration-dependent manner (n=3 for each). Both GABA and
isoguvacine also significantly (pThe GABAergic signaling and growth
factor pathways have been implicated in neuroendocrine differentiation
and CRPC progression. We hypothesized that the GABAergic signaling and
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway worked together to
promote prostate cancer (PCa) progression. Using androgen receptor
(AR)-negative PC-3 cells and AR-positive LNCaP cells derived from human
PCa patients, we demonstrated that both cell lines responded to
GABA(10-7M - 10-14M) and isoguvacine [a GABAAR antagonist] (10-7M -
10-11M) treatments over two days with elevated growth in a
concentration-dependent manner (n=3 for each). Both GABA and isoguvacine
also significantly (p<0.05) stimulated expressions of EGFR ligands (EGF,
HB-EGF, and TGF-) (n=3 for each) in both PCa cell lines as determined by
real-time quantitative PCR. Immunoblot analyses indicated significant
(pThe GABAergic signaling and growth factor pathways have been implicated
in neuroendocrine differentiation and CRPC progression. We hypothesized
that the GABAergic signaling and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
pathway worked together to promote prostate cancer (PCa) progression.
Using androgen receptor (AR)-negative PC-3 cells and AR-positive LNCaP
cells derived from human PCa patients, we demonstrated that both cell
lines responded to GABA(10-7M - 10-14M) and isoguvacine [a GABAAR
antagonist] (10-7M - 10-11M) treatments over two days with elevated
growth in a concentration-dependent manner (n=3 for each). Both GABA and
isoguvacine also significantly (p<0.05) stimulated expressions of EGFR
ligands (EGF, HB-EGF, and TGF-) (n=3 for each) in both PCa cell lines as
determined by real-time quantitative PCR. Immunoblot analyses indicated
significant (p<0.05, n=3) elevation of phosphorylation levels of EGFR
(Tyr1068) and downstream signal component Src (Tyr416) after GABA and
isoguvacine treatments in both cell types with the same temporal changes
as those observed with EGFR ligand expressions. Further involvement of
GABAAR and EGFR signaling pathway in GABA and isoguvacine-stimulated PCa
cell growth and signal transduction was studied using picrotoxin (a
GABAAR antagonist) (10-6M ) and gefitinib (an EGFR inhibitor)( 10-6M).
Both picrotoxin and gefitinib significantly (pThe GABAergic signaling and
growth factor pathways have been implicated in neuroendocrine
differentiation and CRPC progression. We hypothesized that the GABAergic
signaling and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway worked
together to promote prostate cancer (PCa) progression. Using androgen
receptor (AR)-negative PC-3 cells and AR-positive LNCaP cells derived
from human PCa patients, we demonstrated that both cell lines responded
to GABA(10-7M - 10-14M) and isoguvacine [a GABAAR antagonist] (10-7M -
10-11M) treatments over two days with elevated growth in a
concentration-dependent manner (n=3 for each). Both GABA and isoguvacine
also significantly (p<0.05) stimulated expressions of EGFR ligands (EGF,
HB-EGF, and TGF-) (n=3 for each) in both PCa cell lines as determined by
real-time quantitative PCR. Immunoblot analyses indicated significant
(p<0.05, n=3) elevation of phosphorylation levels of EGFR (Tyr1068) and
downstream signal component Src (Tyr416) after GABA and isoguvacine
treatments in both cell types with the same temporal changes as those
observed with EGFR ligand expressions. Further involvement of GABAAR and
EGFR signaling pathway in GABA and isoguvacine-stimulated PCa cell growth
and signal transduction was studied using picrotoxin (a GABAAR
antagonist) (10-6M ) and gefitinib (an EGFR inhibitor)( 10-6M). Both
picrotoxin and gefitinib significantly (p<0.05, n=3) suppressed the GABA
and isoguvacine-stimulated cell growth, as well as EGFR (Tyr1068) and Src
(Tyr416) phosphorylation. Immunohistochemical studies of GABAAR 1 and
phospho-Src (Tyr416) demonstrated that the presence of these molecules
was largely limited to prostate carcinomatous glands, but the levels were
extremely low or absent in the normal prostate. In addition, GABAAR 1 and
phosphor-Src (Tyr416) were co-localized within the cancerous prostate.
Our results demonstrate for the first time, that the GABAergic signaling
in CRPC cells is mediated through the EGFR pathway, suggesting that GABA
may work as autocrine or paracine to promote PCa progression. The
clinical implications of this pathway in CRPC may be of significance by
therapeutically targeting the GABAAR pathway.

