Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD8+ natural regulatory T cells as antitumor immune effectors in
carcinomas of breast and lung


CD8+ T cells are cytolytic effectors of adaptive immunity against
invading pathogens, and under various pathological conditions including
cancer. In syngeneic, immunocompetent murine models of epithelial
cancers, including breast and lung cancer, we observed up-regulation in
frequencies of a unique CD8+ T cell population, characterized as
CD8+CD25-Foxp3+, referred here as CD8+ natural regulatory T cells. This
regulatory cell population was present in very high numbers during
initial stages of tumor growth. However, a drastic reduction in CD8+
natural regulatory T cells was observed as tumor burden increased, and
also with the onset of metastasis to distant sites, including bone in the
case of breast cancer. Upon further investigation of these cells, we
observed that they are highly cytotoxic towards the cancer cells.
Adoptive transfer of these CD8+ natural regulatory cells obtained from
mice with minimal tumor burden resulted in significantly reduced tumor
growth in the tumor-bearing recipients.There was also an inverse
relationship between CD8+ natural regulatory T cells and plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDC) as tumor burden increased. Additionally, depletion
of pDC, either using depletion antibody or by using a transgenic mouse
model lacking pDC, showed increased numbers of CD8+ natural regulatory T
cells that resulted in decreased tumor burden. Analysis of a possible
molecular mechanism on the role of CD8+ natural regulatory T cells as
anti-tumor effectors demonstrated that these cells express PD-1.
Furthermore, PD-L1, a ligand for PD-1, is expressed by both pDC and
cancer cells in vivo. Ongoing experiments are focused on deciphering a
possible role of PD-1 and PD-L1 interaction in determining the fate of
CD8+ natural regulatory T cells in the presence of pDC and cancer cells
through in vitro assays and using transgenic murine models and depletion
antibodies for both PD-1 and PD-L1. Collectively, these data suggest a
novel anti-tumor immune population that has a potential to be used as
immunotherapy for cancer in conjunction with conventional treatments.

