Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and vivo activity against multiple myeloma cells of a
novel locked nucleic acid (LNA)-miR-221 inhibitor


Upregulation of miR-221/222 has been found in several solid and
hematologic malignancies, including multiple myeloma (MM), and is thought
to have oncogenic potential and promote cell proliferation via
down-regulation of p27 and/or p57, negative regulators of cell cycle
progression. We previously demonstrated that upregulation of both miRNAs
occurs in malignant plasma cells (PCs) from multiple myeloma (MM)
patients belonging to TC2 and TC4 (traslocation/Cyclin) groups. A rising
body of evidence suggests that silencing miRNAs with oncogenic potential
could represent a novel approach for human cancer therapy. We previously
demonstrated that silencing miR-221/222 exerts significant anti-MM
activity and triggers canonical targets in vitro and in vivo (Di Martino
et al. Oncotarget, 2013). In the aim to progress to clinical translation
of our proof-of-principle findings, we here investigated the anti-tumor
activity and the appropriateness for systemic delivery of 10 different,
originally designed, miR-221/222 inhibitors which took advantage from
locked nucleic acid (LNA) technology and phosphorothioate backbone for
increasing the seed sequence binding stability and nuclease resistance.
We found that electroporation of t(4;14) MM cells with a novel 13-mer
miR-221 inhibitor, named LNA-i-miR-221, significantly inhibited growth
and survival of MM cells in vitro. In treated cells, we detected knocking
down of miR-221 together with increased levels of p27 mRNA and protein.
Specific activity of this LNA-i-miR-221 against mature miR-221 was
confirmed by the use of two 3UTR reporter (luciferase renilla/firefly)
constructs containing miR-221 target sites. These constructs were
separately co-transfected either with miR-221/222 mimics or LNA-i-miR-221
into MM cells. As predicted, a reduced luciferase activity was detected
in miR-221/222 mimics co-trasfected cells, while increase luciferase
activity was measured in LNA-i-miR-221 co-transfected MM cells indicating
an efficient and stable binding to the miRNA target sequence.
Importantly, we evaluated the systemic delivery of the naked LNA-miR-221
inhibitor alone by intraperitoneal or intravenous injection route against
MM xenografts in NOD.SCID mice. Significant anti-tumor activity was
achieved after 2 weeks of treatment at similar extent by both injection
routes. Retrieved tumors from treated animals showed efficient inhibition
of miR-221 and increased levels of p27Kip1 in vivo. H&E staining and
immunohystochemical analysis showed wide necrosis areas, reduced Ki67 and
a significant increase of p27 cytoplasmic expression in retrieved tumors
from LNA-i-miR-221-treated mice. No changes in mice behavior or organ
toxicity were observed in treated mice. Taken together these findings
support the rationale for development of this novel and highly efficient
LNA-miR-221 inhibitor as a promising anti-MM drug in subsequent primate
toxicology studies.

