Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced antitumor effect of anti tissue factor (TF)
antibody-conjugated epirubicin-incorporating polymeric micelles in human
cancer xenografts with high TF expression


Background:Anticancer agent-incorporating polymeric micelles, categorized
as passive targeting agents, are expected to accumulate in tumors based
on the enhanced permeability and retention effect. Recently, we made
epirubicin-incorporating micelles containing acid-sensitive bonds
(NC-6300), and reported the enhanced antitumor activity and reduced
cardiotoxicity in preclinical studies; a Phase I study of NC-6300 is also
under way in Japan. In order to further enhance the accumulation of
NC-6300 in tumors using the active targeting strategy, we tried to attach
a tumor-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) to the terminal of
polyethylene glycol comprising NC-6300. As the targeting molecule, we
selected transmembrane receptor tissue factor (TF), namely, the primary
initiator of coagulation. TF, which is known to play an important role in
not only blood coagulation, but also in tumor growth and metastasis, is
frequently overexpressed in various types of tumor. We have established a
mAb against human TF, and succeeded in developing anti TF mAb-conjugated
NC-6300 (anti TF-NC-6300). Here, we report the results of in vitro and in
vivo studies of this immunoconjugate.Methods:Anti TF-NC-6300 was prepared
based on our Antibody/Drug-Conjugated Micelle (ADCM) technology (Japan
Patent No.4538666) with slight modification. In the in vitro assay,
real-time cell analysis was performed using the xCELLigence system to
determine the effects of anti TF-NC-6300 and NC-6300 on pancreatic tumor
cell proliferation. Next, image analysis and quantification of the
intracellular epirubicin concentration were performed using Array Scan
VTI. For evaluating the in vivo antitumor effects, anti TF-NC-6300 (10
mg/kg), NC-6300 (10 mg/kg) and epirubicin (10 mg/kg) were administered
intravenously once a week for 3 weeks to mice bearing human pancreatic
cancer xenografts or human gastric cancer xenografts with high TF
expression (BxPC3 or 44As3).Results:In the real-time cell proliferation
assay, anti TF-NC-6300 exerted a greater degree of inhibition of cell
growth than NC-6300 in BxPC3. On the other hand, there was no difference
in effect between these two drugs in SUIT2, a human pancreatic cancer
with low TF expression. In the imaging cytometric analysis, anti
TF-NC-6300 was internalized sooner than NC-6300, resulting in higher
accumulation of epirubicin in the cytoplasm and nuclei of the BxPC3
cells. On the other hand, no such difference was observed in the case of
SUIT2. In the in vivo antitumor assay, as compared to both epirubicin and
NC-6300, anti TF-NC-6300 showed significant antitumor activity in
xenograft models of BxPC3 and 44As3.Conclusion:These data warrant a
clinical evaluation of anti TF mAb-conjugated epirubicin-incorporating
polymeric micelles in patients with TF-positive cancer subtypes.

