Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail- and ERK2-dependent signaling enhances breast cancer cell
resistance to hydroxytamoxifen


Snail transcription factor and MAPK/ERK signaling regulate EMT and
chemotherapy resistance in various tumor models by binding to target
promoters (i.e., E-cadherin, maspin, ER-). ERK1 is expressed during
embryogenesis and in non-metastatic cells; ERK2 is implicated during
vasculogenesis and promotes stem cell phenotype in triple negative breast
cancer. Nuclear-localized ERK is associated with more active and
potentially metastatic breast and ovarian carcinoma cells;
cytoplasmic-localized ERK is a good prognostic factor. The role that
Snail plays during the transition from cytoplasmic ERK1 to nuclear ERK2
has not been investigated. We hypothesized that both nuclear Snail and
ERK2 are required for breast cancer cells to become resistant to
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT). We utilized MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma
cells, MCF-7 transfected stably with empty Neo vector control (MCF-7 Neo)
or constitutively active Snail cDNA (MCF-7 Snail). MCF-7 Neo and MCF-7
Snail have previously represented a breast cancer EMT model; we used this
model to analyze ERK signaling and therapy response. Preliminary data
suggest that MCF-7 Neo express higher levels of p-ERK, ER-, and
E-cadherin and no Snail. MCF-7 Snail expressed higher levels of Snail and
vimentin, low levels of p-ERK, and low ER- and no E-cadherin. MCF-7 Neo
expressed higher ERK1 and MCF-7 Snail expressed higher ERK2.
Immunocytochemistry indicated that p-ERK was nuclear and cytoplasmic in
MCF-7 Neo, but mostly nuclear in MCF-7 Snail. We treated MCF-7 Neo and
MCF-7 Snail with control siRNA, ERK1 siRNA, or ERK2 siRNA, then
determined the expression of Snail, p-ERK1/2, ERK1/2, E-cadherin, and
ER-. We found that ERK1 siRNA decreased E-cadherin, while ERK2 siRNA
increased E-cadherin in MCF-7 Neo. ERK2 siRNA decreased Snail, but ERK1
siRNA had no effect on Snail. ERK1 siRNA increased active ERK2 and ERK2
siRNA increased ERK1 in MCF-7 Neo and MCF-7 Snail. To determine the role
that Snail plays in resistance, we treated MCF-7 Neo and MCF-7 Snail with
4-OHT and/or UO126 then mitochondrial permeability and caspase-3/7
activity assays. MCF-7 Neo had higher mitochondrial permeability than
MCF-7 Snail, indicative of the dimmer staining using TMRM stain, and
MCF-7 Neo had higher caspase-3/7 activity after treatments. Overall, cell
death in MCF-7 Snail was caspase-independent. These data imply that Snail
and ERK2 collaborate through an unknown mechanism to promote EMT and
therapy resistance in breast cancer cells. Targeting Snail and/or ERK2 in
advanced breast cancer may be a potential therapeutic or preventive
strategy.

