Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative NF-B signaling promotes inflammatory cell recruitment
and lung tumor formation


Nuclear factor-B (NF-B) is a transcription factor that can be activated
through either the classical or alternative signaling pathways. In lung
tumors, high levels of classical and alternative pathway components have
been observed. While many studies have demonstrated that classical NF-B
signaling is a central pathway regulating inflammation and tumorigenesis,
the role of alternative NF-B signaling remains undefined. We hypothesize
that alternative NF-B signaling in the lung epithelium plays a key role
in inflammation and lung tumor formation through paracrine signaling to
the inflammatory microenvironment. To investigate alternative NF-B
signaling in the lung epithelium, we generated a transgenic mouse model
with doxycycline (dox)-inducible expression of the alternative pathway
component p52 in airway epithelial cells (designated ALTA for alternative
pathway trans-activated). When placed on dox, nuclear p52 is increased in
the lungs of ALTA mice with no effect on activation of other NF-B
components. Surprisingly, alternative pathway activation alone did not
cause a significant increase in inflammatory cell recruitment. However,
in conjunction with the inflammatory stimulus lipopolysaccharide (LPS),
alternative pathway activation caused increased mortality, which was
associated with a significant increase in inflammation and increased lung
permeability. To determine the effect of alternative pathway activation
on lung tumor formation, mice were injected with the lung carcinogen
urethane. Six weeks after urethane administration, ALTA mice demonstrated
an increased number of bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophils, and by 6
months post-urethane, ALTA mice had an increased number of tumors,
increased tumor size, and more advanced lesions. Together, these data
suggest that alternative NF-B signaling plays an important role in
stimulus-induced inflammatory cell recruitment and that alternative
pathway activation can promote lung tumor formation and progression. By
defining the role of alternative NF-B signaling in tumor formation, we
hope to gain insight into the role of inflammation in lung carcinogenesis
and to identify novel pathways and signaling targets that could
potentially serve as therapeutic targets.

