Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B mediated CD47 upregulation promotes sorafenib resistance and
its blockade synergizes the effect of sorafenib in hepatocellular
carcinoma


Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, is currently used as the normative
treatment for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It can prolong
survival for a few months however sorafenib insensitivity and resistance
often develops in tumors hence a better understanding of resistance
mechanisms is urgently needed. Tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs) have
recently been implicated in the cause of treatment resistance. Recently,
our group found that CD47 is preferentially expressed in liver T-ICs,
which suggests a possibility of targeting CD47 in order to evade
sorafenib resistance via elimination of liver T-ICs. To test this
hypothesis, we have successfully developed sorafenib-resistant clones in
HCC cell lines (BEL7402 and Huh-7 cells) and in vivo using
patient-derived xenograft (PDTX #1) by continuous exposure to sorafenib.
We found that sorafenib-resistant clones showed enhanced T-IC properties
such as self-renewal, tumorigenicity and invasiveness, which is also
accompanied by an increase in CD47 expression. We found increased NF-B
activation in sorafenib resistant clones indicated by upregulated levels
of phosphorylated p65 and IkB which is consistent to the bioinformatics
analysis showing two putative NF-B binding sites on the CD47 promoter. In
addition, CD47 expression was found to be decreased upon treatment of
NF-B inhibitor IMD-0354 and increased upon treatment of TNF-. These
results suggested that NF-B mediated CD47 upregulation promotes sorafenib
resistance in HCC. To further confirm the role of CD47 in sorafenib
resistance, we knocked down CD47 expression in CD47-high expressing HCC
cells. Through annexin V staining, we found that knockdown of CD47
sensitized Huh-7 and MHCC-97L to sorafenib treatment at 10M and 20M
respectively. Using patient derived xenograft model (PDTX #8) to
investigate the effect of different treatment regimens, we found that
mice treated with daily administration of sorafenib (100mg/Kg) showed
tumor volume reduction by 3-fold upon 30 days of treatment and a similar
effect was found in mice treated daily with and anti-CD47 antibody
(500mg/Kg). Interestingly, sorafenib combined with anti-CD47 antibody
exhibited maximal effect on tumor suppression. All in all, regulation of
CD47 by NF-B may enable the promotion of sorafenib resistance and
anti-CD47 antibody in co-treatment with sorafenib may serve as a novel
therapeutic regimen for the treatment of advanced stage HCC.

