Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch-1 regulation of the PTEN - mTOR axis in prostate


Prostate cancer affects one in three men over the age of 60. Loss of
expression or function of PTEN is the most commonly observed molecular
defect in human prostate cancer. Thirty to 70% of clinical cases exhibit
loss of this critical tumor suppressor. PTEN is an essential negative
regulator of PI3K/Akt signaling. Together with the mTOR pathway, the
PTEN/PI3K/Akt cascade forms a network for cellular responses to growth
factors and nutrients. Studies in mice have demonstrated that small
changes in PTEN dose can influence cancer development. Thus,
understanding the regulation of PTEN expression and function is key to
understanding tumor progression. We have previously reported that
signaling through the Notch-1 receptor pathway results in increased
transcriptional expression of the tumor suppressor PTEN. We further
reported that Notch-1 signaling was lost in the tumor foci of clinical
prostate cancer cases as compared to the surrounding benign tissue.
Herein, we report that Notch-1 signaling alters the pool of active,
unphosphorylated PTEN in the human metastatic prostate tumor cell line
DU145. Retroviral transduction was used to generate DU145 cells that
express constitutively active Notch-1 (DU/ICN1). In cells with
constitutively active Notch-1 (DU/ICN1), the pool of unphosphorylated
PTEN was increased roughly 2.5 fold compared to the vector only control.
Constitutive Notch-1 signaling also resulted in decreased mTOR signaling
as determined by a decrease in phosphorlyated 4E-BP1 and phosphorylated
S6 ribosomal protein. Decreased expression of Raptor and Rictor and
decreased phosphorylation of mTOR were also observed in the presence of
constitutively active Notch-1. To test if Notch-1 signaling influences
tumor engraftment and growth in a syngeneic model, the tumorigenic C2
cell line, derived from TRAMP mice, was transduced with constitutively
active Notch-1. C2/ICN1 and parental C2 cells were engrafted into C57/BL6
mice. All recipients of the parental C2 cell line developed tumors within
46 days, whereas none that received cells expressing constitutively
active Notch-1 (C2/ICN1) had developed tumors. Only after 61 days did one
of the four mice that received C2/ICN1 cells develop tumors. We next
tested if loss of Notch-1 expression promotes characteristics associated
with tumorigenicity by using lentiviral transduction to knock down
endogenous Notch-1 expression in DU145 cells (DU/shN1). DU145 cells with
loss of Notch-1 (DU/shN1) exhibited decreased expression of PTEN protein
and a decreased ability to migrate in transwell experiments as compared
with control cells expressing endogenous Notch-1. Collectively, these
data indicate a role for Notch-1 receptor signaling in modulating the
activity of PI3K/Akt and mTOR axis through regulation of the PTEN tumor
suppressor, and suggest a mechanistic basis for Notch-1 tumor suppressive
activity in prostate cells.

