Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA opilymerase participates in the repair of DNA damage from
topoisomerase II


DNA topoisomerase II (Top2) is the target of several important
anti-cancer agents, including doxorubicin and etoposide. Clinically
active Top2 agents, termed Top2 poisons, act by blocking the enzyme
reaction at a step where the protein is covalently bound to DNA. This
leads to the accumulation of Top2/DNA complexes that act as DNA damaging
agents that interfere with DNA metabolism and trigger cell death. The
mechanisms leading to tumor specific killing by Top2 poisons remain
poorly understood, and have been hypothesized to result in part from DNA
repair defects that arise during tumorigenesis. If this hypothesis is
correct, then targeting repair pathways important for topoisomerase
mediated cell killing could be used to enhance the activity of Top2
poisons. Similar reasoning has led to extensive trials of agents such as
PARP inhibitors, and other DNA repair inhibitors. The DNA repair pathways
that have been examined for sensitization to Top2 poisons include
homologous recombination, non-homologous end-joining, proteasome mediated
degradation, and nucleolytic activities that may participate in the
removal of protein/DNA adducts (such as Tdp1 and Tdp2). We have been
studying the repair of damage from Top2 poisons, and have optimized a
quantitative assay for Top2/DNA covalent complexes in cultured mammalian
cells. This assay, termed the ICE assay, detects Top2 covalent complexes
by DNA purification followed by antibody detection of protein adducts.
Using this assay, we have demonstrated a role of the MRN complex in
processing Top2/DNA adducts, using both MRN knockdowns and small molecule
inhibitors of the Mre11 nuclease activities. We also confirmed the
importance of proteolytic pathways in repairing Top2 damage. A surprising
candidate protein for participation in repair of damage from Top2 poisons
is DNA polymerase (pol ), an X family polymerase critical for base
excision repair. Recent results have implicated pol in processing of
protein/DNA adducts (1). We found that the pol inhibitor pamoic acid
(4-[(3-Carboxy-2-hydroxynaphthalen-1-yl)methyl]-3-hydroxynaphthalene-2-carb
oxylic acid) and etoposide led to a large increase in Top2/DNA covalent
complexes compared to etoposide alone. We are currently validating these
results using other pol inhibitors and gene knockdown approaches. We
speculate that the dRP lyase activity may play a role in processing DNA
damage arising from Top2 poisons.Literature cited:1. Lawson, M.H., et al.
(2011) Two Novel Determinants of Etoposide Resistance in Small Cell Lung
Cancer. Cancer Res, 71, 4877-4887.

