Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin-induced CD24 upregulation in CD44+ stem-like head and
neck squamous carcinoma cells: a potential marker for unfavorable
cisplatin response


Introduction: Head and neck cancers are usually detected in its later
stages of progression, resulting in a 5-year survival rate of only
30-50%. Chemotherapy is the treatment of choice for locally advanced head
and neck squamous cellular carcinoma (HNSCC), and unfortunately, only a
subset of HNSCC responds favorably to cisplatin treatment. Currently,
there are no predictive markers of a tumor's response to cisplatin
therapy. Therefore, to investigate the extremely low rates of cisplatin
response in HNSCC, we employed a method of screening membrane bound
surface stem cell markers as a means to possibly identify a group of
cells that are inherently resistant to high doses of cisplatin
treatment.Methodology: Expression of membrane bound CD24 was measured by
flow cytometry. Tumor cell viability in response to cisplatin was
measured by MTT assay. QPCR was performed using a standard thermocycler
program and data was normalized to -Actin. CD24 RNA interference was done
through lentiviral transduction with Puromycin and GFP based selection.
Standard Western blot procedures were used to check STAT3 and p-STAT3
expression. Ororsphere formation assay was performed in low attachment
dishes with stem cell specific mediaResults: Four UM-SCC cell lines were
taken that had variable degrees of sensitivity to cisplatin, but all the
lines formed a pronounced cisplatin resistant tail in a dose response
curve. In an effort to screen for the fraction of cells that formed the
cisplatin resistant tail, we observed that these four UM-SCC lines that
expressed similar amounts of membrane bound CD44 had variable levels of
membrane bound CD24. Levels of CD24 peaked at super high doses of
cisplatin that had resulted in a cisplatin resistant tail. To further our
study, UM-SCC-10B and UM-SCC-10B/pt15s, a cisplatin sensitive-resistant
pair from the larynx that express high amounts of CD24 in normal
conditions, were selected. Upon confirmation of CD24 up-regulation at a
clinically relevant dose of cisplatin [10uM], a lentiviral vector
construct containing a CD24 siRNA was introduced into the model pair. The
knockdown of CD24 resulted in increased sensitivity to cisplatin, and it
eliminated the cisplatin resistant tail in a dose response curve. It also
showed reduced phosphorylation levels of STAT3. Interestingly, the lone
CSC marker in HNSCC, CD44, by itself did not select for a cisplatin
resistant population.Conclusion: Our work thus far, indicates that
up-regulation of CD24 and the resulting phosphorylation of STAT3 upon
cisplatin exposure is a phenomenon that leads to cisplatin resistance,
and it could be a crucial EGFR independent STAT3 activating mechanism
that needs to be explored further. In case a similar relationship in
clinical specimens corroborates these in vitro findings, CD24 has the
potential to be a valuable predictor of response to cisplatin in HNSCC
patients as well as a therapeutic target.

