Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large oncosomes are internalized and functionally modulate
transcription factors in recipient cells


Background and Objective: We recently reported that rapidly migratory,
amoeboid prostate cancer (PCa) cells shed large (1-10m diameter),
bioactive extracellular vesicles (EV), termed large oncosomes (LO), whose
abundance correlates with tumor aggressiveness (Di Vizio et al., Cancer
Res. 2009; Di Vizio et al. Am J Pathol. 2012). Increasing evidence
supports an important role for EVs in mechanisms of communication between
cancer cells and the surrounding microenvironment. EVs can activate
signal transduction as well as transfer biomolecules to recipient cells,
processes that may promote oncogenesis and/or enhance tumor progression.
The aim of this study was to investigate the molecular mechanisms of LO
internalization into recipient cells and LO-mediated intercellular
communication. Results: LO stimulated the migration of tumor and
endothelial cells and contained active MMP2 and MMP9, key proteases
involved in tumor cell invasion. Quantitative LC-MS/MS SILAC analysis of
LO and exosomes demonstrated enrichment of specific proteins in LO in
comparison with exosomes. Fluorescently labeled-LO were internalized into
recipient cells and maintained their stability as discrete microvesicles
that were localized in the perinuclear space at early time points and
into the nucleus at later times. Because of this transfer of LO to the
nuclear compartment, we investigated whether exposure to LO altered the
activity of transcription factors in recipient cells, hypothesizing a
possible novel mechanism of LO-mediated intracellular communication.
Interestingly, the degree of internalization, as quantitatively assessed
by flow cytometry, varied among different recipient cells, including
benign and cancer prostate epithelial cells, immortalized myofibroblasts,
cancer associated fibroblasts and endothelial cells. These results
suggest cell-specific affinities for target cells and, perhaps, finely
regulated mechanisms underlying LO-internalization. Moreover selective
inhibition of pathways important in EV internalization indicated that the
LO enter cells through an active endocytic process, rather than passively
fusing with the plasma membrane of recipient cells. Internalization of LO
resulted in altered expression of transcription factors. Conclusions: Our
results show for the first time that internalization of intact LO might
be necessary for their biological activity in recipient cells. These
findings also suggest that the functional role of LO in the tumor
microenvironment might be mediated by modulation of transcription factors.

