Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prion protein and its ligand STI1/HOP modulate migration and
invasion of cell lines derived from colorectal tumors


The colorectal cancer is the fourth most common type of cancer in the
world. The search for potential molecular targets for therapy has led to
the Cellular Prion Protein (PrPC) as a possible candidate. Its activity
depends on the interaction with the secreted form of the stress inducible
protein 1 or heat shock organizing protein (STI1/HOP). Previous results
indicated the importance of the PrPC-STI1/HOP complex in proliferation of
glioblastomas and invasion of melanomas. Therefore, this work aims to
understand how PrPC-STI1/HOP complex can influence the migration and
invasion of WiDr and HCT8 colorectal tumor cells. PrPC is equally
expressed at the cell surface of both cell lines. Cell migration assays
were performed using boyden chambers and recombinant STI1/HOP as chemical
attractant. For invasion experiments cells were seeded on boyden chambers
covered with matrigel and treated with STI1/HOP. The results showed that
when stimulated with recombinant STI1/HOP, both tumor cell lines showed
higher migration and invasion potentials than non-treated cells or those
treated with a STI1/HOP deletion mutant for the PrPC binding domain
(STI1230-245). Moreover, migration and invasion mediated by PrPC-STI1/HOP
complex were blocked by a STI-1/HOP (230-245) peptide, which mimics STI1
binding site to PrPC or also by a neutralizing anti-PrPC antibody.
STI1/HOP is secreted in the conditioned medium (CM) within extracellular
microvesicles (MVs) and WiDr cells secreted more MVs and STI1/HOP than
HCT8 cells. Remarkable, HCT8 cells treated with CM or isolated MVs from
WiDr cells show a higher migration than that induced when the former
cells were treated with their own CM or when WiDr cells were treated with
CM or MVs derived from HCT8 cells. Together, these results indicate that
the PrPC-STI1/HOP complex mediate migration and invasion of colorectal
tumor cells and suggest that cellular migration is dependent on the
concentration of secreted MVs. The role of STI1/HOP present in MVs on
cell migration is still under investigation.

