Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of the complexity of HBV DNA integration
sites in the circulation of patients with HBV-related liver disease


HBV related liver disease ranges from hepatitis, cirrhosis, and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which has a 5-year survival rate of 14%
because it is difficult to diagnose at its curative stages. Chronic
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections is the major etiology of HCC,
associated with over 50% of HCC cases worldwide and up to 70-80% in
endemic areas. 85-90% of HBV related HCCs (HBV-HCC) contain integrated
HBV DNA. During chronic HBV infection, HBV DNA has been shown to
integrate at random sites in the host chromosome creating a unique
genetic signature in each HBV infected hepatocytes. This makes the pool
of HBV DNA integration sites highly complex in the liver. This genetic
signature in HBV-infected liver along with the fundamental mechanism of
carcinogenesis, which is clonal expansion, would result in HCC tissue
containing only one to few clonally expanded integration sites, resulting
in reduced complexity. Thus, we hypothesize the detection of reduced
complexity of HBV DNA integration sites in the circulation can be a
potential biomarker for HBV-HCC.In order to study the complexity of cell
free circulating HBV DNA integration sites in the circulation, a targeted
next generation sequencing (NGS) assay for urine DNA was developed. We
chose to use urine in order to avoid detecting of HBV DNA from infectious
viruses. Targeted enrichment was performed using an in-solution
hybridization platform with biotinylated RNA baits covering the entire
HBV genome. The assay was tested using library constructed DNA controls:
Hep3B, which contains integrated DNA, and HepG2, which contains no HBV
DNA to confirm targeted capture of HBV DNA. Next, matching tissue and
urine DNA and DNA from urine collected after surgical removal of HCC
tumor from seven HBV-HCC patients were collected and underwent library
construction. The library DNA samples were subsequently enriched with HBV
and HCC-specific RNA baits. Enriched library DNA was sequenced on
Illumina's MiSeq platform. Although the analysis is still ongoing, we
have successfully analyzed the complexity of cell-free circulating HBV
DNA integration sites in urine. We detected 46 integration sites in the
tissue and urine where the location of integrated HBV DNA mapped
primarily (89%) to a known HBV integration breakpoint region, HBV DR1-2.
Furthermore in 3 HBV-HCC patients, a pattern of reduced complexity of
cell-free circulating HBV DNA integration sites was found in urine before
the removal of HCC, as compared to urine collected after surgery
suggesting reduced complexity of HBV DNA integration sites in HBV-HCC
patients. A similar NGS analysis of the urine of hepatitis and cirrhosis
patients is in progress. Overall, if successful this study will
demonstrate the potential of detecting reduced complexity of HBV DNA
integration sites as a biomarker for HBV-HCC screening and provide
insight to the involvement of HBV DNA integration sites in HBV-HCC
carcinogenesis.

