Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The sodium channel auxiliary subunit SCN1B promotes breast tumor
growth and metastasis


Voltage-gated Na+ channels (VGSCs) are heteromeric proteins composed of
pore-forming subunits and smaller subunits. The subunits are
multifunctional channel modulators and are members of the immunoglobulin
superfamily of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). 1, encoded by SCN1B, is
best characterized in the central nervous system (CNS), where it plays a
critical role in regulating electrical excitability, neurite outgrowth
and migration during development. 1 is also expressed in breast cancer
cell lines, where it regulates adhesion and migration in vitro. Using the
Oncomine database, we found that SCN1B mRNA was up-regulated in breast
cancer, compared with normal breast. Similarly, 1 protein was
up-regulated in a cohort of breast cancer tissue specimens compared with
surrounding normal tissue. Over-expression of 1 in MDA-MB-231 cells
substantially increased tumor growth and metastasis from orthotopic
xenografts in immune-deficient mice. 1 had no effect on the density of
Ki67-positive cycling cells in the primary tumors. However, 1 increased
the density of CD31-positive vessel structures and reduced the density of
apoptotic cells expressing activated caspase-3. 1-expressing MDA-MB-231
cells had an elongate morphology in tumors in vivo and in 2D culture in
vitro. 1 potentiated the outgrowth of processes from MDA-MB-231 cells and
MCF-7 cells co-cultured with fibroblasts, via trans-homophilic adhesion.
Both the src family tyrosine kinase inhibitor PP2 and siRNA targeting fyn
kinase blocked 1-mediated process extension in breast cancer cells. Thus,
1-mediated process outgrowth in breast cancer cells requires the presence
and activity of fyn kinase. This recapitulates the mechanism by which 1
regulates neurite outgrowth in CNS neurons. We conclude that when present
in breast tumors, 1 drives pathological growth and cellular dissemination
by recapitulating its well-defined role in CNS ontogeny. This study is
the first demonstration of a functional role for 1 as a CAM in tumor
growth and metastasis. We propose that targeting 1-mediated adhesion
interactions may have potential as a novel anti-cancer therapy.

