Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal liver metastases induce a systemic phase shift of the
biological clock


Circadian clock genes drive cyclic expression of 10-15% of the
transcriptome. Disruption of the circadian clock may deregulate the
cell's normal functions and can lead to carcinogenesis, indicating that
clock genes also act as tumor suppressor genes. In previous work, we have
shown that circadian rhythmicity is disrupted in C26 colon carcinoma
cell-derived hepatic metastases, as compared to the non-cancerous tissue
of the liver. It has been suggested that neoplastic tissue can influence
the circadian clock of adjacent tissues, causing a tissue specific phase
shift. A better understanding of how tumors affect the circadian system
may help elucidate the role of the clock in cancer patients suffering
from fatigue and sleep disorders. Therefore, we have examined the
circadian clock in liver and kidney tissue of mice carrying hepatic C26
colon carcinoma cell metastases.Male BALB/c mice were divided into two
groups. In group 1, hepatic metastases were induced by injecting C26
colorectal carcinoma cells into the spleen. Group 2 was sham operated.
Three weeks after (sham) surgery, animals were sacrificed over a 24-hour
period (6 time points, n=4 per time point) and liver and kidneys were
collected to compare circadian rhythmicity in control and tumor bearing
animals. RNA was isolated and qRT-PCR was performed to determine the
expression levels of 5 clock genes (Rev-Erb, Per1, Per2, Bmal1, Cry1) and
3 clock controlled genes (Dbp, p21 and Wee1).Liver and kidney tissue of
healthy control mice showed normal 24-hour oscillations of all clock
genes, consistent with normal circadian rhythmicity. Liver and kidney
tissue of tumor-bearing mice, as compared to control mice, showed a
marked phase difference in clock rhythms. In the liver we observed a
4-hour phase advance for Bmal1, Rev-Erb and Dbp. In contrast in the
kidney, there was a 4-hour phase delay for Bmal1, Rev-Erb, Cry1 and DBP,
and a 8 hour delay for Per2.These data show that colorectal liver
metastases induce a phase advance in the liver, and a phase delay in the
kidney . This suggests a systemic effect of the tumor on peripheral
clocks. This difference in clock phase between tumor-bearing mice and
healthy controls may provide new clues to further understand the role of
the clock for fatigue and sleep problems in cancer patients, but may also
give opportunities to administer chemotherapeutic treatment in a
chronotherapeutical setting .

