Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to cabazitaxel is associated with ABCB1/P-glycoprotein
activation, alterations in -tubulin content and dynamics, reduced BRCA1,
and a mesenchymal phenotype in MCF-7 human breast cancer variants


In order to identify determinants of cellular response to this new
taxane, we derived a resistant variant from the MCF-7 human breast cancer
cell line by stepwise selection in cabazitaxel. The 33-fold resistance to
cabazitaxel in this variant, MCF-7/CTAX, was associated with
ABCB1/P-glycoprotein (P-gp) activation, but also 3-fold residual
resistance to taxanes after modulation with the P-gp inhibitor PSC-833, 2
M. Another variant was established by co-selecting in the presence of
PSC-833 (MCF-7/CTAX-P). This variant was negative for ABCB1 transcripts
and accumulated parental levels of rhodamine-123, BODIPY-labeled
paclitaxel and [3H]-docetaxel, indicating that the taxane resistance
(9-fold) observed in this cell line is not mediated by transporters.
However, we observed a 34% reduction in bound fluorescent-labeled
paclitaxel in MCF-7/CTAX-P relative to parental controls by flow
cytometry. These cells are hypersensitive to depolymerizing agents
(vincas and colchicine) indicating a change in tubulin dynamic
instability, and we observed reduced baseline tubulin polymer in
untreated MCF-7/CTAX-P cells, and impaired tubulin polymerization in
response to taxane exposure (cabazitaxel or docetaxel) relative to MCF-7
parental cells. Quantitative PCR and immunoblotting confirmed elevated
levels of the class III (TUBB3) -tubulin isotype in both MCF-7/CTAX and
MCF-7/CTAX-P. Reduced BRCA1 content was observed in both MCF-7 variants,
which could affect taxane response via the regulation of the mitotic
spindle checkpoint. Gene silencing with specific siRNAs confirmed that
reduced TUBB3 sensitizes cells to cabazitaxel, and reduced BRCA1 results
in taxane resistance. In addition, altered epithelial-mesenchymal
transition markers (elevated Vimentin, reduced E-cadherin) are associated
with cabazitaxel resistance in these MCF-7 variants. In summary,
cabazitaxel resistance mechanisms include MDR (although at a lower level
than paclitaxel and docetaxel), and alterations in microtubule
dynamicity, as manifested by higher expression of TUBB3, decreased BRCA1,
and by the induction of EMT.

