Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two-phase study of PTH polymorphisms, calcium, magnesium and
colorectal adenoma risk


Background: The findings on the associations between intakes of calcium
and magnesium with risks of colorectal adenoma and cancer have not been
consistent. Previous studies identified substantial inter-person
variability in calcium absorption (10-70%). The differences in calcium
absorption persist over time and only a small portion of cases can be
explained by known factors. Calcium competes with magnesium in many
biological activities such as (re)absorption. The polymorphisms in genes
related to calcium and magnesium may modify the associations between
intakes of calcium and magnesium and risk of colorectal cancer and
adenoma. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a critical hormone in the
regulation of calcium concentration and magnesium in extracellular fluid
and plays a key role in (re)absorption of both calcium and magnesium in
the gut and kidney.Objectives: We hypothesize that common variants in PTH
may modify the associations between calcium and magnesium intake or
calcium/magnesium ratio and risk of colorectal adenoma risk.Methods:
Included were participants of the Tennessee Colorectal Polyp Study
(TCPS), a colonoscopy-based case control study conducted in Nashville,
TN. In the Phase I study, genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix
Human Mapping 500K array in 728 colorectal adenoma cases and 757 controls
and 3 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the PTH gene were
evaluated. SNPs identified as significant in phase I were genotyped in
Phase II in an independent set (546 cases and 2062 controls). Dietary
nutrient intakes were obtained from a food frequency questionnaire.
Multivariate unconditional logistic regression models were used to
estimate the odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for each SNP.
Multiplicative interactions were evaluated for gene-diet interactions
using likelihood ratio tests.Results: In Phase I of the study, we
identified 2 SNPs that significantly interacted with calcium to magnesium
(Ca/Mg) intake ratio in association with adenoma risk. In an independent
set (Phase II), one of two gene-Ca/Mg ratio interactions was replicated.
In the combined analysis, we found that intakes of calcium and magnesium
were related to a reduced risk of colorectal adenoma. However, in
stratified analysis, magnesium intake was only associated with a reduced
risk of adenoma among those with the TC/CC genotype (p for trend, 0.03).
Magnesium intake320 mg/day was linked to about 40% reduction in risk
among those with the TC genotype. On the other hand, calcium intake was
only related to a reduced risk for those who carry the TC/TT genotype (p
for tend, 0.02). Calcium intake1000 mg/day was associated with an over
40% reduction in risk of colorectal adenoma among the TT
group.Conclusions: Intakes of calcium and magnesium are linked to reduced
risk of adenoma for subsets of populations with different genotypes.

