Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of microRNA signature in non-small-cell lung
cancer: A microRNA expression analysis


Purpose: MicroRNA (miRNA) plays significant role in the development and
progression of cancer. We aimed to identify miRNA signatures to be used
as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).Experimental Design: Patients with NSCLC who underwent surgical
resection and didn't receive any therapy before surgery were randomly
divided into training set (198 patients) and test set (199 patients). The
miRNA expression levels were detected by microarray and selected miRNAs
were verified by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). The other 302
patients from another center were used as an independent set to verify
the miRNA signature.Results: A 37-miRNA signature consisting of 15
downregulated miRNAs and 22 upregulated miRNAs was established for
distinguishing NSCLC specimens from noncancerous lung tissues in the
training set with 98.2% accuracy. In the test set, the classification
accuracy of the signature was 98.5%. Then three miRNAs were chosen to
construct prognostic signature in the training set. A formula based on
the 3 miRNAs was built to calculate prognostic index. Kaplan-Meier
analysis showed that patients with a high prognostic index had a
significant poorer survival than those with a low index. The 3-miRNA
signature was validated in test set with the same formula for computing
the prognostic index. The expression levels of 4 miRNAs including the 3
miRNA in the prognostic signature were verified by RT-PCR in 33 paired
NSCLC and corresponding noncancerous lung tissues. The expression level
of the 3 miRNA was detected by qRT-PCR in the independent set. Survival
analysis showed that the 3-miRNA signature was associated with survival
in the independent set. Multivariate analysis indicated that the 3-miRNA
signature was an independent prognostic biomarker. A combination of the
3-miRNA signature and TNM stage had much better prognostic ability than
did TNM stage alone in the training, test and independent
sets.Conclusions: The 37-miRNA and 3-miRNA signatures identified in our
study may be useful biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis of NSCLC
patients.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

