Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted suppression of interleukin-1 signaling inhibits growth of
primary human acute myeloid leukemia cells


Background: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) represents the most common type
of leukemia in adults and is associated with high morbidity and
mortality. Targeted therapy represents a promising approach in AML with
the potential for increased efficacy and reduced toxicity. Because recent
studies have demonstrated that certain inflammatory cytokines known to
suppress normal hematopoiesis have the opposite effect (ie. enhancing
proliferation) on cell growth of AML cells, we systematically assessed
the functional relevance of 90 cytokines and their receptors in primary
human AML cells. Here we present a novel role of Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
signaling in aberrant regulation of AML cell growth.Methods and Results:
To identify functionally important cytokine signaling pathways in
leukemia pathogenesis we took a two pronged approach. First, we
quantified the growth of 45 primary AML patient samples against graded
concentrations of 90 cytokines. Second, we employed a functional siRNA
screen targeting 188 cytokine receptors that were found highly expressed
in 140 primary leukemia samples by gene expression analysis. Using this
approach we identified that IL-1 signaling had the most dramatic effect.
Forty percent of AML samples exhibited a 5-25 fold increase in growth in
the presence of IL-1/. Paradoxically, IL-1 suppressed growth of normal
CD34+ cells. Silencing the IL-1 receptor, IL1R1, reduced the viability of
these AML primary samples by 60%. Most IL-1 sensitive AML samples exhibit
monocytic and myelomonocytic features; however, no correlation with
specific somatic mutations has thus far been observed. IL-1 responsive
samples are from patients with abnormally increased serum IL-1 levels (5
fold). Consistent with this, conditioned media from the mononuclear cells
of these samples promote the growth of AML CD34+ cells. Deep sequencing
of primary AML samples indicated that genes encoding signaling molecules
of IL-1 pathway (IL1R1, IL1RAP, MYD88, TRAF6, IRAK, IKK, cJUN, NFB and
p38) are normal. We confirmed the importance of IL1R1 using a genetic
model. We found that the absence of IL1R1 in murine bone marrow leads to
significant ablation of clonogenic potential (80% reduction) of
oncogene-induced leukemic cells (AML1-ETO9a, NRASG12D and MLL-ENL) when
compared to oncogene-induced leukemic cells from wild type mice. However,
no effect on colony growth was observed with empty vector controls. These
results suggest that multiple genetic drivers of leukemia share a
dysfunctional IL-1 pathway. Mechanistically, IL-1 promotes CD34+ AML cell
survival by increasing p38 phosphorylation that is significantly
inhibited with IL1R1 knockdown or p38 kinase inhibitors such as
Doramapimod. No toxic effect of Doramapimod was observed on normal cell
growth.Conclusion: These results demonstrate a novel role for IL-1
signaling in promoting oncogenesis in AML and provide evidence that
targeting this pathway might be beneficial to AML patients.

