Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Near-infrared-resonant IONP/Au2S core/satellites hybrid
nanocomposite for imaging-guided photothermal therapy


Abstract: Photothermal therapy (PTT) using near-infrared-resonant
nanomaterials including multifunctional probes with both therapeutic
functions and imaging capabilities has gained great attention in recent
years. However, various challenges still exist including the large size
of gold nanoshells, the melting effect of gold nanorods, lack of imaging
capability, and tedious multiple steps for making imaging-capable
multifunctional probes. Consequently, it is desired to develop an
effective PTT mediator with the following criteria: small size, photo
stability, facile synthesis, low toxicity, and imaging capability. We
report the design of a core/satellites hybrid nanocomposite with a highly
crystallized iron oxide nanoparticle (IONP) core (10-20 nm) and multiple
gold sulfide (Au2S) nanoparticle satellites (1-2 nm) attached to the IONP
polysiloxane-containing polymer coating for imaging-guided photothermal
cancer therapy. In this nanostructure, the multiple satellites (Au2S)
enhance PTT, while the IONP core serves as both a photothermal mediator
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent to localize the
tumor. To make these core/satellites nanocomposites we first modify the
IONP polymer coating with (3-mercaptopropyl) trimethoxysilane followed by
mixing with Au2S nanoparticles, which are made by mixing sodium sulfide
(Na2S) and chloroauric acid (HAuCl4) at the designed ratio. After
purification using a magnet, the TEM image shows that around 8-10 Au2S
nanoparticles (1-2 nm average diameter) were attached to each IONP (15 nm
in diameter). This core/satellites nanocomposite has obvious absorption
in the near infrared (NIR) range and the absorption peak can be adjusted
by the molar ratio of Na2S to HAuCl4. The developed nanocomposite
exhibits an enhanced photothermal effects without any quenching under NIR
laser light. Benefitting from the anti-biofouling polysiloxane-containing
polymer coating for in vivo applications, the core/satellites
nanocomposites effectively accumulate to xenograft tumor tissue (SUM-159,
triple-negative breast tumor cell line) through the enhanced permeability
and retention effect after tail vein injection. MRI imaging is used to
locate the tumors. NIR triggered PTT, which is enhanced by the
core/satellites nanoparticles within the tumor site, destroys the tumor
cells, while the tumor tissues in control mice do not show any change
under the same laser light irradiation. Our in vitro and in vivo data
reveal that NIR-resonant IONP/Au2S core/satellites nanocomposites can be
used as effective MRI imaging-guided photothermal cancer
therapy.Correspondence should be addressed to: Duxin Sun, PhD, or Hongwei
Chen, PhD, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,
The University of Michigan, 428 Church Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
Email: duxins@umich.edu (D. Sun); or hongweic@umich.edu (H. Chen)

