Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of uterine leiomyomas,
histopathological uterine leiomyoma subtypes, and uterine leiomyosarcomas


Uterine leiomyomas (ULMs) are the most common tumors of the female
genital tract. They originate from the smooth muscle cells of the
myometrium. Despite their benign nature, ULMs can cause considerable
morbidity, such as excessive bleeding, abdominal pain, and infertility.
They are also the most common cause for hysterectomy. Based on
histopathology, ULMs can be divided into common leiomyomas and various
subtypes, such as cellular, atypical, and mitotically active leiomyomas,
that mimic malignancy in one or more aspects. Histopatological ULM
subtypes are responsible for approximately 5% of all ULMs. In light of
the current literature, ULMs may rarely undergo malignant transformation
and develop into a leiomyosarcoma. We have previously reported that
mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) exon 2 is mutated in approximately
70% of ULMs. Our subsequent studies have indicated that both
histopathological ULM subtypes (17.5%) and uterine leiomyosarcomas (7%)
harbor MED12 exon 2 mutations significantly less frequently than common
leiomyomas. The aim of this study is to examine the frequency of other
known aberrations in ULMs, such as overexpression of HMGA1 and HMGA2, in
histopathological ULM subtypes and uterine leiomyosarcomas. The study
material consists of 213 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples
including 60 common leiomyomas, 93 histopathological ULM subtypes
(cellular, atypical, and mitotically active leiomyomas), and 60 uterine
leiomyosarcomas. We have constructed tissue microarrays of these distinct
tumor groups for immunohistochemical stainings. In addition to HMGA1 and
HMGA2 antibodies, various immunohistochemical markers, commonly used in
gynecological pathology, will be utilized to analyze similarities and
differences between the tumor groups. It is clinically relevant to
identify tumor subtypes with different molecular genetic characteristics
which might then lead to improved diagnosis, personalized medical
treatments, and prognosis in the future. New knowledge of the mechanisms
underlying the potential progression to malignancy is also essential,
because, for example in the case of uterine leiomyosarcomas, diagnosis is
often accidental and postoperative.

