Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transient duration of action is the primary mechanism responsible
for the unique biology of bryostatin 1


Bryostatin 1 (bryo 1) is a natural compound tested in several clinical
trials as an anticancer agent and in preclinical studies for treatment of
Alzheimer disease. Despite the clinical interest, the mechanisms
responsible for its unique behavior are not fully understood. Bryo 1 is a
protein kinase C activator that paradoxically antagonizes many but not
all phorbol ester responses. To obtain a broader view of the differences
in response to bryo 1 and to the phorbol ester PMA, we have compared
their effects on global RNA expression as well as on the levels of
important regulatory proteins in two cellular systems (LNCaP and U937
cell lines) where bryo 1 has different biology than PMA. In LNCaP cells,
where bryo 1 does not induce secretion of TNF alpha or cause apoptosis,
bryo 1 fails to induce translocation of PKC alpha, delta, epsilon and
pPKD1 to the nuclear enriched fraction or the phosphorylation of PKCdelta
at Y311. For many other early responses detected at 60 min (activation of
MEK/ERK pathway and of several transcription factors including NFKB, AP1,
EGR1) bryo 1 acts similarly to PMA. In contrast, bryo 1 fails to induce
the late responses detected at 6 hrs (phosphorylation of p65,
translocation of cRel and RelB) and induces early termination of the
induced responses both at the protein and RNA levels as detected for a
selected panel of genes. The early termination of the induced responses
by bryo 1 can be detected as well in U937 cells, where bryo 1 fails to
induce differentiation and apoptosis, unlike PMA. Microarray analysis of
LNCaP and U937 cells treated for 6 and 8 hrs, respectively, revealed
significant, extensive changes in gene expression compared to control but
did not identify genes uniquely responsive to bryo 1. Typically, the
effect of bryo 1 was smaller than that of PMA. qPCR analysis of about 3
dozen genes spanning the breadth of the microarray response patterns
indicated a single mechanism - genes were similarly activated by PMA and
bryo 1 early on but the effect of bryo 1 was transient. Further
microarray analysis was performed on LNCaP and U937 samples treated for
60 min and 6 hrs to address the following questions: 1) Are there genes
that are induced selectively by bryo 1 at 1 hr? 2) Does transient
response to bryo 1, which was only shown for selected genes by qPCR but
was inferred to explain the extensive reduced expression at 6 hr in
response to bryo 1 compared to PMA, actually explain the reduced
expression? While some genes are selectively induced by bryo 1 treatment,
the altered levels of expression are limited, suggesting that it does not
reflect a unique site of action. Looking at genes showing a reduced level
of expression at 6 hr in response to bryo 1 compared to PMA, we confirm
that transiency of action is the primary mechanism. These insights
provide a guide for evaluation of second generation bryostatin analogs
and a focus on the biochemical basis for the transiency of bryo 1 effect.

