Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants and expression of AEG-1 in relation to clinical
outcome and radiotherapy response in colorectal cancer patients and cell
lines


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in
men and the second in woman worldwide. The therapy of CRC has been
critically improved during the past two decades, but the treatment
response varies significantly between different treatments and patients.
Therefore it is of need to search for biomarkers for more suitable
prognosis and treatment. The aim of this study was to investigate genetic
variants of the astrocyte elevated gene-1 (AEG-1), its expression in CRC
patient samples and colon cancer cell lines and the potential correlation
to clinicopathological variables and treatment response.Materials and
Methods: We analysed genetic variants and the mRNA and protein expression
of AEG-1 in 593 CRC patient samples by direct Sanger sequencing, qPCR and
immunohistochemistry. Of the patients, 158 rectal cancer patients were
enrolled in the Swedish clinical trial of preoperative radiotherapy (RT).
AEG-1 expression in response to -irradiation was analysed by Western blot
in 5 colon cancer cell lines. We inhibited the AEG-1 expression by siRNA
in the cell lines, and their survival was analysed after
-irradiation.Results: By direct sequencing we found 29 variants, of which
12 were novel. Six of the variants were exonic and 23 intronic. The
variant c.1353G>A, rs2331652 was found only in 4 samples and the variant
c.1679-6 T>C in only one sample. In the cell lines KM12C, KM12SM and
KM12L4a we found a deletion in exon 4 (c.595_598delAGAG). AEG-1 mRNA and
protein expression revealed a significant increased AEG-1 expression in
the primary tumors and metastases compared to the normal mucosa in all
patient cohorts (pBackground: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most
common cancer in men and the second in woman worldwide. The therapy of
CRC has been critically improved during the past two decades, but the
treatment response varies significantly between different treatments and
patients. Therefore it is of need to search for biomarkers for more
suitable prognosis and treatment. The aim of this study was to
investigate genetic variants of the astrocyte elevated gene-1 (AEG-1),
its expression in CRC patient samples and colon cancer cell lines and the
potential correlation to clinicopathological variables and treatment
response.Materials and Methods: We analysed genetic variants and the mRNA
and protein expression of AEG-1 in 593 CRC patient samples by direct
Sanger sequencing, qPCR and immunohistochemistry. Of the patients, 158
rectal cancer patients were enrolled in the Swedish clinical trial of
preoperative radiotherapy (RT). AEG-1 expression in response to
-irradiation was analysed by Western blot in 5 colon cancer cell lines.
We inhibited the AEG-1 expression by siRNA in the cell lines, and their
survival was analysed after -irradiation.Results: By direct sequencing we
found 29 variants, of which 12 were novel. Six of the variants were
exonic and 23 intronic. The variant c.1353G>A, rs2331652 was found only
in 4 samples and the variant c.1679-6 T>C in only one sample. In the cell
lines KM12C, KM12SM and KM12L4a we found a deletion in exon 4
(c.595_598delAGAG). AEG-1 mRNA and protein expression revealed a
significant increased AEG-1 expression in the primary tumors and
metastases compared to the normal mucosa in all patient cohorts (p<0.006)
and on the mRNA level a higher expression in tumors located in the rectum
compared to tumors in the colon (p=0.047). In the rectal cancer patients
from the Swedish trail of preoperativeRT, a high AEG-1 expression
correlated with a higher risk of distant recurrence and disease free
survival (p=0.001 respectively) independently of the tumor stage, only in
patients receiving preoperative RT. AEG-1 knock-down in the
radioresistant cell lines KM12L4a, SW480 and SW620 resulted in reduction
of the survival after radiation, but not in the radiosensitive cell lines
KM12C and HCT116. The AEG-1 expression was up-regulated shortly after 2
Gy -radiation in KM12C, KM12L4a and SW480, but not in SW620 and
HCT116.Conclusion: We found several novel AEG-1 variants. The AEG-1
expression at the mRNA and/or protein level was up-regulated in the
primary tumour and metastases compared to the normal mucosa. Furthermore
we showed for the first time that the AEG-1 expression is an independent
prognostic factor for distant recurrence and disease-free survival in
rectal cancer patients after treatment with preoperative RT. The cell
line studies suggest AEG-1 as a promising radiosensitizing target for
rectal cancer.

