Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The endocannabinoid system inhibits non-small cell lung cancer
tumorigenesis by modulating the EGF/EGFR pathway


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a leading form of cancer with
limited treatment regimens and is a major cause of cancer related
mortality in the United States. The endocannabinoid system composed of
two cannabinoid receptors- CB1 and CB2, their endogenous ligands and the
enzymes for their metabolism has been implicated in several
pathophysiological conditions. They have been extensively studied in
various cancers as inhibitors of tumor cell growth by modulating key cell
survival pathways. Anandamide (AEA), a well characterized
neurotransmitter is an endogenous cannabinoid and agonist for the
cannabinoid receptor CB1. One way to enhance the effect of
endocannabinoid signaling is to inhibit the enzyme fatty acid amide
hydrolase (FAAH), which metabolizes AEA by using the selective FAAH
inhibitor URB597. To understand the physiological role of the
endocannabinoid system, the NSCLC cell lines A549 and H460 were treated
with either Met-F-AEA, URB597 or in combination and subjected to further
analysis. Cells which were incubated in combination with Met-F-AEA and
URB597 showed reduced proliferative and chemotactic activities in vitro
when compared to AEA alone, which were confirmed by reduced MMP2
secretion and stress fiber formation. Also, we have shown that the
combination treatment modulates activation of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and its downstream targets. In response to EGFR pathway
activation, cells treated with Met-F-AEA in combination with URB597
underwent GO/G1 cell cycle arrest, ultimately leading to apoptosis via
activation of caspase-9 and PARP. Furthermore, these results were
validated in vivo in a xenograft nude mouse model system. Mouse
xenografts treated with both Met-F-AEA and URB597 underwent reduction in
tumor growth when compared to Met-F-AEA or URB597 alone. In summary, our
results presented here show that Met-F-AEA in combination with URB597
inhibits the EGFR pathway, resulting in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Our findings suggest a novel perspective for the antitumorigenic activity
of the endocannabinoid Met-F-AEA when used in combination with URB597 in
NSCLC.

