Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR kinase inhibition enhances radiosensitivity in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common malignant primary brain
tumor and predicts a poor prognosis despite current treatment modalities.
Aberrant activation of the phosphatidyl-inositol-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway
is observed in nearly 90% of GBMs making the downstream effector,
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a potential drug target. mTOR is a
serine/threonine kinase that regulates cell growth, proliferation,
survival, protein translation and metabolism by integrating signals
received from the PI3 K/Akt signaling pathway. The allosteric mTOR
inhibitor rapamycin has failed in the clinic as a treatment for GBM
patients. Therefore, in the current study, we examined the potential
benefit of MLN0128, a novel potent mTOR ATP competitive inhibitor, as a
therapeutic strategy for GBM. We assessed in vitro antiproliferative
activity of MLN0128 in a panel of GBM tumor and stem cell lines. MLN0128
significantly inhibited cell proliferation of both GBM tumor and stem
cells. It decreased the phosphorylation of mTOR, Akt, S6, 4E-BP1, and
NDRG1, inhibiting both mTORC1 and mTORC2 signaling in GBM. Thus, MLN0128
appears to be superior in blocking mTORC1/2 signaling in contrast to
rapamycin. It inhibited migration and invasion of GBM cells in a matrigel
coated chamber assay. On clonogenic survival assay MLN0128 decreased GBM
cell survival and increased radiosensitivity. To investigate the
mechanism of radiosensitization, the induction and repair of DNA
double-strand breaks were evaluated by H2AX foci formation. MLN0128
exposure significantly delayed the dispersal of radiation induced H2AX
foci formation in both tumor and stem cells. These results indicate that
MLN0128 enhances tumor cell radiosensitivity by inhibiting DNA repair.
Next we combined MLN0128 with temozolomide (TMZ), a FDA approved
radiosensitizer for GBM therapy. Although, we did not observe any synergy
in inhibition, addition of TMZ did not adversely affect MLN0128
inhibitory effects. These findings support the rationale for clinical
testing of MLN0128 in patients with GBM to provide insight towards
optimizing therapeutic efficacy of mTOR kinase inhibitors with standard
care.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

