Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomics of phyllodes tumor revealed that decorin increase in
the extracellular matrix by periostin deficiency decreased cancer cell
motility and invasion


The ability of cancer cells to metastasize is dependent on the
interactions of their cell surface molecules with microenvironment.
However the tumor microenvironment, especially cancer-associated stroma,
is poorly understood. To search for proteins which are present in the
stroma, we investigated the phyllodes tumor, which contains breast
stromal tissue, specific expression proteins compared with normal tissue
by using iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach. Periostin and
versican core protein were up-regulated in phyllodes tumor. Decorin,
mimecan, hemoglobin subunit alpha, hemoglobin subunit beta and ketatin,
type1 cytoskeletal 19 were up-regulated in normal tissue. Periostin and
decorin are one of component of the extracellular matrix. Periostin
upregulation has been reported in many cancer types and is consequently
defined as a tumor-enhancing factor. On the other hand, decorin
upregulation inhibits tumor growth by antagonizing tumor angiogenesis.
Periostin upregulation in phyllodes tumor and decorin upregulation in
normal tissue was validated by immunohistochemical analysis from
phyllodes tumor thirty five patients. We determined the interaction
between decorin and periostin in phyllodes tumor tissues and breast
cancer cell line BT-20 cells, by using immunoprecipitation and mass
spectrometry analysis. Furthermore, we uncovered the plasma membrane
translocation of decorin from cytoplasm in BT-20 or T-47D cells by
siRNA-mediated knockdown of periostin, and detected the secreted decorin
to the extracellular medium using Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM)
method. The periostin siRNA-treated BT-20 cells motility and invasion
were prevented by the secreted decorin into the extracellular medium. The
overexpression of decorin suppressed the metastatic breast cancer cell
line, MDA-MB-231 cells motality and invasion. These results demonstrated
the secreted decorin by periostin deficiency decreased cancer cells
motality and invasion. This molecular mechanism may become the new target
for anti-cancer therapy.

