Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Construction and validation of an activating and inhibitory
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) system


Introduction: The use of adoptive transfer of T cells for the treatment
of cancer has been hampered by the low persistence of the infused cells
and the difficulty to isolate and expand tumor-specific lymphocytes. The
use of chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) allows the circumvention of
these problems. CARs consist of an antibody-derived scFv, a transmembrane
region and an intracellular activating signaling domain, recognizing the
target antigen with high affinity and in a MHC-independent fashion.
Nonetheless, off-target responses owing to the recognition of the target
antigen in healthy cells limit the application of this therapy. The
antigen CD19 represents a good target for the elimination of B-cell
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL) and anti-CD19 CAR+
lymphocytes are being used clinically. However, the expression of CD19 as
a pan B-lineage marker leads to mature B cell depletion. Objective: Since
mature B cells express both CD19 and CD20 antigens, we propose the
creation of an inhibitory CAR directed to CD20, allowing the lymphocytes
to discriminate between BCP-ALL and mature B cells. Methods: Jurkat cells
expressing the plasmid pGL4.30 (luciferase controlled by a NFAT
responsive element) were generated and used as a reporter cell line. As
target cells we used the K562 cell line modified to express CD19 (K5-19),
CD20 (K5-20) or CD19 and CD20 (K5-19/20). The expression of the
activation marker CD69 was evaluated by flow cytometry. The Sleeping
Beauty transposon system was used to modify primary human T lymphocytes
and the effector activity was evaluated by cytotoxicity and IFNg
production assays. Results: Three different inhibitory CD20-CARs
containing signaling domains CTLA-4, PD-1 or BTLA were constructed.
Jurkat cells expressing the CD19- activating CAR 19BBz showed high
activity of luciferase when cultured with K5-19 or K5-19/20. However,
Jurkat cells expressing both the activating and inhibitory CARs showed a
potent inhibition of luciferase activity when incubated with K5-19/20,
while maintaining a high activity when cultured with K5-19 cells.
Moreover, the three inhibitory CARs were able to inhibit the de novo
expression of CD69 induced by 19BBz in Jurkat cells. In primary T cells,
the CAR 20PD1 was not able to inhibit the production of IFNg or the
cytotoxic activity induced by 19BBz. Surprisingly, T cells expressing
both 19BBz and 20PD1 showed preferential lysis of CD19+ CD20+ targets,
suggesting that addition of PD1 signaling domain might augment T cell
function in particular contexts. Conclusions: The results in Jurkat cells
suggest that CD20-CARs can inhibit the activation of lymphocytes mediated
by CD19-CAR. However, additional experiments are required to evaluate the
inhibitory activity of 20PD1 in primary human T cells. Experiments with
CARs 20CTLA4 and 20BTLA are in progress and might allow the validation of
the dual CAR hypothesis in vitro and in vivo.

