Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor (KPT-330), a novel selective inhibitor of nuclear export
(SINE), shows single agent efficacy against alveolar soft part sarcoma
(ASPS) in vivo


Chromosomal Region Maintenance Protein 1/Exportin 1 (CRM1/XPO1) is a key
nuclear export protein whose inhibition leads to the nuclear accumulation
of Tumor Suppressor Proteins (TSPs) and renders cancer cells susceptible
to apoptosis. Selinexor is orally bioavailable and represents a novel
class of small molecule compounds with potent activity against a wide
variety of cancers. Selinexor is currently in Phase 1 clinical studies in
hematological and solid cancer patients (Clinicaltrials.gov NCT01607892
and NCT01607905). We tested the activity of Selinexor in a soft tissue
sarcoma ASPS that is resistant to traditional chemotherapy and
irradiation treatment. Here we report in vitro activity of Selinexor
against ASPS and in vivo efficacy results in xenograft models.MethodsWe
used MTT, FACS, qPCR, immunofluorescence, immunostaining and immunoblots
to measure the in vitro and in vivo effects of KPT-330 on the ASPS-KY
cell line and in xenograft models.ResultsThe IC50 of the ASPS-KY cell
line treated with Selinexor for 72 hours was 10 M. This concentration
induced nuclear accumulation of p53, p21, IB and FOXO3A within 4 hours of
treatment, and by 24 hours cells stopped DNA synthesis and were arrested
at G1 phase of the cell cycle. By 72 hours, 25% of the cells died. Prior
to cell death, the drug reduced the survival protein BCL2 as well as
other pro-proliferative proteins such as CDK4, Cyclin D and E2F. In
addition, Selinexor induced dephosphorylation of pRb activating its tumor
suppressor activity and also induced Caspase 3/7 and PARP cleavage. To
assess the in vivo activity of Selinexor in a xenograft model of ASPS, we
treated mice with 10 or 20 mg/kg of KPT-330 using a 3 times weekly oral
dosing schedule. Following a week of treatment, tumors showed
accumulation of TSPs as well as significant reduction of the
proliferation marker Ki-67. Following treatment with Selinexor for 40
days, tumor growth was inhibited by 70% at 10 mg/kg and by 80% at 20
mg/kg compared with vehicle treated animals. Analysis of immunoblots from
these tumors showed induction of p21, with corresponding reduction of the
pro-survival and proliferation markers c-Jun, c-Met, survivin, ERK and
HSP70. Histological analysis revealed apoptosis and large areas of
fibrosis in treated tumors. These results indicated that Selinexor not
only inhibited tumor growth, but also induced ASPS cell death in
vivo.ConclusionsOur results demonstrated that Selinexor is effective
against ASPS in vivo as a single agent and further support the
development of SINE-based therapies for alveolar soft part sarcoma that
has currently no cure. We will perform further studies to test Selinexor
in drug combination studies to identify synergism with other therapies.

