Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDK1 and hexokinase 2 are downstream effectors of PTEN loss and
regulate response to targeted therapies in multiple tumor types


Recent advances in molecular profiling of many human tumor types has
enabled the development and clinical use of molecularly-targeted
therapies in patients. Many tumors exhibit inactivation of PTEN which is
predicted to sensitize tumor cells to PI3 kinase or AKT inhibitor
therapy. However, clinical responses to PI3 kinase or AKT inhibitors are
variable and not curative. Furthermore, these responses in patients do
not correlate uniformly with PTEN inactivation. Therefore, we
investigated whether PTEN inactivation could lead to dependence on
signaling pathways and components that function independently of PI3K or
AKT and that could serve as novel therapeutic targets in PTEN deficient
tumors. Using multiple human tumor models including lung adenocarcinoma,
lung squamous, renal cell carcinoma, and prostate adenocarcinoma that
express or lack PTEN and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, we identified
alterations in numerous metabolic regulatory genes in response to PTEN
inactivation, including hexokinase 2 (HK2) and pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase 1 (PDK1). We found that in PTEN-deficient tumor cells HK2 is
upregulated and selectively localizes to the mitochondria, where it
enhances glycolytic flux and inhibits apoptosis. Furthermore, we found
that PDK1 is also upregulated upon PTEN inactivation and suppresses
oxidative phosphorylation, upregulating glycolysis and the production of
lactate. Thus, we uncovered a novel role for HK2 and PDK1 in the
metabolic reprogramming that occurs as a consequence of PTEN inactivation
in tumor cells. Furthermore, we found that overexpression of either HK2
or PDK1 confers resistance to targeted therapies against PI3K and other
oncogenic drivers more broadly. Conversely, genetic or pharmacological
suppression of HK2 or PDK1 enhances response to targeted therapy in
multiple tumor cell types. Together, our data identify HK2 and PDK1 as
novel molecular biomarkers and promising therapeutic targets in multiple
PTEN deficient tumor types.

