Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel small molecule pak4 allosteric modulators with activity
against pancreatic cancer


The p21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) acts as a key effector of Rho family
GTPases downstream of K-Ras and is found over-expressed in most of the
available pancreatic cancer (PC) cell lines but not in normal human
pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (HPDE). Gene copy number amplification
studies in PC patient cohorts has shown amplification of PAK4. Most
importantly, RNA interference of PAK4 suppresses PC cell proliferation
making PAK4 an attractive therapeutic target within the K-Ras signaling
network. Nevertheless, the previously developed PAK4 Type I ATP
competitive inhibitor (PF-3758309; tested in non-pancreatic models) was
evaluated in a Phase 1 study and showed undesirable pharmacokinetic
properties as well as no objective responses and was subsequently
discontinued. In order to fill this scientific void, we evaluated a new
class of PAK4 allosteric modulators in PC. Using multiple molecular
biology techniques we tested the Pak4 modulators' activities (in the
presence and absence of -ve and +ve controls) in a panel of PC cells
lines, PAK4 over-expressing Gemcitabine resistant (GEM-R) PC models and
highly resistant flow sorted PC stem cells (CSC). CSC's are triple
positive for CD133+CD44+EpCam+ and undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The toxicity and efficacy of these PAK4 modulators were
evaluated in sub-cutaneous mouse models of PC. The novel, orally
available PAK4 allosteric modulators (KPT-7189, KPT-8752) show
anti-proliferative activity against different PC cell lines (AsPC-1,
Colo-357, MiaPaCa-2, L3.6pl and HPAC IC50s The p21-activated kinase 4
(PAK4) acts as a key effector of Rho family GTPases downstream of K-Ras
and is found over-expressed in most of the available pancreatic cancer
(PC) cell lines but not in normal human pancreatic ductal epithelial
cells (HPDE). Gene copy number amplification studies in PC patient
cohorts has shown amplification of PAK4. Most importantly, RNA
interference of PAK4 suppresses PC cell proliferation making PAK4 an
attractive therapeutic target within the K-Ras signaling network.
Nevertheless, the previously developed PAK4 Type I ATP competitive
inhibitor (PF-3758309; tested in non-pancreatic models) was evaluated in
a Phase 1 study and showed undesirable pharmacokinetic properties as well
as no objective responses and was subsequently discontinued. In order to
fill this scientific void, we evaluated a new class of PAK4 allosteric
modulators in PC. Using multiple molecular biology techniques we tested
the Pak4 modulators' activities (in the presence and absence of -ve and
+ve controls) in a panel of PC cells lines, PAK4 over-expressing
Gemcitabine resistant (GEM-R) PC models and highly resistant flow sorted
PC stem cells (CSC). CSC's are triple positive for CD133+CD44+EpCam+ and
undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The toxicity and
efficacy of these PAK4 modulators were evaluated in sub-cutaneous mouse
models of PC. The novel, orally available PAK4 allosteric modulators
(KPT-7189, KPT-8752) show anti-proliferative activity against different
PC cell lines (AsPC-1, Colo-357, MiaPaCa-2, L3.6pl and HPAC IC50s <250nM)
sparing HPDE (IC50s 5 fold higher). Cell growth inhibition was concurrent
with apoptosis induction and suppression of colony forming abilities in 5
different PC cell lines (not in HPDE). KPT-7189 reduced PAK4 protein
levels along with the inhibition of proliferative and anti-apoptotic
signals downstream of PAK4. Molecularly, PAK4 RNA interference enhanced
KPT-7189 activity and co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed
disruption of PAK4 complexes (p65, Bcl-2 and vimentin). KPT-7189
inhibited spheroid forming ability of CSCs and reversed the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) phenotype. Confocal, western blot and
RT-PCR analysis of KPT-7189 treated CD33+CD44+EpCam+ spheroids showed
suppression of EMT and CSC markers EpCAM, vimentin and snail with
re-expression of epithelial phenotype promoter E-cadherin. A similar
compound, KPT-8752, with desirable PK properties was well tolerated in
mice with the absence of any clinical signs of toxicity up to 200 mg/kg
oral daily dose. Pre-clinical animal efficacy trial in sub-cutaneous,
orthotopic and LSL-K-Ras G12D/+;LSL-Trp53R172H/+;Pdx-1-Cre transgenic
mouse models are ongoing. This is the first proof of concept study
demonstrating the anti-proliferative effects of novel allosteric
modulators of PAK4, a downstream effector of K-Ras, in pancreatic cancer
that warrants further clinical investigations.

