Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CaMKK2-AMPK signaling facilitates androgen-mediated prostate
cancer cell metabolism


Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy among men in
industrialized countries, accounting for the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths. While we now know that the androgen receptor (AR)
is important for progression to the deadly advanced stages of the
disease, it is poorly understood what AR-regulated processes drive this
pathology. Previous work from several independent laboratories has
suggested AR signaling promotes prostate cancer through a
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase beta (CaMKK2)-dependent
signaling mechanism. Further, it was demonstrated this enzymatic cascade
promotes the use of sugars for cellular energy, a common trait for many
cancers. Given CaMKK2's known role as a regulator of various aspects of
metabolism, we hypothesized that CaMKK2 could promote prostate cancer
cell growth through additional mechanisms beyond glycolysis.To test our
hypothesis, we used clinical samples to track the activation of
downstream signaling components of CaMKK2 in prostate cancer. The
mechanistic role of these components was then identified using a variety
of cell-based assays and xenograft mouse models of prostate cancer.Here,
we demonstrate that AR-mediated CaMKK2 signaling regulates prostate
cancer cell growth via the metabolic sensor 5-AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), a kinase that classically regulates cellular energy
homeostasis. In patients, activation of AMPK correlated with prostate
cancer progression. Using a combination of radiolabeled assays and
emerging metabolomic approaches, we also show that prostate cancer cells
respond to androgen treatment by increasing not only rates of glycolysis,
as is commonly seen in many cancers, but also glucose and fatty acid
oxidation. Importantly, this effect was dependent on androgen-mediated
AMPK activity. Our results further indicate that the AMPK-mediated
metabolic changes increased intracellular ATP levels and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha
(PGC-1)-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis, affording distinct growth
advantages to the prostate cancer cells. Correspondingly, we used outlier
analysis to determine that PGC-1 is overexpressed in a subpopulation of
clinical cancer samples. This was in contrast to what was observed in
immortalized benign human prostate cells and a testosterone-induced rat
model of benign prostatic hyperplasia.Taken together, our findings
converge to demonstrate that androgens can co-opt the CaMKK2-AMPK-PGC-1
signaling cascade, a known homeostatic mechanism, to increase prostate
cancer cell growth. The current study points to the potential utility of
developing metabolic-targeted therapies directed towards the
CaMKK2-AMPK-PGC-1 signaling axis for the treatment of prostate cancer.

