Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hematogenous metastasis of ovarian cancer: Re-thinking mode of
spread


Background: Most patients with ovarian cancer have widely metastatic
disease within the abdominal cavity at primary diagnosis; historically,
this was thought to occur via intraperitoneal seeding. Here, we report
unexpected findings related to hematogenous ovarian cancer metastasis
with a strong tropism for the omentum.Methods: We established a novel
parabiosis model where the skin of female mice was fused surgically from
the shoulder to the hip joint. Two weeks later, the host parabiont mice
were injected with tumor cells into ovary. Once the host mice became
moribund, the parabionts were separated, and the host mice were
euthanized. Tumor development and patterns of metastasis were analyzed in
the host mice. A series of additional in vitro and in vivo experiments
were carried out to decipher the underlying mechanisms.Results: The
parabiosis models demonstrated that tumor cells injected into the ovary
of each host mouse metastasized to the corresponding guest mouse,
predominantly to the omentum. Using high-throughput transcriptome
analysis and phospho-proteome arrays, we demonstrated that ErbB3, an EGFR
family receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) was highly expressed in the ovarian
cancer cells that hematogenously metastasized to the omentum (SKOV3-OM3)
compared to parental cells. The ErbB3-NRG1 axis activated Src/PI3K/AKT
signaling pathway, which in turn induced loss of polarity and increased
invasion of ovarian cancer cells. Depletion of murine NRG1 using target
specific siRNAs almost completely abolished omental metastasis. In
contrast, overexpression of ErbB3 resulted in enhanced tumor formation
and omental metastatic spread, which confirms the role of ErbB3 in
hematogenous omental metastasis. Additional studies with a
function-blocking antibody specific to ErbB3 led to substantial reduction
in hematogenous metastasis of ovarian cancer
cells.Conclusions:Collectively, our results provide the first evidence
that ovarian cancer cells are capable of hematogenous metastasis, but
with strong tropism for the omentum. These findings not only provide a
new understanding of ovarian cancer metastasis, but also identify novel
therapeutic targets.

