Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of ribosomal protein p1 and its pseudogene in
breast tumors


Introduction: Ribosome biogenesis and translation control are essential
cellular processes in growing cancer cells. Defects in ribosomal
components can alter the pattern of gene expression, cell cycle
progression and cell growth. Human ribosomes consist of four RNA species
and 79 ribosomal proteins with 2090 processed and 16 duplicated
pseudogenes. Specifically, 60S Acidic Ribosomal Protein P1 (RPLP1) is
expressed in a tissue specific manner with multiple processed
pseudogenes. We accidentally identified the expressed pseudogene 4 of
RPLP1 (RPLP1P4) and determined genetic and molecular mechanism of RPLP1
and RPLP1P4 expression in breast cancer cells.Methods: Expression levels
of RPLP1 and RPLP1P4 were quantified using qRT-PCR with total RNAs
isolated from 7 normal tissues and 20 breast tumor tissues of 5 different
subtypes. Cell cycle progression was analyzed cytofluorimetrically with
the Beckman Coulter Gallios Flow Cytometer. Gene expression profiles were
performed using Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array and
analyzed using Partek Genomic Suite. Somatic copy number alterations
(SCNA) of RPLP1/RPLP1P4 were detected with the custom designed TaqMan
assays using ABI 7900HT real time PCR system. CopyCaller Software was
used for the SCNA analysis with RNase P as a reference.Results: Because
breast cancer subtypes have distinct origins and molecular
characteristics, we compared expression of RPLP1 and RPLP1P4 in 5
subtypes of breast tumors. Although RPLP1/RPLP1P4 is ubiquitously
expressed in normal and cancer tissues, their expression levels are
significantly increased in the basal-like subtype of breast cancer
compared to other subtypes with a 2.23 1.06 fold increase in basal-like
subtype compared to non-basal subtypes. Interfering RPLP1 expression with
siRNA dramatically decreased cell proliferation up to the level of
complete inhibition of cell proliferation. FACS data revealed reduced S
phase cells in RPLP1 silencing-cells compared to control, suggesting that
RPLP1-mediated regulation of cell proliferation is partly mediated
through regulation of cell cycle progression. Analysis of gene expression
profiles displayed down-regulation of genes involved in cellular
metabolism and DNA replication. When we assessed 44 formalin fixed
paraffin embedded breast tissues for SCNA of RPLP1/RPLP1P4, we observed
RPLP1 amplifications in 44% of tumor DNAs with no amplification observed
in normal tissues. The clear difference between tumors and normal tissues
demonstrates frequent RPLP1 amplification events during tumorigenesis,
which possibly drives an increase in RPLP1 expression and cell
proliferation in cancer.Conclusion: Our data suggest a subtype-specific
increased expression of a ribosomal protein and its pseudogene,
potentially driven by copy number alterations in breast tumors. Future
studies to understand the contributions of ribosomal protein genes and
their pseudogenes to human neoplasia are warranted.

