Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAIL-TZD combinatorial treatment induces apoptosis in prostate
cancer cells through modulation of AMPK signaling pathway


Prostate cancer is the second most frequently diagnosed cancer of men and
the fifth most common cancer overall. Treatment options for localized
disease include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormonal therapy, but
they are not effective in the advanced stages of the disease. Most of the
anticancer drugs in current use primarily act by inducing apoptosis in
target cells. So, the identification of novel targets for drug-induced
apoptosis will be useful for treating resistant forms. Tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a promising cancer
therapy that preferentially induces apoptosis in cancer cells. However,
many neoplasms are resistant to TRAIL by mechanisms that are poorly
understood. Our previous studies indicated that combinatorial treatment
with Troglitazone (TZD), a synthetic ligand for peroxisome
proliferator-activator receptor gamma and TRAIL can induce significant
apoptosis in TRAIL-resistant cancer cells. In this study we determined
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) as a potential target for
TRAIL-TZD-induced apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. AMPK is a family of
serine/threonine protein kinase and is highly conserved from yeast to
human. It consists of three subunits: a catalytic subunit and regulatory
and subunits. AMPK is a well-accepted target for the treatment of
metabolic syndrome and Type 2 diabetes. We used C42-DN (stably
overexpressing AMPK 1-dominant negative) and C42-EV (empty vector)
prostate cancer cell lines to study differences in TRAIL-TZD-induced
apoptosis. Our studies showed a dose dependent increase in TRAIL-induced
apoptosis with increasing concentrations of TZD (upto 100M), which was
significantly higher in C42-EV cells compared with C42-DN cells. The peak
of apoptosis was around 4h following treatment. Similarly, using MTT
assay, we observed a dramatic reduction in cell viability in the C42-EV
compared to C42-DN cells when treated with same concentrations of
TRAIL-TZD, thus suggesting that C42-DN cells were more resistant to this
treatment. In addition, time course studies with C42-EV cells showed an
increase in pAMPKT172 levels (indicating AMPK activation) and pACCS79
(downstream target of AMPK) levels coinciding with the time of apoptosis.
Small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of endogenous AMPK 1
expression showed a reduction of apoptosis in DU145 and LNCaP cells.
Studies are currently underway to determine whether knocking down both
AMPK 1 and 2 produces a more complete inhibition of apoptosis. These
studies suggest that apoptosis induction by TRAIL-TZD combination is
mediated via AMPK in prostate cancer cells.

