Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Artesunate inhibits multiple proinflammatory transcription factors
leading to the suppression of growth and induction of apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells


Prostate cancer (PCa) is common and a frequent cause of cancer death
among men worldwide. Moreover, PCa rates have risen quite significantly
in the last decade in Singapore men and although some of the increase can
be attributed to enhanced detection, much of the increased incidence is
associated with genetic alterations and life-style related factors.
Current therapies for metastatic prostate cancer are only marginally
effective, and hence new treatment modalities are urgently needed.
Considerable evidence suggests that chronic inflammation plays a pivotal
role in the development and progression of PCa. Thus, the agents that can
suppress inflammatory mediators have a potential in treatment of PCa. One
way to expedite drug development is to find new uses for drugs already in
clinical use. Hence we propose to investigate the role of artesunate, (a
drug approved for the treatment of multidrug-resistant malaria) in PCa
using diverse prostate cancer cell lines. In this study, we investigated
the effect of artesunate (ART) primarily on signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3(STAT3) signaling pathway in both androgen
independent (DU145) and androgen dependent (LNCaP) PCa cell lines and
also prospectively tested the hypothesis of NF-B and STAT3 inhibition
using a virtual predictive functional proteomics tumor pathway technology
platform. We found that ART inhibited constitutive and IL-6-induced
activation of STAT3 in DU145 and LNCaP cells in a dose and time dependent
manner. We observed that STAT3 suppression by ART was mediated through
the inhibition of activation of upstream kinases such as (c-Src, JAK1,
and JAK2) and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was also
involved in this process. Our preliminary findings further indicate that
ART also suppressed constitutive NF-B activation in PCa cells. ART
exhibited significant anti-proliferative effects and abrogated the
migratory/invasive potential of PCa cells. Moreover, ART down-regulated
the expression of various NF-B and STAT3 regulated gene products involved
in proliferation, survival and angiogenesis, also induced apoptosis in
PCa cells lines as evident by DNA fragmentation and Annexin V staining.
Overall our preliminary results from experimental and predictive studies
indicate that ART mediates its anti-tumor effects through suppression of
NF-B and STAT3 pathways in PCa.

