Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated NK cells efficiently kill Glioblastoma through
activating receptor-ligand interactions


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most malignant brain tumor, where the patients'
survival remains dismally low despite multimodal therapies. Due to the
immune suppressed status of GBM patients, adoptive cellular immunotherapy
might represent an attractive therapeutic strategy. We hypothesized that
allogeneic NK cells may be potent effectors against GBM due to their
direct cytotoxicity and immunomodulatory properties through cytokine
production. Nevertheless, it is not known how concurrent inhibitory and
activating signals coordinate to regulate NK effector function against
solid tumors. In vitro cytotoxicity assays using n=3 patient-derived GBM
and K562 cells co-cultured with NK cells obtained from n=9 healthy donors
revealed that activated NK cells efficiently killed GBM cells in a dose-
and donor-dependent manner. The GBM cells variably expressed MHC class I,
but highly expressed ligands for NKG2D receptor: MICA, ULBPs 1,2,3,5,6,
and to a less extent MICB by flow cytometric phenotyping. Activated NK
cells highly expressed NKp46, NKG2D, and NKG2A on the protein level.
Analysis of high resolution genotyping of NK cell Killer
Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIR) and HLA ligands expressed by GBM
revealed that NK cell cytotoxic potency was associated with activating
KIRs and NKG2D, and was partially independent of inhibitory KIRs
repertoire in vitro. Blocking NKG2D receptor with specific antibody
attenuated tumor lysis providing proof of concept for the contribution of
this receptor. Experiments with antibodies blocking KIR2DS2 and KIR2DS4
receptors are in progress. Efficacy of NK cells obtained from donors with
different KIR repertoires and infused intratumorally into human
GBM-bearing NOD-SCID mice was investigated. The primary end points were
animals' survival and mechanisms of therapeutic efficacy. Donor A lacked
activating KIR2DS2 and KIR2DS4 and had inhibitory KIR-HLA ligands
mismatched in the human GBM xenografts. In contrast, Donor B possessed
activating KIR2DS2 and partial deletion KIR2DS4, as well as, a full
repertoire of inhibitory receptors. NK cells from both donors
significantly prolonged animal survival after single dose treatment
compared to vehicle controls (p=0.0005 and p=0.0001; donor A and B
respectively). Despite diminished inhibitory KIR-HLA ligand mismatch,
donor B's NK cells extended the median survival to 163 days compared to
117.5 days of donor As NK cells. Furthermore, donor Bs NK cells
significantly increased tumor apoptosis compared to control (p=0.04) and
tumors treated with donor As NK cells (P=0.0004). Donor Bs NK cells
significantly diminished tumor proliferation (p=0.02) and angiogenesis
(p=0.04) compared to controls. In conclusion, allogeneic NK cells may be
potent effectors against GBM mediated by activating signals through
receptor-ligand interactions. However, further studies are required to
evaluate their toxicity and applicability to GBM management.

