Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated SHP2 collaborates with MYCN in neuroblastoma
tumorigenesis


Neuroblastoma, an embryonic tumor of peripheral sympathetic nervous
system (PSNS), accounts for 10% of all childhood cancer deaths. We
recently developed a robust zebrafish model of neuroblastoma and
demonstrated that activated ALK synergizes with MYCN by inhibiting a
developmentally-timed apoptotic response that is otherwise induced by
MYCN. Genomic studies show that PTPN11 (encoding SHP2) is the second most
frequently mutated genes in high-risk neuroblastoma. We have now used our
zebrafish model to ask whether mutationally activated SHP2 functions as
an oncogene in neuroblastoma. We developed a transgenic line in which
ptpn11E69K is overexpressed in the PSNS under control of the
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase promoter. Interestingly, ptpn11E69K synergized
with MYCN to accelerate the onset of neuroblastoma in the interrenal
gland (IRG), the zebrafish analogue of the adrenal medulla. Tumors began
to appear at 15 weeks in transgenic fish overexpressing MYCN alone,
whereas latency was shortened to 7 weeks and the penetrance was increased
more than four-fold in transgenic fish coexpressing MYCN and ptpn11E69K.
Coexpression of ptpn11E69K and MYCN also induced ganglioneuroma in the
sympathetic ganglia, an outcome that has not been observed in transgenic
fish overexpressing MYCN and activated ALK. In addition, coexpression of
ptpn11E69K and MYCN induced adrenal neuroblastic hyperplasia in the IRG
of all the transgenic fish at 5 weeks of age, a phenotype that has only
been observed in about 50% of transgenic fish overexpressing activated
ALK and MYCN or MYCN alone. Thus, these results suggest that activated
SHP2 can collaborate with MYCN in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis via
mechanisms different from those of activated ALK. Thus, zebrafish appears
to provide a robust model system for functional genomic analysis and for
the investigation of the mechanisms and pathways underlying genetic
alterations identified in integrative genomic studies.

