Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Derivation of bone trophic human prostate cancer cells


Introduction: Bone metastases continue to be the main source of morbidity
and mortality in prostate cancer patients. Determining the mechanism(s)
by which prostate cancer cells utilize the bone microenvironment to
survive and grow is key to developing strategies to prevent metastasis.
Such approaches could affect disease morbidity and mortality, as nearly
80% patients have bone metastases at the time of death. The finding that
disseminated cancer cells can be detected in 72% of patients prior to
prostatectomy led to the realization that prostate cancer cells
disseminate early and persist in the bone for extended periods of time
prior to detection. This may be due to factors within the metastatic
microenvironment that restrict cancer cell growth. Unfortunately, current
models of prostate cancer bone metastases are lacking, and the field
would greatly benefit from the creation of new bone trophic model cell
lines.Hypothesis: We hypothesize that the AR positive, human CWR22Rv1 can
be made bone trophic by serial passage through mice in an experimental
metastasis assay.Methods: CWR22Rv1 cells were engineered to express the
synthetic firefly luciferase luc 2, and injected into the left ventricle
of intact male, 8 week old NOD/SCID mice. Metastatic growth was assessed
weekly, and metastases were examined histologically at the experimental
endpoint. Bone metastatic cells were extracted, cultured and ultimately
re-injected to select for a sub-population of bone trophic human prostate
cancer cells.Results: CWR22Rv1 cells lodge in the skeleton where they
persist for approximately two weeks. The cells then undergo progressive
growth (as indicated by increasing signal intensity), culminating in
overt metastases at the experimental endpoint (8 weeks post injection).
The 145-fold increase in luciferase signal was accompanied by
osteoblastic-lesions in the skeleton, most notably calvarial lesions.
Several animals developed additional metastases in the hind limbs. Cells
that were passaged once or twice through animals exhibit increased bone
tropism, but are not simply more metastatic as indicated by whole body
luciferase signal.Conclusions: Passage through animals is successfully
generating bone trophic human prostate cancer cells. These baseline data
serves as a staring point for additional studies to more precisely define
the kinetics of metastatic growth in this model system. Future work will
identify molecular changes that occur in the prostate cancer cells and
the bone microenvironment both during and prior to metastatic
outgrowth.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

