Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common mutations in the hTERT promoter cause instability in
quadruplex DNA which is overcome by quadruplex stabilizing agents and
targeted oligonucleotides


Introduction: Telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) is a catalytic
subunit of the enzyme telomerase. It has recently been shown that the
hTERT promoter is commonly mutated (>75%) in a malignant melanoma and
glioblastoma. These mutations occur at four sites in a G-rich region
which has previously been shown to form quadruplex DNA and to
downregulate hTERT expression. We have tested the hypothesis that
mutations in the quadruplex-forming region of the hTERT promoter
destabilize quadruplex-formation resulting in increased hTERT expression
and cellular proliferation.Methods: Quadruplex formation by the mutated
and wild type hTERT promoter oligonucleotides was determined by circular
dichroism. Analytical ultracentrifugation was used for sedimentation
equilibrium analysis. Thermal denaturation was used to characterize the
relative stability of the mutated and wild type oligonucleotides. Four
cancer cell lines obtained from ATCC were used to characterize the growth
inhibitory effect of mutated and wild type oligonucleotides (A549, Calu1,
A375, T24). The MTT assay was used for the cell proliferation
experiments.Results: In order to characterize the effects of the hTERT
mutations, the biophysical properties of structures formed by wild-type
and mutant TERT sequences were explored by several methods. Circular
dichroism and thermal denaturation studies showed that all sequences
formed quadruplex structures but that those formed by mutant sequences
were less stable than the wild-type. Analytical ultracentrifugation
showed that all sequences formed one major unimolecular folded form but
that mutant sequences had a greater tendency to form misfolded aggregated
species than the wild-type. Addition of the quadruplex binder TmPyP4 to
the mutant sequences lessened that amount of such aggregates and resulted
in sedimentation profiles that closely resembled the wild-type sequences.
Treatment of cells with the wild type hTERT promoter sequence with the
mutated or wild type oligonucleotides had very little effect on cell
growth. However, treatment of cells with mutated hTERT promoter sequence
resulted in significant growth inhibition that was time and concentration
dependent.Conclusions: The common mutations in the hTERT promoter
destabilize quadruplex formation and likely prevent quadruplex-mediated
transcriptional silencing. This instability can be overcome by
quadruplex-binding drugs. The growth of cell lines containing the hTERT
promoter mutations is inhibited by oligonucleotides encoding the wild
type and mutated sequences. We believe that this occurs by stabilization
of the mutated quadruplex, resulting in transcriptional silencing.

