Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of long noncoding RNA SChLAP1 in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the second most common epithelial cancer and second
leading cause of cancer death in men. Prostate cancers remain indolent in
the majority of individuals but behave aggressively in a minority of
patients. The molecular basis for this clinical heterogeneity remains
incompletely understood. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as a
prominent layer of transcriptional regulation implicated in various
biological and disease processes, including several types of cancer.
Therefore, we hypothesized that lncRNAs may play a role in mediating
aggressive prostate cancer.Previously, our lab utilized RNA sequencing
across a cohort of prostate tissues to discover differentially expressed
lncRNAs in cancer versus benign samples. We identifed a novel transcript
termed SChLAP1 (Second Chromosome Locus Associated with Prostate-1)
overexpressed in a subset of localized and metastatic cancers. Clinical
analyses showed that SChLAP1 levels independently predict poor outcomes,
including metastasis and prostate cancer-specific mortality. In vitro and
in vivo experiments indicated that SChLAP1 is critical for cancer cell
invasiveness and metastasis. Mechanistically, we found that SChLAP1 binds
to and antagonizes the genome-wide localization of the tumor-suppressive
SWI/SNF nucleosome-remodeling complex.Given the scaffolding capabilities
of lncRNAs, previous studies describing an inhibitory role of SWI/SNF on
PRC2 function, and the known oncogenic role of PRC2 in prostate cancer,
we hypothesized that SChLAP1 may mediate PRC2 activity in conjunction
with SWI/SNF to promote aggressive disease. Here, we show that a
SChLAP1-associated gene signature nominates PRC2-related concepts, and in
vitro studies indicate an interaction between SChLAP1 and PRC2 that
enhances PRC2 genome-wide localization as well as its histone
methyltransferase activity. These results suggest a mechanistic model in
which SChLAP1 simultaneously engages multiple epigenetic complexes,
inhibiting tumor-suppressive functions of SWI/SNF while enhancing
oncogenic activity of PRC2, which leads to aggressive prostate cancer.

