Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug repurposing to treat melanoma brain metastases


Despite recent therapeutic advances in the management of patients with
metastatic melanoma, brain metastases remain an intractable problem. It
has proven difficult to identify and target single genes or pathways
critical to brain metastasis formation. In this work we set out to
explore a more global and preventive treatment approach to melanoma brain
metastases within an established xenograft model of human melanoma. Mice
were injected intracardially under ultrasound guidance and followed for
six weeks with whole-body BLI and brain MRI. Tumor-bearing brains,
adrenals, ovaries, and femurs were harvested and enzymatically
dissociated before three tumor cell samples from each organ were
flow-sorted and subjected to RNA sequencing. We developed a combined
workflow of several independent computational and statistical analyses
based on differential expression, and defined a brain metastasis gene
signature of 54 upregulated and 54 downregulated genes. We then queried
the Connectivity Map database using our 108-gene signature for candidate
drugs, i.e. drugs that induce an opposite gene expression profile in
various cancer cell lines. Three of the top ten drugs, already in use for
other clinical conditions, showed significant efficacy in monolayer
proliferation assays and colony forming assays with two brain-tropic
melanoma cell lines and one brain-tropic lung cancer cell line. To
examine these results in vivo, we used a highly standardized and
predictive model system with automated MRI-based quantification of
nanoparticle-labeled cells in the mouse brain following intracardiac
injection of human melanoma cells. Treatment was started shortly after
verification of comparable tumor cell exposure in the mouse brains and
animals were monitored with whole-body BLI and brain MRI. Preliminary
results showed promising therapeutic effects with respect to brain
metastatic burden and survival, as well as acceptable toxicity profiles.
We are currently validating these results on a larger scale in vivo, in
other models, as well as applying systems biology and network modeling
approaches to explore the fundamental mechanisms of action. Together, our
results demonstrate a previously unrecognized potential for drug
repurposing in the treatment of patients at risk of developing melanoma
brain metastases or with clinically occult micrometastatic disease.
Finding new uses for old drugs can greatly expedite translation to
clinical practice; thus, further investigations are warranted to
determine the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of these therapies.

