Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of a tankyrase inhibitor on the small intestine tissue
homeostasis


In the small intestine the Wnt/-catenin pathway is involved in regulation
of stem cells and tissue homeostasis. Aberrant Wnt signaling is known to
cause intestinal cancers. Tankyrase enzymes play crucial roles in the
regulation of the Wnt signaling pathway. Inhibition of tankyrase activity
is an effective way of inhibiting Wnt/-catenin signaling. A small
molecule tankyrase inhibitor, G007-LK, was developed that inhibits tumor
growth in a APC-mutant colorectal cancer xenograft model. In in vivo
experiments at high doses (60 mg/kg), G007-LK treatment resulted in
severe necrosis and inflammation in the small intestine, possibly
affecting the stem cells. Different cell populations in the small
intestine have been shown to have stem cell properties, including the
Lgr5+ cell population located at the bottom of the crypts and the cells
residing in +4 position counting from the crypt base. Both of these cell
populations can give rise to all the various cell types of the small
intestine.In the current project, we have used in vivo models to address
the effect of the tankyrase inhibitor, G007-LK, on small intestine tissue
homeostasis. H&E staining of fixed tissue sections showed no significant
differences between mice treated with 10 mg/kg G007-LK or vehicle. We
performed lineage tracing from the Lgr5+ stem cells of the small
intestine and observed that treatment with G007-LK reduced the number of
cells traced from Lgr5+ stem cells. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining
for the proliferation marker Ki67 showed reduced number of positive cells
in the small intestinal crypts of the G007-LK- compared to
vehicle-treated mice. As expected, IHC staining for -catenin showed
reduced number of positive nuclei in the G007-LK- compared to
vehicle-treated mice, suggesting reduced signaling via the Wnt/-catenin
pathway.Taken together, our data show that a daily dose of the tankyrase
inhibitor G007-LK (10 mg/kg), is well tolerated by mice. Administration
of the tankyrase inhibitor to the mice reduces the number of lineage
traced cells from the Lgr5+ stem cell population in the small intestine,
without altering the general histology of the tissue.

