Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing a potent and selective nonreplicating adenoviral mutant
(Ad5-TV-CU), with gene expression controlled by androgen
receptor-dependent activation domains in the TMPRSS2 gene, as a novel
prodrug-converting enzyme therapy for prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) progression is dependent on transcriptional
activation of the androgen receptor (AR) in the majority of cases.
Therefore, therapies include anti-androgens, which decrease levels of
circulating androgens and inhibit AR activity. However, resistance
inevitably develops, resulting in more aggressive, incurable late-stage
disease with intact or constitutively active AR signaling. There is
currently no cure for castration-resistant metastatic PCa and novel
therapies are needed.A major AR-regulated gene is TMPRSS2, which is
commonly expressed at higher levels in cancer than normal prostate. In
50% of PCa cases the TMPRSS2 promoter is fused to the oncogenic
transcriptional regulator ERG. We generated TMPRSS2 promoter and enhancer
constructs to drive the prodrug-converting chimeric enzyme cytosine
deaminase uracil phosphoribosyl transferase (CD/UPRT) from an adenoviral
vector to investigate the therapeutic efficacy in various PCa models.The
selectivity and transcriptional efficiency of various promoter and
enhancer regions containing Androgen response elements (ARE's) were
investigated after cloning TMPRSS2 constructs driving Luciferase (Luc)
expression into the versatile expression vector VISA (VP16-GAL4-WPRE
integrated systemic amplifier) (Professor Hung, M.D Anderson, TX,USA) to
enhance promoter activity. Comparison with the traditional PSA promoter
and the chimeric PSA promoter/enhancer in the VISA vector demonstrated
the TMPRSS2 construct to be superior by inducing 3.5 fold and 2.3 fold
levels of luciferase expression, respectively. When the Luc-gene was
replaced with CD/UPRT, specific and dose-dependent cell killing was
observed in 22RV1 (AR+) cells when the non-toxic prodrug 5-flourocytosine
(5-FC) was administered. No cell death was observed in primary prostate
epithelial cells (PrEC), or immortalized prostate cell lines PNT1A or
PNT2 (AR-).To increase transfection efficiency of the CD/UPRT gene, the
TMPRSS2-VISA-CD/UPRT expression cassette was inserted into a
non-replicating adenovirus (Ad5-TV-C/U) replacing the E1-genes.
Ad5-TV-C/U was characterized and protein expression of the CD/UPRT gene
was detected at high levels post infection in 22RV1, LNCaP, and VCaP
cells (AR+). Dose-dependent decreases in EC50-values were observed upon
infection with Ad5-TV-C/U in combination with low doses of 5-FC in a
number of cell lines, for example 22RV1 cells, where EC50-values
decreased from 571ppc 55 to 174ppc 30.These results demonstrate that
Ad5-TV-C/U is both selective and efficacious in killing AR-positive PCa
cells in combination with non-toxic 5-FC. Verification of these findings
in preclinical in vivo models is in progress.

