Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin use is not associated with pancreatic cancer risk in a
clinic-based case-control study conducted in the San Francisco Bay Area,
California


Patients with pancreatic cancer (PC) are commonly diagnosed at advanced
stages of the disease, at which point cure is no longer possible. A
better understanding of risk or protective factors for PC may inform
prevention and/or early detection strategies. Metformin, a commonly used
drug for type II diabetes (DM2), has been shown in some observational
clinical studies to reduce the risk of several cancer types, including
PC. Its antineoplastic effects occur through inhibition of mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) and induction of cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, among other mechanisms. The current case-control study
addresses two distinct research questions: whether metformin use is
associated with PC risk among those with DM2, and whether metformin
modulates the risk of PC associated with DM2.We recruited 536 cases and
869 controls, predominantly from University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF) medical and surgical oncology clinics (cases) and general medicine
clinics (controls), over a six-year period (2006-2011). Controls were
frequency-matched to cases by sex and age in 5-year groups. Case
diagnoses were confirmed by patient medical record and cancer registry
data. Direct interviews were conducted by trained interviewers using an
epidemiological risk factor questionnaire. The association between
metformin use and PC risk among diabetics was analyzed using propensity
score-weighted unconditional logistic regression, whereas the effect of
metformin use on the association between DM2 and PC in the total study
population was analyzed using standard multivariable logistic
models.Metformin was the most common anti-diabetic drug used by DM2 study
participants (66.5%). Among DM2 participants (N=170), ever use of
metformin was not associated with PC risk in adjusted models (OR: 1.01,
95%CI: 0.61-1.68). Similarly, duration of metformin use was not
statistically significantly associated with PC risk when also adjusted
for DM2 duration. Among the total study population (N=1405), DM2 was not
statistically significantly associated with PC risk (adjusted OR: 1.28,
95%CI: 0.81-2.00). However, risk was inversely associated with DM2
duration; participants whose DM2 was diagnosed 1-5 years prior to PC
diagnosis/interview were at markedly increased risk (OR: 2.47, 95%CI:
1.25-4.85). Stratification of participants with DM2 by metformin use
revealed no difference in risk between never (OR: 1.44, 95%CI: 0.78-2.67)
and ever users (OR: 1.19, 95%CI: 0.72-1.99) relative to non-DM2
participants. PC risk also did not differ across groups of metformin or
DM2 duration.In this clinic-based case-control study of PC, metformin use
was not associated with PC risk. Specifically, our results suggest that
metformin is neither associated with PC risk in those with DM2, nor does
it attenuate or exacerbate PC risk associated with DM2.

