Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of TOM40 (translocase in the outer mitochondrial
membrane 40) inhibits the cell proliferation, invasion and migration
abilities in ovarian cancer cell lines


Background: Mitochondria are essential for energy conversation and
cellular metabolism in eukaryotic cell. Mitochondria contain
mitochondrial proteins that are encoded in the nucleus and synthesized in
cytosol. Synthesized mitochondrial proteins are specially sorted by
sub-mitochondrial compartment and then transported to their functional
location. If mitochondrial proteins are not transported to their specific
regions, it is reported that Mitochondria has a tendency to be implicated
in various diseases including cancer. Mitochondria consist of
mitochondrial outer membrane and inner membrane, especially, TOM complex
are integrated in mitochondrial outer membrane. TOM40 is a central
component of TOM complex has General import pore (GIP) to pass
mitochondrial pre-protein. The goal of this study is to investigate the
function of TOM40 in ovarian cancer.Methods: At first, we performed
microarray to identify new target gene in ovarian cancer for nine human
ovarian cancer cell line and seven human ovarian surface epithelial cell
lines (HOSEs). We investigated target gene expression level in ovarian
cancer cell line by RT-PCR and Western blot. To evaluate the association
of target gene expression level and clinicopatholigical parameter in
ovarian cancer, we carried out immunohistochemistry by using normal and
ovarian cancer tissue.Second, we constructed stable DOV-13 and RMUG-S
cell lines for overexpression and knock down of TOM40 protein using
lentiviral system. We carried out proliferation, invasion and migration
assay of each individual stable cell line.Results: We identified TOM40 as
a new target gene for ovarian cancer by microarray data that was
overexpressed in all nine human ovarian cancer cell lines than HOSEs.
TOM40 protein level in borderline and cancer tissue was higher than
normal tissue and benign tissue. TOM40 immuno-staining score of normal
ovarian tissues is 1.23 (95% CI, 0.44-2.01) that compare with TOM40
immuno-staining score of benign, borderline, and epithelial ovarian
tumors is 1.23 (95% CI, 0.44-2.01), 1.41 (95% CI, 0.45-2.37), 3.42 (95%
CI, 2.65-4.20), and 5.04 (95% CI, 4.82-5.27), respectively.We understood
TOM40 expression level of DOV-13 cells and RMUG-S cells is lower and
higher than other ovarian cancer cell line. TOM40 overexpression in
DOV-13 cell line inhibited the cell proliferation, invasion and migration
than that of control cell line. TOM40 knock down in RMUG-S cell line
induced cell proliferation, invasion and migration abilities than in
control RMUG-S cell line.Conclusion: It is important to transport
pathways of mitochondrial proteins, actually, the paper discussing
directly association of TOM complex involving mitochondrial proteins
transport and various diseases including cancer is not found. Our results
suggest that TOM40 can be a role as putative tumor suppressor for ovarian
cancer.

