Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of CDK4 and MEK as a combination treatment strategy
for metastatic colorectal cancer


Aberrant hyperactivation of KRAS plays a prominent role in tumor
initiation and progression of a broad spectrum of human malignancies. The
incidence of KRAS mutations is especially high in colorectal cancers,
where it occurs at a frequency of roughly 50%. The present study
addresses the hypothesis that dual targeting of CDK4 and MEK represents a
viable treatment strategy for the subpopulation of colorectal cancers
exhibiting hyperactivated KRAS signaling. We have generated both in vitro
and in vivo data in highly passaged colorectal xenograft models to
provide compelling support for further exploration of this combination
treatment strategy. We have now turned to the study of primary human
models that are anticipated to be more predictive of ultimate clinical
activity in patients. A heterogeneous panel of low passage colorectal
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) has been established from biospecimens
procured during patient surgeries conducted at our institution (n=12).
All xenograft models have been genomically profiled and their histologies
mimicked those observed in the original samples. As anticipated,
approximately half of these models harbor an oncogenic KRAS mutation and
exhibit widely differing histologies, consistent with the heterogeneity
encountered in the clinic. Immunoblotting analysis has further revealed
that that the majority (>80%) are positive for both phosphorylated RB and
constitutive pERK expression and are therefore candidates for treatment
regimens combining inhibitors of CDK4 and MEK. Employing the CDK4
inhibitor palbociclib and multiple MEK inhibitors, in vivo efficacy
studies are ongoing against our colorectal PDX panel. Preliminary data
have shown a higher frequency of regressions in the combination arm
compared to either single agent arm at the respective maximum tolerated
doses. Our results therefore suggest that combined inhibition of CDK4 and
MEK may provide an attractive therapeutic strategy for the treatment of
colorectal cancer.

