Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the molecular nature of cancer cell lines


Large-scale cancer genome programs have generated rich data of genetic
abnormalities observed in thousands of clinical patient tumors, which
provides a major opportunity to develop a landscape of molecular
aberrations across tumor types and propose new therapeutic targets.
Although human tumor cell lines have been important tools for the cancer
researcher for decades, there is a lack of bio-functional validation of
genetic alterations and systematic molecular characterization across
commonly used cell lines in this genomic age. To meet the need of
applying cancer genome knowledge to facilitate basic and translational
cancer research, an updated and accurate knowledge of the cell lines in
use, particularly from a molecular viewpoint, is critical for in vitro
studies. Here, we show systematic molecular characterization and
clustering of 90 authenticated human tumor cell lines, which represent
the most common human cancer types found in the clinic, such as lung,
breast, colon, pancreatic, skin cancer and so on. By next generation
sequencing and molecular profiling, those tumor cell lines were fully
analyzed to capture the driver gene mutations, DNA copy number
variations, gene expressions, protein expressions and relevant cell
signaling pathway activations. In addition to driver mutations such as
BRAF V600, KRAS G12, PI3K E545 and EGFR T790, the gene copy number
amplifications of AKT, FGFR, MET, ERBB2 and deletion of PTEN are
presented in this work. Moreover, correlating with the verified genetic
alternations, the endogenous basal levels of protein expression and
signaling pathway activations within the cells were analyzed by western
blot and immunofluorescence staining. A set of 6 wild type control cell
lines that were derived from either normal tissues or tumors were
characterized in parallel. Furthermore, live cell growth kinetics was
continually monitored by label-free cell based assay. Finally, the cell
lines are clustered into 10 genetic alteration panels according to driver
genes, critical protein kinases, or key components of signaling pathways.
Cell lines are essential models for progressing our understanding of the
cancer genome, as they allow for the functional and biological validation
of the genetic alterations proposed by NGS data. The genetic alteration
tumor cell panels and their molecular signature profiles provide powerful
tools to accelerate the discoveries in basic cancer research, compound
screening, biomarker selection, pathway analysis, and targeted
therapeutic development.

