Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inferred regulatory interaction network from prostate cancer
reveals potential regulators coordinating progression and metastasis


Introduction: Significant genomic reprogramming occurs when prostate
cancer cells acquire androgen receptor (AR) independent growth and
metastasize to remote sites. Recent whole genome sequencing studies have
noted recurrent gene deletion, amplification, fusion and widespread
chromoplexy associated with prostate cancer progression. Synchronizing
such a multistep multicomponent process, involving both cancer cells and
tumor microenvironment, to gain growth advantage is challenging without a
master coordinator. Genome-wide siRNA screenings have been undertaken to
identify regulators driving such a reprogramming process affecting cancer
cell themselves, but not the necessary interaction with host tissue.
Thereby a novel approach was developed in the current work to uncover
potential regulators that coordinate major cancer hallmarks and
tumor-host interactions leading to prostate cancer progression. Methods:
A network of potential regulatory interactions among genes was derived
from matched prostate cancer expression profiles and copy number
variation (CNV) datasets. The relevance of the inferred network was
examined by experimentally derived AR target networks and literature
mining- based cancer gene interaction networks. Subsequently, a network
topology-based matrix, critical node index, was established to identify
network modules significantly associated with biochemical recurrencea
clinical surrogate marker representing prostate cancer progression.
Results: When bench-marked with established prostate cancer gene sets,
the critical node downstream modules were more significantly enriched for
individual genes with strong prognostic power (PIntroduction: Significant
genomic reprogramming occurs when prostate cancer cells acquire androgen
receptor (AR) independent growth and metastasize to remote sites. Recent
whole genome sequencing studies have noted recurrent gene deletion,
amplification, fusion and widespread chromoplexy associated with prostate
cancer progression. Synchronizing such a multistep multicomponent
process, involving both cancer cells and tumor microenvironment, to gain
growth advantage is challenging without a master coordinator. Genome-wide
siRNA screenings have been undertaken to identify regulators driving such
a reprogramming process affecting cancer cell themselves, but not the
necessary interaction with host tissue. Thereby a novel approach was
developed in the current work to uncover potential regulators that
coordinate major cancer hallmarks and tumor-host interactions leading to
prostate cancer progression. Methods: A network of potential regulatory
interactions among genes was derived from matched prostate cancer
expression profiles and copy number variation (CNV) datasets. The
relevance of the inferred network was examined by experimentally derived
AR target networks and literature mining- based cancer gene interaction
networks. Subsequently, a network topology-based matrix, critical node
index, was established to identify network modules significantly
associated with biochemical recurrencea clinical surrogate marker
representing prostate cancer progression. Results: When bench-marked with
established prostate cancer gene sets, the critical node downstream
modules were more significantly enriched for individual genes with strong
prognostic power (P<1E-5). Furthermore, compounds, which are capable of
reversing expression patterns of individual top critical node downstream
modules, either inhibited cancer cell growth or tumor progression in
public datasets and literature. More importantly, overexpression or knock
down of individual critical nodes in LNCaP, 22RV1, and PC3 prostate
cancer cell lines demonstrated the potential of critical nodes to
coordinate AR-independent growth through regulating host tissue immune
interactions. Conclusion: Our preliminary results imply the existence of
network modules that can synchronize the effects of genomic reprogramming
during prostate cancer progression and metastasis.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

