Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA inhibit medulloblastoma growth


Background/Aim: Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenic acid (EPA)
are two essential omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid that have been shown
to exert antitumoral effects in several cancer types, both in vitro and
in vivo. DHA has also been shown to protect neural cells from apoptosis
and is of importance in the maintenance of normal brain development and
function.Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in
children with a poor 5-year survival of only 50-60%. It is a highly
invasive embryonal neuroepithelial tumor that arises in the cerebellum
and has a tendency to disseminate throughout the CNS early in its course.
Multimodal treatment is always necessary in the form of surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. However, treatment for this disease often
results in significant endocrinological and intellectual sequelae. The
neuroprotective and antitumoral properties of omega-3 fatty acids could
therefore be of great benefit in this patient group. Here we aim to
investigate the effect of DHA and EPA in medulloblastoma.Methods:
Cytotoxic activity of DHA and EPA was studied in cell viability assay in
a panel of medulloblastoma cell lines. The molecular mechanisms were
characterized using cell- and molecular biology techniques.Results: By
adding different concentrations of DHA and EPA we could demonstrate IC50s
ranging between 1.9 and 46 M for DHA and 3.8 and 68 M for EPA in the six
examined medulloblastoma cell lines. All cell lines showed greater
sensitivity for DHA than EPA. Preliminary data showed that treatment with
DHA inhibited the prostaglandin E2 production in medulloblastoma cells,
indicating a possible mechanism of action.Conclusions: Medulloblastoma
cells are highly sensitive to omega-3 induced toxicity. Previous studies
have showed that DHA can protect neurons from apoptosis. Therefore,
omega-3 fatty acids are good candidates for improving medulloblastoma
therapy by acting as both sword and shield by killing off cancer cells
while protecting healthy neurons from therapy induced toxicity, thus
possibly both inhibiting tumor growth and reducing the sequelae
associated with other modes of brain tumor treatment.

