Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A GNAS mutation found in pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasms changes mucin gene expression and gene expression profiles


Background: GNAS, a gene encoding G-protein stimulating alpha subunit, is
frequently mutated in pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms
(IPMNs) that are indolent neoplasms secreting abundant mucin and are
considered to be one of precursors of pancreatic cancer. GNAS mutation is
not found in conventional ductal adenocarcinomas of the pancreas or
pancreatic cystic neoplasms except IPMN. Mutated GNAS is supposed to
upregulate intracellular cAMP and activate GPCR pathway, however, its
phenotype in pancreatic ductal cells is unknown.Methods: To determine the
functional significance of GNAS mutation, we examined in vitro phenotypes
of cells of pancreatic ductal lineage, HPDE, PK-8, PCI-35, and MIA
PaCa-2, with exogenous expression of either wild-type or mutated (R201H)
GNAS. cAMP assay, real time PCR for mucin gene expressions, serial
analysis of gene expression (SAGE) with pathway analysis using KEGG,
colony formation assay and MTT assay for proliferation, and flow
cytometry for cell cycle were performed. Interactions between GPCR, MAPK
and PI3K pathways for expression of mucin genes were also
determined.Results: The exogenous GNAS induced increasing of
intracellular cAMP, however, the degree of increasing appeared to be
cell-type specific. The exogenous GNAS showed no obvious cell-growth
promotion or cell cycle alterations but suppressions of proliferation and
survival of some cells. In SAGE analysis, the exogenous GNAS induced
varying degrees of alterations in global gene expression profiles. PK-8
exhibited drastic alterations in the gene expression profile, which
indicated that it was most sensitive to the mutated GNAS among the cells
examined. Moreover, the exogenous GNAS upregulated expression of MUC2 and
MUC5AC in PK-8 and HPDE. On the other hand, PCI-35 and MIA PaCa-2 cells
exhibited modest change of gene expression profiles and downregulation of
mucin genes. Pathway analysis revealed that mutated GNAS altered
expression of genes involved in PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways.
Furthermore, the experiments using MAPK and PI3K inhibitors clarified
that these signaling contributed mucin gene expressions as GPCR did,
however, their roles for mucin gene expressions were diverse and
cell-type specific.Conclusion: Mutated GNAS found in IPMNs can
extensively alter gene expression profiles, including expression of mucin
genes, with the interaction with MAPK and PI3K pathways in pancreatic
ductal-lineage cells, which may determine the characteristic phenotype of
the neoplasm.

