Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of cabozantinib activity in diverse prostate cancer
xenograft models


Cabozantinib (cabo), an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases including MET,
VEGFR2, RET, KIT, and AXL, is undergoing clinical investigation in
patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). A phase II
randomized discontinuation trial of cabo showed clinical activity in CRPC
patients. However, not all patients responded to cabo, and most of the
responding patients eventually experienced disease progression. The
objective of our study was to evaluate the efficacy of cabo in a
preclinical setting using xenograft models of CRPC with differential
phenotypes to obtain insight into which tumor types might be sensitive to
cabo, and to investigate mechanisms of action of this agent.We used LuCaP
35CR, a PTEN- ERG+ Rb+ CRPC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) that exhibits
amplification of the androgen receptor (AR); LuCaP 96CR, a PTEN+ ERG- Rb+
CRPC PDX with high levels of intra-tumoral androgens; LuCaP 86.2, a PTEN-
ERG+ Rb- CRPC PDX that expresses the AR v5-7 variant and is not
responsive to endocrine therapy; and LuCaP 93, a PTEN- ERG- Rb-
neuroendocrine CRPC PDX. Expression of cabo targets in these models was
determined by qPCR. Animals were treated with 30 mg/kg cabo p.o. for six
weeks (5d on/2d off), and tumor volume (TV), serum PSA and body weights
were monitored. IHC and expression arrays were used to analyze effects of
cabo. Cabo was effective in halting tumor growth in all four PDXs.
Significant inhibition of TV was evident after one week of cabo treatment
compared to control groups. PSA values were also significantly lower
after one week of the treatment in all three adenocarcinomas.
Furthermore, cabo treatment resulted in significant survival benefits in
LuCaP 35CR, LuCaP 96CR and LuCaP 93 without significant decreases in body
weight. IHC analysis showed decreased microvessel density in all
cabo-treated groups vs control groups, suggesting effects on tumor
environment. qPCR analysis showed that all models expressed some cabo
targets though at different levels, but we did not observe any
associations between magnitude of cabo effects and levels of the its
targets in the tumors; inhibition of LuCaP 93, which expresses the
highest levels of cabo targets, was similar to that of LuCaP 96CR, which
expresses low levels of cabo targets. Our analyses of expression profiles
of tumors following cabo treatment showed very little overlap between the
models. However, E2F1 signaling, was inhibited by cabo in Rb- PDXs LuCaP
93 and LuCaP 86.2, but not in the Rb+ PDXs LuCaP 35CR and LuCaP 96CR.
Also, expression of genes regulated by androgen was increased in the Rb-
tumors and decreased (LuCaP 35CR) or was not altered (LuCaP 96CR) in the
Rb+ tumors, and the levels of nuclear AR showed a similar pattern.
Further investigations are ongoing to obtain more detailed insight into
mechanisms of cabo effects.

