Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX3 plays an oncogenic role in Ewing sarcoma cells


Ewing sarcomas are aggressive, poorly differentiated pediatric tumors of
bone and soft tissue. Ewing sarcoma affects one to three people per
million every year and is the second most common pediatric bone
malignancy after osteosarcoma. Approximately 85% of Ewing sarcomas harbor
the EWS-FLI fusion protein, which arises from a chromosomal
translocation, t(11:22)(q24:q12). EWS-FLI interacts with numerous
lineage-essential transcription factors to maintain mesenchymal
progenitors in an undifferentiated state. We previously showed that
EWS-FLI binds the osteogenic transcription factor RUNX2, and prevents
osteoblast differentiation. RUNX3 is highly homologous to RUNX2 and
participates in the mesenchymal-derived bone formation. RUNX3 has been
described as both a tumor suppressor and an oncogene in different tumor
types.In this study, we investigated the role of RUNX3 in Ewing Sarcoma.
RUNX3 was detected in all Ewing sarcoma cells examined (7/7 cell lines,
and 4/4 primary tumors), whereas RUNX2 was detected in only 73% of these
specimens. Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that RUNX3 binds to
EWS-FLI via its Runt domain, which is >91% identical to the Runt domain
in RUNX2. The interaction between RUNX3 and EWS-FLI in cell nuclei was
confirmed by immunofluorescence. Moreover, EWS-FLI interactions prevented
RUNX3 from activating the transcription of a RUNX-responsive reporter,
p6OSE2.To determine the role of RUNX3 in Ewing sarcoma cell growth, we
stably suppressed RUNX3 expression in the Ewing sarcoma cell line A673
with shRNAs. In anchorage independent growth assays in soft agar,
RUNX3-deficient A673 cells formed smaller colonies than cells expressing
scrambled shRNAs. Consistent with the smaller colonies, RUNX3 suppressed
cells had increased expression of the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor
p21. Taken together, these results suggest and oncogenic role for RUNX3
in Ewing sarcoma.

