Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD90(+) intraperitoneal mesothelial-like cells (MLC) promote
peritoneal metastasis by forming a tumor permissive microenvironment


Background: Peritoneal cavity is a common metastatic site of
gastrointestinal as well as ovarian cancer, but the mechanisms to develop
peritoneal metastasis has not been fully elucidated.Method: Peritoneal
fluids were obtained in patients with liver cirrhosis or gastrointestinal
cancer, and cells were cultured on collagen-coated plate and their
characteristics were functionally analyzed both in vitro and in
vivo.Results: We found that CD90(+)CD45(-) cells exist as a minor
population (0.016.81%) in human peritoneal fluids. However, those cells
vigorously grew in culture on type I collagen-coated plate, showing the
morphology of mesothelial cells, and names as mesothelial-like cells
(MLC). The cultured MLC, when injected into the abdominal cavity of nude
mice whose peritoneum was scratched by mechanical scraping, were
incorporated into the damaged peritoneum. Interestingly, the MLC
possessed the potential to differentiate into adipocytes, osteocytes, and
chondrocytes in appropriate culture conditions. Moreover, the MLC
markedly suppressed T cell proliferation stimulated with coated anti-CD3
mAb. Those findings are identical to the characteristics reported for
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Moreover, by the stimulation of TGF-, the
MLC highly expressed type I collagen, vimentin, -smooth muscle actin
(SMA) and Fibroblast activated protein (FAP)-, which are characteristics
of activated myofibroblasts. From these facts, MLC with CD45(-)CD90(+)
phenotype are supposed to be a intraperitoneal MSC. Then, we examined the
possible role of the MLC on the development of peritoneal metastasis.
Intraperitoneal co-injection of PKH26 stained MLC with human gastric
cancer cell line, MKN45, significantly enhanced the rate of metastatic
formation on peritoneum in nude mice. Histological examination revealed
that many MLC are engrafted in metastatic nodules and they were mainly
located at fibrous area in peritoneal nodules. Immunostaining showed that
the MLC in peritoneal nodules are positive for type I collagen. Finally,
Dasatinib, a potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor, strongly inhibited the in
vitro proliferation of MLC, but had no effects on MKN45. However, oral
administration of Dasatinib significantly inhibited the development of
peritoneal metastasis of MKN45, and the tumor nodules developed in
Dasatinib-treated mice showed significantly less fibrous
components.Conclusion: These facts strongly suggests that intraperitoneal
free floating MLC play a positive role on the development of peritoneal
metastasis, possibly though the production of tumor permissive
microenvironment and thus the functional blockade of MLC can be a
reasonable strategy to treat peritoneal recurrences in abdominal
malignancy.

