Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic activation of RAS and RAF induce distinct ERK activation
in the colon


Background and aims: Activation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway occurs
frequently in colorectal cancer (CRC), typically a result of somatic
mutations to either KRAS or BRAF. These mutations are mutually exclusive,
however, indicating that either alteration is sufficient to deregulate
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. The phenotypic
properties of CRCs harboring either KRAS or BRAF mutation, are
dissimilar, particularly with respect to their histological progression.
In precancerous lesions, KRAS mutations are common to serrated and
non-serrated hyperplastic aberrant crypt foci (ACF), whereas BRAF
mutations are rarely found in non-serrated hyperplastic ACF. These
earlier observations suggest that, despite sharing a common pathway,
somatic activation of KRAS or BRAF may differentially affect downstream
signaling events. In the following study, we examine the affects of KRAS
and BRAF mutations on downstream signaling in genetically engineered
mouse models. Methods: Transgenic mice were generated that express mutant
forms of KRAS or BRAF within the colonic epithelium by crossing
LSL-KRASG12D and LSL-BRAFV600E mice to Carbonic anhydrase 1 (Car1)-Cre
mice. Colons were harvested from both KRAS and BRAF mutant mice at 8
weeks of age for histological and molecular evaluation; Car1-Cre mice
served as a control for subsequent histological and molecular analyses.
Results: Both KRAS and BRAF mutant mice developed widespread hyperplasia
throughout the colonic epithelium by 8 weeks of age. Hyperplastic
morphology is typified by an extreme lengthening of colonic crypts, and
by the development of large, prominent goblet cells when compared with
control colon. No such changes are found in the small intestine. Notably,
crypt length is shorter in BRAF compared to KRAS mutant mice. Western
blot analysis of colonic mucosa revealed that both KRAS and BRAF mutant
mice have high levels of phosphorylated MEK and ERK expression compared
to controls. However, the levels of phosphorylated ERK are dramatically
lower in BRAF compared to KRAS mutant colons. Furthermore, CRAF
phosphorylation was increased only in the KRAS colon. To evaluate the
activation states of ERK in greater detail, the relative amounts of
non-phosphorylated, singly phosphorylated and dually phosphorylated ERK-2
isoforms were measured in freshly scraped colonic mucosa using a
nanofluidic proteomic immunoassay. Interestingly, up-regulation of singly
phosphorylated ERK-2 was observed only in KRAS mutant mice, but not in
BRAF mice, suggesting that a negative feedback loop is present in the
BRAF colon, but not in KRAS mice. Conclusion: These observations suggest
that KRAS and BRAF mutations have distinct effects on ERK phosphorylation
during early stages of colon carcinogenesis, perhaps in part because CRAF
is not fully activated in BRAF mutant mice. Further analyses of
underlying mechanisms that may contribute to differential ERK
phosphorylation will be investigated.

