Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic delivery of STAT3 blocking/TLR9 activating
oligodeoxynucleotides induces regression of mouse and human acute myeloid
leukemia


STAT3 is persistently activated in cancer cells and in diverse
tumor-associated immune cells and plays critical role for tumorigenesis
and immune evasion. As a transcription factor uniting signaling from a
variety of receptors and kinases, STAT3 is a highly desirable but
challenging therapeutic target. An attractive strategy for inhibiting
STAT3 is the use of oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) to prevent STAT3 DNA
binding and transcriptional activation. The limiting factor in the
clinical application of STAT3 ODNs is difficulty in their targeted
delivery, additionally complicated by the inherent sensitivity of the
immune system to nucleic acids. However, immune cells may themselves be
essential targets for cancer therapy. We previously demonstrated that
ligand for the intracellular receptor TLR9 (CpG ODN) allows for the
uptake of oligonucleotides specifically by TLR9-positive target cells.
Now, we used this approach to deliver STAT3 ODN inhibitor into variety of
mouse and human target cells both in vitro and in vivo. These include
normal myeloid cells or B lymphocytes and malignant cells, such as acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and B cell lymphoma. As expected, STAT3 inhibition
resulted in various degrees of cytotoxic effects in tumor cells while it
did not affect viability of non-malignant cells. Due to design and
chemical modifications of the backbone, the CpG-STAT3 ODN has improved
resistance to degradation in human serum with half-life exceeding 48 hrs.
Thus, we assessed whether it is also suitable for systemic administration
against blood cancers. As shown by our studies using disseminated human
MV4-11 AML, repeated i.v. injections of CpG-STAT3 ODN (5 mg/kg) resulted
in leukemia regression within two weeks. The antitumor efficacy of this
strategy is enhanced by combined effect of STAT3-blocking/TLR9-triggering
in immunocompetent mice. In syngeneic model of mouse AML, i.v.
administration of CpG-STAT3 ODN over two weeks induced tumor regression
in bone marrow, spleen and blood. In addition, secondary transplant
experiments indicated reduced leukemia-initiating potential of AML cells
in vivo treated with CpG-STAT3 ODN. Treatment with control CpG-scrambled
ODN did not show significant antitumor effects in any of our tumor
models. The antitumor effect was accompanied by immune cell activation
and T cell infiltration into various organs. These results underscore
potential of further development of this strategy for clinical
application in AML and likely B cell lymphoma therapy.

