Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cetuximab-mediated ADCC activity is correlated with the cell
surface expression level of EGF-R but not the K-RAS/B-RAF mutational
status in colorectal cancer


Cetuximab, an IgG1 monoclonal antibody against epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGF-R), is widely used for the treatment of metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC). One of the working mechanisms is considered to
be antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) triggered by FcR
on natural killer cells. However, whether ADCC is associated with EGF-R
expression and/or the mutational status of EGF downstream effectors
(K-RAS and B-RAF etc.) in colorectal cancer (CRC) remains unclear. The
aim of this study was to verify whether ADCC activities are associated
with the cell surface expression levels of EGF-R and/or the mutational
status of K-RAS and B-RAF. Five human CRC cell lines with different cell
surface expression levels of EGF-R and different K-RAS and B-RAF
mutational statuses were selected to evaluate ADCC activity using
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from healthy human donors.
Furthermore, tumor cells from resected specimens of CRC patients were
used to evaluate the cell surface expression level of EGF-R using
immunohistochemistry and the K-RAS and B-RAF mutational statuses using
direct sequencing, while the ADCC activity was examined using PBMCs from
the same CRC patients. A strong correlation was observed between the
expression levels of EGF-R and the ADCC activities in the cell lines
(correlation coefficient: 0.949; P = 0.003). Of the 13 resected
specimens, a high ADCC activity level was significantly observed in tumor
cells with high expression levels, compared with those with low
expression levels, of cell surface EGF-R (P = 0.027). In both CRC cell
lines and tumor cells from CRC patients, the ADCC activities were
significantly associated with the cell surface expression levels of EGF-R
(standard partial regression coefficients: 0.911 [P = 0.017] and 0.660 [P
= 0.018], respectively), but not the mutational status of K-RAS and B-RAF
(standard partial regression coefficient: -0.101 [P = 0.631] and 0.160 [P
=0.510], respectively). Cetuximab-mediated ADCC activity may be
correlated with the cell surface expression level of EGF-R, regardless of
the mutational statuses of K-RAS and B-RAF, in CRC.

