Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinases in lung squamous cell carcinoma and inhibitor matching
using quantitative activity-based protein profiling


Introduction: Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the lung is an aggressive
tumor even at an early stage, leading to poor patient outcomes.
Furthermore, few treatment options are currently available. In order to
address these clinical needs and add to the arsenal of treatment options,
we combine activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) and liquid
chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MRM)
biomarker measurements to evaluate ATP uptake by 200 kinases in frozen
specimens acquired from 50 SCC patients. ABPP-LC-MRM also quantifies the
displacement of ATP probes in these kinases by promiscuous inhibitors.
The combination of kinase ATP uptake patterns and the interference
between the drug and the ATP probe enables matching of therapeutics to
individual patients. These surveys of kinase signaling landscapes can
lead to novel options for patient treatment.Experimental Procedures:
ABPP-LC-MRM for enrichment and quantification of kinase ATP uptake was
optimized using SCC cell lines, and a library of assays was developed
from extensive LC-MS/MS data from different tumor types. Biomarker
measurements were made for frozen tumor and normal specimens from 50
patients. In a pooled tumor proteome, ABPP-LC-MRM evaluated the reduction
in ATP probe binding to map a panel of drugs to their target kinases.Data
Summary: The panel of ABPP-enriched proteins consists of >200 kinases
(>15 tyrosine kinases). ABPP-LC-MRM analysis of SCC cell lines, including
H157, H1581, H1703, H2170, H2286, H520, H596, and HCC366, indicates the
ability to detect previously characterized oncogenic drivers. Because
cancer cells have many drivers or significant plasticity in signaling,
the ABPP-LC-MRM strategy enables readout of multiple kinases as targets
for inhibition, which could support the design of rational combinations.
For example, H2170 cells have high levels of ATP uptake by ErbB2
(matching its gene amplification), the Src family kinase, YES, and MEK
isoforms. Therefore, combinations using MEKi, SRCi, and Lapatinib could
have potential for treatment. In cell lines, viability assays were used
to examine synergy of kinase inhibitors suggested by ABPP-LC-MRM.
Comparison of kinase ATP uptake in tumor and normal tissues indicates
potential drivers for each cancer that can be used for patient
classification and matched to therapeutic strategies, including novel
combinations of kinase inhibitors.Conclusions: Proteomic quantification
of kinase ATP uptake enables the evaluation of numerous hypotheses within
the same sample. Evaluation of ABPP-LC-MRM analysis in cell lines and
subsequent comparison of tumor and normal tissue specimens indicates the
ability to detect oncogenic kinases that may be tumor drivers. The
implementation of this platform can be a first step for understanding
drug resistance and classifying patients for molecularly-driven selection
of targeted therapy combinations.

