Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cells have not only sweet tooth but also large mouths:
Evidence for uptake of ATP into KRas oncogene-expressing cancer cells by
macropinocytosis


Cancer cells are known to exhibit reprogrammed metabolism and prefer to
use glycolygsis for their ATP synthesis even when oxygen is abundant, a
phenomenon called the Warburg effect. However, cancer cells are also
known for more rapid growth and proliferation, therefore requiring more
ATP than normal cells of the same tissues. How cancer cells manage to use
low efficiency glycolysis but still meet their higher ATP demands is
enigmatic. In our previous study, we found that extracellular ATP induced
large intracellular ATP increase and drug resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) that function as ATP analogs / competitors in cancer
cells. The induced ATP increase was from neither OXPHOS nor glycolysis,
and was not dependent on AMPK, the master ATP regulator. Furthermore, the
increase did not involve new gene expression or new protein synthesis.
Recently, it was reported that cells transformed with an oncogenic form
of KRas gene (KRas+) exhibit a phenotype of macropinocytosis, a type of
endocytosis. KRas-induced macropinocytosis nonspecifically takes up
extracellular proteins. All these led us to hypothesize that the
increased intracellular ATP induced by extracellular ATP is, at least in
part, not produced intracellularly but is transported into cancer cells.
To test this hypothesis, high molecular weight fluorescent dextran was
use to determine if KRas+ human non-small cell lung cancer A549 cells
exhibit macropinocytosis. Nonhydrolyzable fluorescent ATP analog was used
to visualize if the ATP analog can be transported into A549 cells along
with dextran. Fluorescence microscopy studies revealed that A549 cells
exhibit the phenotype of macropinocytosis, which can be reduced by a
macropinocytosis inhibitor EIPA. HMW dextran and the nonhydrolysable
fluorescent ATP analog were found co-localized inside A549 cells,
demonstrating that they were transported into A549 cells via
macropinosomes. It was also found that the ATP increase cannot be
explained by purinergic receptor signaling alone. In comparison, KRas-
human breast cancer MCF7 cells do not take up HMW dextran, indicating
that they do not exhibit macropinocytosis. All these provide strong and
visual evidence that ATP can be transported into KRas+ A549 cancer cells
by macropinocytosis. Other experiments using radioactive ATP or
purinergic receptor inhibitors also strongly support this conclusion.
This is the first time that ATP (ATP analog) is shown to be taken into
cancer cells. This finding will have major impact on how we view cancer
cells in terms of their energy exchange with other cancer or noncancer
cells in the tumor and on the Warburg effect. It will also have profound
implications on how to more effectively inhibiting KRas+ or KRas- cancer
cells by targeting ATP transport and ATP metabolism.

