Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of proliferation and platelet-derived growth factor
expression in desmoid tumors by microRNA-29


Desmoid tumors (DT), also called aggressive fibromatosis, are a rare,
locally invasive soft tissue tumors. While DTs harbor mutations that
activate -catenin, a major effector molecule of canonical Wnt signaling,
they also display elevated levels of both Platelet-Derived Growth Factor
Receptor Beta (PDGFR) and its PDGF-B ligand. We hypothesize that active
PDGFR signaling maintains DT progression.We studied the effect of PDGFR
inhibition on DT growth. Primary cultures of DTs treated with the PDGFR
inhibitor Sunitinib show a decrease in proliferation rate as measured by
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assay. In vivo, Sunitinib
treatment of Apc1638N/+ mice, a mouse model of DT, also decreased the
number and size of tumors. To investigate the relationship of -catenin
activation and PDGFR activation, we treated human skin fibroblasts with
Wnt3a to activate canonical Wnt signaling, and utilized transgenic murine
skin fibroblasts harboring an activated form of -catenin. In both
systems, PDGF-B ligand expression increased both at the mRNA and protein
level. However, this increase was not observed immediately, suggesting an
indirect mode of regulation. The PDGF-B gene contains a conserved
microRNA-29 (miR29) binding site in its 3 untranslated region. In silico
miRacts analysis of five independent DT microarray studies predicted
miR29 family deregulation. As such, we studied whether miR29 deregulation
in DT leads to PDGF-B overexpression and tumor proliferation. By
performing quantitative PCR on human DT samples, we observed that the
levels of mature forms of all miR29 family members (MIR29A, B, and C) are
significantly down-regulated. Overexpressing miR29 in DT cells decreases
PDGF-B ligand levels as well as BrdU incorporation rate. Finally,
-catenin-induced modulation of the PDGF-B ligand is abrogated upon
inhibiting miR29.Taken together, these data suggest that PDGFR signaling
is a potentially important pathway in DT progression. PDGFR may be linked
to -catenin by the novel discovery of microRNA-29 down-regulation in DT
tumors. This work will offer new perspectives on the molecular biology
underlying DT development and help identify novel targets for therapy.

