Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of Met signaling in urothelial cancer of the
bladder


Background: Mounting evidence supports Met as a target in urothelial
cancer (UC). Activated Met can promote angiogenesis and tumor growth by
upregulating VEGF and may play a role in UC pathogenesis. Cabozantinib
inhibits both VEGFR2 and Met pathways. In this study, we assessed
cabozantinib's effects on HGF-driven UC cell growth and invasion.Methods:
sMet levels in serum and urine samples from 31 patients with UC (23
metastatic, 8 muscle-invasive) were correlated with stage, presence of
visceral metastases and urinary source. The effects of cabozantinib on 6
human UC-derived cell lines were studied in vitro. Intact RT4, TCC-SUP,
T24M2, T24M3, J82 and SW780 cells at 80% confluence were serum deprived
16 h, then left untreated or treated with hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
and/or cabozantinib prior to analysis of Met, phospho- (p)Met, pAkt, Akt,
pErk and ErK by immunoassay or immunoblotting. Cabozantinib effects on
basal and HGF-induced UC cell invasion, proliferation and soft agar
growth were measured.Results: Median serum Met levels were modestly
higher in patients with metastatic versus muscle-invasive disease.
Urinary Met levels were clearly higher in patients with visceral
metastasis (p=0.0111) and in urine from ileal conduits and neobladders
compared to normally voided urine, regardless of stage (p=0.0489). Met
content in UC cell lines was low in RT4 and higher in T24M2, T24M3,
TCC-SUP, J82 and SW780. Basal pMet content was universally low, increased
significantly by HGF and this was reversed by cabozantinib. HGF-driven
increases in pAkt/Akt and pErK/ErK in all 6 cell lines were reversed by
cabozantinib, as were HGF-enhanced UC cell invasion, proliferation and
anchorage independent growth.Conclusions: Median urinary sMet is
significantly higher in patients with visceral metastasis and in
specimens from ileal conduits and neobladders relative to normally voided
urine. UC cell Met content in culture increased with disease grade; HGF
stimulated activation of Met and known effectors, and enhanced invasion,
growth rate and anchorage-independent growth; cabozantinib effectively
reversed these HGF-driven effects.

