Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioactive proanthocyanidins from grape seeds inhibit cigarette
smoke condensate-enhanced invasion of human non-small cell lung cancer
cells by targeting NADPH oxidase and epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United
States, and the dismal 5-year survival rate of approximately 14% has
shown no improvement over the past three decades. Cigarette smoke (CS) is
the cause of 90% of lung cancer cases, and promotes drug resistance in
lung cancer patients and is even known to limit effectiveness of
treatment of cancers of other organs. It is therefore important to
develop more effective strategies targeting CS-induced molecular
abnormalities. Cigarette smoking increases oxidative stress particularly
via activation of NADPH oxidase (NOX), a key source of superoxide anion
production. Here we report the inhibitory effects of bioactive
phytochemicals, grape seed proanthocyanidins (GSPs), on the migration
potential of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells (A549, H460
and H1299) and assessed whether CS-induced NOX activation is their
target. Using an in vitro invasion assay, we found that treatment of
NSCLC cells with CS condensate (CSC) increased the migration of NSCLC
cells in a dose-dependent manner, via enhancing NOX mediated-reactive
oxygen species (ROS) accumulation. Treatment of NSCLC cells with GSPs
inhibited the cell migration via reduction in ROS accumulation or
oxidative stress and subsequent reduction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition. To examine the molecular targets of GSPs, we studied the
effect of GSPs on CSC-induced alterations in the levels of key NOX
components, namely, p22phox and p47phox, using A549 cells. We also
determined the effect of GSPs on CSC-induced interaction between p22phox
and p47phox proteins, a key event in NOX activation. Our results indicate
that treatment of A549 cells with GSPs not only reverse CSC-induced
expression levels of p22phox and p47phox, but also inhibit CSC-induced
NOX activation by decreasing the binding of p22phox and p47phox proteins.
This new insight into the anti-lung cancer cell migration activity of
GSPs could serve as a basis for chemoprevention or therapy of advanced
stage of lung cancer in human patients.

