Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment modulation enhances macrophage polarization
and T-cell activation resulting in synergized anti-cancer effect


Solid cancer microenvironment is heterogeneous in nature, comprised of
many stromal cell types that work in concert with malignant tumor cells
for its maintenance and growth. Among these cell types, tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) represent a dominant cell population with
immunosuppressive and proangiogenic properties. Present in most human
cancers, histologic evidence of increased TAMs is often associated with
poorer prognosis. Here, we show that the immunosuppressive properties of
TAMs can be overcome by modulating tumor microenvironmental parameters.
By restoring tumor vascular network and tissue perfusion via
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) antibody,
significant reduction of tumor tissue hypoxia and acidosis can be
accomplished. Alteration of these local environmental factors directly
results in the polarization of TAMs from an immune inhibitory (M2-like)
towards immune stimulatory (M1-like) phenotype. In addition, the
restoration of aberrant and dysfunctional tumor vessels leads to changes
in local cytokine and protein expression profiles that favor the
recruitment of immune effector cells, including increased CXCL9
expression. As a result, both CD4+ helper and CD8+ cytotoxic T cell
populations were significantly increased within the tumor. Based on these
findings, we tested the utility of combining the optimal dose of
anti-VEGFR2 antibody therapy with B7-H4 blockade in breast cancer models.
Our preliminary data suggests that such treatment enhanced TAM
polarization to an anti-tumor phenotype, increased tumor immune cell
infiltration and decreased T-cell inhibition, resulting in synergized
anti-cancer effects. Therefore, these results suggest that tumor
microenvironment modulating therapy provides a new and interesting
strategy to augment active immunotherapy for breast as well as other
cancer types.

