Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactive status of cancer cells with suppression of AKT activity
contributes to survival in chronic hypoxia


A hypoxic microenvironment in tumors has been recognized as a cause of
malignancy or resistance to various cancer therapies. In contrast to the
recent progress in understanding the acute response of cancer cells to
hypoxia, the characteristics of tumor cells in chronic hypoxia remain
elusive. We have identified a pancreatic cancer cell line, AsPC-1, which
is exceptionally able to survive for weeks under hypoxic conditions
(1%O2) without changing medium at all, while most of the tested cancer
cell lines died after several days under these conditions. Under hypoxic
conditions, the AsPC-1 cells entered an inactive status characterized by
no proliferation or death and by metabolic suppression. They recovered to
active status after being placed again in optimal culture conditions.
Under chronic hypoxia, ATP turnover, an indicator of energy demand, was
markedly decreased, as was AKT phosphorylation. Forced activation of AKT
resulted in increased ATP turnover and massive cell death in vitro.
Xenograft tumors generated with AKT over-expressing cells showed
remarkable decrease of inactive zone, where BrdU uptake and S6
phosphorylation were eliminated without any sign of cell death. We
recently developed a novel culture system for primary cancer cells. In
contrast to most cancer cell lines, primary colorectal cancer cells
entered inactive status with AKT suppression under hypoxia combined with
growth factor-depleted conditions. The ability of cancer cells to survive
in a deteriorated microenvironment by entering into an inactive status
might be a common property among cancer cells. The cancer cells in
inactive status of both primary cultured cancer cells and AsPC-1 cells
were resistant to chemotherapy. Targeting the regulatory mechanism
inducing this inactive status might provide a new strategy for overcoming
resistance to various cancer therapies.

