Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Indices of actionability and clinical utility in a CLIA-enabled
study of whole genome/exome/RNA sequencing in 33 cancer patients:
Actionable vs. utility


Background: Whole genome/exome/RNA sequencing has revolutionized the
ability to assess the genomic landscape of cancer and is increasingly
being utilized for clinical decision-making. Initial clinical
applications have been constrained by specimen quantity, analyte quality
and the time from sample acquisition to results report.Methods: Patients
with advanced cancers underwent surgical resection, excisional/core
biopsies, or bone marrow biopsy. Samples were analyzed by whole genome or
exome sequencing in addition to RNA sequencing, bioinformatics analysis,
and therapeutic target prioritization by a multi-disciplinary Clinical
Genomics Board. All prioritized targets were CLIA validated using Sanger
sequencing, RT-qPCR, FISH, or IHC as appropriate. Treatment was delivered
using off-label FDA approved drugs, clinical trials, or single patient
INDs.Results: We have enrolled 40 patients for whom sequencing data is
available on 33. The initial 6 patients were evaluated in a non-CLIA
pilot phase and 27 in a CLIA-enabled phase. Tumor types in the
CLIA-enabled phase with the highest enrollment were pancreatic cancer
(n=8) and cholangiocarcinoma (n=8). We sought to quantify the targets
identified along with clinical benefit, defining these as the Actionable
Index (AI) (proportion of patients with 1 putative drug target) and
Utility Index (UI) (proportion of patients who derive clinical benefit).
Putative therapeutic targets were identified in 7/8 (AI=0.88)
cholangiocarcinoma (CC) patients and in 5/8 (AI=0.63) pancreatic cancer
(PC) patients. All 3 CC patients who received target directed treatment
achieved a partial response (UI=0.38). In contrast, none of the 4 PC
patients who received target directed therapy had treatment response
(UI=0.0). Interestingly no actionable targets were identified in 1 CC and
in 2 PCs. One CC with an identified target was unable to access the drug
and subsequently died. A CC patient and a PC patient, each with
identified targets, expired prior to the initiation of
therapy.Conclusions: While whole genome/exome/RNA sequencing is providing
unparalleled detail of tumor genomes, the application to the clinic must
be carefully considered. Actionability of targets will eventually need to
be defined in close relation to eventual clinical utility and appropriate
refinements to disease-gene-drug databases implemented. Preliminary
observations in pancreatic cancer and cholangiocarcinoma demonstrate
disparity in correlation between utility indices and actionable indices.
Application of these tools in larger cohorts and types of tumors will
need to be conducted to ascertain more precise estimates. Additional
measures that are organ-site agnostic but pertain to specific targets
(e.g. BRAF) will also need to be developed in order to facilitate more
judicious application of sequencing in the clinical setting.

