Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low surface Gal3 expression in breast cancer stem cells is
associated with chemoresistance, tumorigenesis, and decreased overall
patient survival


The development of therapeutic approaches that target specific breast
cancer subtypes has improved overall survival, but some patients
nevertheless become resistant to treatment and develop metastatic
disease. Recent insights suggest multiple hallmarks of cancer -
especially drug-resistance, unlimited self-renewal, as well as invasion
and metastasis - that can be attributed to a small subpopulation
frequently designated as cancer stem cells (CSC). CSCs are rare,
self-renewing cells that initiate and maintain tumor growth. Galectin-3
(Gal3), a multifunctional oncogenic beta-galactoside binding lectin, was
implicated in the metastatic cascade by aiding the homing of breast
cancer circulating tumor cells to the metastatic niche. In addition, it
was proposed that Gal3 protects breast cancer cells from
mitochondria-dependent apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents while
concurrently promoting sensitivity to cell death ligands.Recently, we
have found that in a subset of metastatic breast cancer cells (GI-LM2),
cell-surface Gal3 is highly expressed compared to its non-metastatic
counterpart (GI-101). Breast CSCs have been characterized by
CD24-/CD44+/EpCAM+ surface marker expression in flowcytometry analysis.
These subpopulations of GI-LM2 exhibit an enhanced self-renewal
capability in sphere-formation assays (SFA) when compared to a similar
subpopulation of GI-101. Surprisingly, depletion of Gal3 from this subset
of GI-LM2 resulted in epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) - a
mechanism linked to cancer stemness - as evidenced by Immunoblot and
-fluorescence, resistance to the adjuvant FAC regimen (5-Fluorouracil,
Doxorubicin, Cyclophosphamide), and markedly increased tumorigenicity in
in vivo limited dilution assays.These findings are in keeping with
results obtained from a stage 2 and 3a cohort of breast cancer patients
(n=87) with axillary lymph node metastases. Gal3 expression in tissue
microarrays from these patients was found to be significantly associated
with the absence of lymphovascular invasion (p=0.015) as well as
increased locoregional-free, disease-specific and overall survival
(p=0.054, p=0.18, and p=0.019, respectively).Taken together, we present
evidence in vitro, in vivo, and in clinico that lack of surface Gal3 in a
subset of breast CSCs is associated with chemoresistance. This contrasts
with earlier reports that Gal3 renders cancer cells chemoresistant,
enhances tumorigenesis, and is associated with poor overall survival.
Further studies will determine whether these finding can be applied to
therapeutic stratification of breast cancer patients, or as a diagnostic
tool for detection of circulating tumor cells which are frequently
described as early indicators of dormant metastatic breast cancer.

