Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor mediates novel mechanisms of estrogen-induced
growth and tamoxifen resistance in invasive lobular carcinoma


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is a histological subtype of breast
cancer representing 10% of newly diagnosed breast tumors. Over 90% of ILC
cases are ER-positive, however, endocrine response and estrogen signaling
are not well described in ILC. Retrospective analyses suggest that ILC
patients treated with endocrine therapy have poorer outcomes than
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) patients with similar biomarkers, and
that ILC patients may not benefit from adjuvant tamoxifen. Additionally,
we have recently identified ILC-specific ER-target genes and de novo
tamoxifen resistance driven by ER in ILC model systems. Based on these
observations, we hypothesize that ILC-specific signaling pathways driven
by ER mediate growth and endocrine resistance in ILC cells.We focused on
three putative mechanisms of endocrine response and resistance in ILC
cells. First, we investigated the role of the Wnt signaling protein WNT4
in driving E2-induced growth. E2 induced ER binding at the WNT4 promoter
and up-regulated expression specifically in ILC cells (versus IDC cells).
As WNT4 has also been previously implicated in normal mammary gland
growth and development, we hypothesize that ER-driven WNT4 expression of
mediates E2-induced growth of ILC cells. Second, we investigated the role
of the transcriptional repressor SNAI1 in ER-mediated gene expression and
tamoxifen-resistance. SNAI1 gene expression was induced by both E2 and
tamoxifen specifically in ILC cells, which paralleled unique patterns of
E2-mediated gene repression in ILC cells. Thus, SNAI1 may mediate
E2-driven gene repression and tamoxifen resistance. Third, our prior
identification of ILC-specific ER-target genes and ER-mediated tamoxifen
resistance suggested that novel co-factors may associate with ER in ILC.
We hypothesize that identification of these co-factors would provide
novel targets for therapy in ILC.Cell lines MDA MB 134VI and SUM44PE are
used as in vitro models of ILC versus MCF-7 and T47D as models of IDC.
siRNA-mediated knockdown of gene expression is utilized to assess the
function of WNT4 and SNAI1. Cell proliferation and ER-target gene
expression are assessed in both ILC and IDC models following knockdown.
To identify novel ER co-factors in ILC, we co-immunoprecipitate ER with
associated factors, and identify bound proteins by mass
spectrometry.Preliminary experiments have demonstrated that knockdown of
either WNT4 or SNAI1 can suppress the growth of ILC cells, and that this
effect is specific to ILC cells. Additionally, Co-IP/mass spec identifies
co-factors that are specifically associated with ER in ILC cells. These
observations suggest that unique ER-mediated signaling pathways drive
endocrine response and resistance in ILC cells, and that further
understanding of these pathways may present novel therapeutic targets in
ILC.

