Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic administration of DNA nanoparticles containing the
diphtheria toxin gene reduces pancreatic tumor load in mice


Despite years of research and hundreds of clinical trials, our ability to
treat metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) effectively has
been thwarted due to the numerous genetic mutations in multiple core
pathways that are characteristically present in pancreatic tumors, as
well as the ability of tumors to develop resistance to chemotherapeutic
drugs and small molecules. To avoid these complications, we have
developed a suicide gene therapy that targets the death of PDA tumor
cells regardless of their genetic mutation profile while avoiding
unwanted harmful effects to healthy cells. A novel DNA nanoparticle,
3DNA, serving as a delivery vector is derivatized by conjugation to a DNA
construct (MSLN promoter-driven diphtheria toxin A, pMSLN/DTA) as well as
to a tumor-targeting molecule. Targeted DTA-induced tumor cell death is
achieved in two ways: targeted nanoparticle delivery to tumor cells via
docking and internalization, and targeted expression to cells that have
an active mesothelin (MSLN) promoter (MSLN is highly overexpressed in 50%
of PDA tumors). In preclinical tests, these formulations are systemically
administered to PDA tumor-bearing mice. In an initial experiment, after
confirming that MSLN is highly expressed in murine Pan02-luc PDA cells,
we generated Pan02-luc orthografts in C57BL/6 mice and treated mice
2X/week with 50g cargo DNA/i.v. injection for 4 weeks with either
MSLN/DTA-TFP (n=7) or with MSLN/XX-TFP (n=5) dendrimer formulations (TFP
is a peptide with strong affinity for the human transferrin receptor
(TR), and weaker affinity for murine TR; XX = no coding sequence). Tumor
load was assessed weekly by optical imaging and luciferase
bioluminescence quantitation. Fold increase in relative light units (RLU)
(baseline to 4 days after the last injection) was used to measure
therapeutic efficacy. After 4 weeks of treatment, the mean RLU ratio for
the MSLN/DTA-TFP treated mice was 0.51 +/-0.20 while that of the
MSLN/XX-TFP treated mice was 7.1 +/-8.22, a significant 15-fold
difference in tumor load (p=0.04). This quantitative analysis of tumor
load as well as gross observations of tumors upon sacrifice of the mice
showed that tumors in mice systemically treated with MSLN/DTA-TFP
dendrimer formulation shrunk significantly to the point where tumor load
was negligible in contrast to rapid growth of tumors in mice treated with
the MSLN/XX-TFP formulation. This experiment demonstrates that
systemically-administered DNA nanoparticle-delivered DTA effectively
kills tumor cells with little to no apparent systemic toxicity as
assessed by body weight and TUNEL assays of multiple normal tissues. In
ongoing experiments to further validate this approach for the treatment
of metastatic PDA, other targeting molecules such as folate and TFP are
being used to target delivery to Pan02-luc orthografts and human
BxPC3-luc2 xenografts.

