Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of STAG2 in bladder cancer


Bladder cancer (BC), 90% of which have transitional cell histology, is
the fourth most common malignancy in the US. Transitional cell carcinoma
(TCC), which occurs predominantly in men and whose incidence appears to
be increasing, occurs most frequently as superficial disease which, while
prone to recurrence, is not life threatening. However, TCC which invades
the muscle layer of the bladder (stage T2-T4) is lethal in 50% of
individuals. Stage T2-T4 TCC is present at initial diagnosis in 30% of
patients and superficial TCC progresses to T2-T4 disease 20% of the time.
We sequenced whole exomes of 28 muscle-invasive bladder tumors and
performed an additional screen of over 200 genes in 119 additional TCCs.
We found frequent alterations (10%) in STAG2, a gene encoding a subunit
of the cohesin complex, which regulates the sister chromatids segregation
process. Most mutations identified on STAG2 were nonsense, missense or
frameshift. Genetic disruption of the sister chromatid segregation
process leads to aneuploidy, which is one of the hallmarks of cancer.
Based on recently published studies, however, it is uncertain whether a
loss of STAG2 causes aneuploidy or not. In this study we sought to
elucidate the role of STAG2 loss of expression in bladder tumorigenesis.
We have analyzed the expression of STAG2 in 14 urothelial cell lines at
both mRNA and protein levels by means of q-PCR and western blots,
respectively. We found that STAG2 expression was lost in 2 of the 14
urothelial cell lines (HB-CLS-2 and UM-UC-3) analyzed. We chose SV-HUC
(immortalized normal urothelium cells) along with two bladder cancer cell
lines that had high expression of STAG2 (HB-CLS-1 and TCC-SUP) to study
effects of STAG2 loss by transient knockdown. Knockdown of STAG2 in
SV-HUC, TCC-SUP and HB-CLS-1 cells did not affect proliferation. Cell
cycle analysis on TCC-SUP cells revealed that STAG2 knockdown resulted in
a lower percentage of cells in the G0/G1 phase in comparison to the
scrambled control. Taken together, these data suggest that STAG2 has a
role in modifying DNA content but not proliferation. Our ongoing studies
utilizing bladder cancer tissue microarray (TMAs) and copy number
variation (CNV) array will help to clarify the consequences of STAG2 loss
in bladder cancer.

