Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast and ovarian cancer PDXs show excellent conservation of
original features but are genetically plastic


Patient derived xenografts (PDXs) are increasingly appreciated models in
cancer research and preclinical testing. We have established a collection
of 20 breast and 20 ovarian cancer PDXs and investigated their biological
and clinical characteristics, as well as their genetic stability. Take
rates were distinctly lower with breast (16%) compared to ovarian cancers
(85%). The majority of our breast PDX originated from triple negative
(14/20), grade 3 tumors (18/20) and breast cancers with reduced
recurrence free survival. Interestingly, we stabilized 1 ER-/HER2+ and 5
ER+ PDX. Overall we showed that breast tumors that gave rise to a PDX
(take) showed significantly different expression profiles compared to
tumors which did not take. Ovarian PDX originated all from high grade
cancers, but comprised all major ovarian cancer histotypes (mucinous,
clear cell, carcinosarcoma and serous carcinoma).Breast and ovarian PDXs
faithfully recapitulated the histological features of their tumors of
origin. The excellent conservation of original transcriptome
characteristics was a further proof of the phenotypic stability shown by
our PDX models. Noticeably, all grafts from ER+ cancers expressed ER at
the RNA and protein levels. Array-CGH analysis revealed that PDXs
presented a high degree of conservation of the Copy Number Change (CNC)
profiles of the tumors they stemmed from and profiles from PDXs
established from the same original tumor were highly overlapping. We
determined that CNC representing up to 6% of the genome corresponded to
oligoclonal events present in the tumor of origin that got gradually lost
in the PDXs along passages. Furthermore, we noted that a minority of the
PDXs presented a fraction of de novo occurring events representing up to
10% of the genome, suggesting limited levels of ongoing genetic
instability.In conclusion, our data show that breast and ovarian cancer
PDX are excellent reproductions of the tumors of origin but remain
genetically dynamic elements susceptible to drift during sequential
passages.

