Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-peritoneal metastasis properties of Yangzheng Xiaoji, the
potential role of hyaluronan and CD44


Introduction. Peritoneal metastasis is a frequently occurring
complication patients with gastrointestinal, pancreatic, ovarian cancers
and is a condition difficult to manage, clinically, due largely to the
lack of effective treatment. In the present study, we report an
accidental and novel discovery that the extract of Yangzheng Xiaoji
(YZXJ), a traditional medical formula used in cancer treatment had an
anti-peritoneal metastasis function.Materials and methods. Human primary
cultured peritoneal mesothelial cells were used as an in vitro cellular
model. Human gastric, colorectal, pancreatic, ovarian and prostate cancer
cells were used in the tests. Tumour-mesothelial interaction, invasion
and migration were assessed with YZXJ. Athymic nude mice peritoneal
metastasis model was used to evaluate the effects in vivo.Results.
Soluble YZXJ was firstly extracted in a highly reproducible manner. YZXJ
extract (DME25) had a negletable toxicity to cancer cells and mesothelial
cells. However, it profoundly inhibited the tumour-mesothelial adhesions
in the type of tumour cells tested with pancreatic and colorectal cancer
cells amongst the most sensitive ones to YZXJ (pIntroduction. Peritoneal
metastasis is a frequently occurring complication patients with
gastrointestinal, pancreatic, ovarian cancers and is a condition
difficult to manage, clinically, due largely to the lack of effective
treatment. In the present study, we report an accidental and novel
discovery that the extract of Yangzheng Xiaoji (YZXJ), a traditional
medical formula used in cancer treatment had an anti-peritoneal
metastasis function.Materials and methods. Human primary cultured
peritoneal mesothelial cells were used as an in vitro cellular model.
Human gastric, colorectal, pancreatic, ovarian and prostate cancer cells
were used in the tests. Tumour-mesothelial interaction, invasion and
migration were assessed with YZXJ. Athymic nude mice peritoneal
metastasis model was used to evaluate the effects in vivo.Results.
Soluble YZXJ was firstly extracted in a highly reproducible manner. YZXJ
extract (DME25) had a negletable toxicity to cancer cells and mesothelial
cells. However, it profoundly inhibited the tumour-mesothelial adhesions
in the type of tumour cells tested with pancreatic and colorectal cancer
cells amongst the most sensitive ones to YZXJ (p<0.001), a phenomenon
seen with a number of cell based assays. The inhibitory effect was also
seen with cellular migration. A similar pattern of inhibition was seen on
tumour adhesion to hyaluronan (HA) coated surface. It was further
revealed that YZXJ and an hyaluronan inhibitor and anti-CD44 antibodies
had additive effects with YZXJ on tumour-mesothelial interactions. YZXJ
extract had an inhibitory effect on the phosphorylation of SRC kinase in
cancer cells and in mesothelial cells as shown by Western blotting and
immunofluorescence microscopy. In the peritoneal metastasis in vivo
model, it was demonstrated that intraperitoneal administration of YZXJ
significantly reduced the formation of metastatic nodules (p=0.035,
control vs YZXJ treatment). This was seen with little side effects. We
have also shown that hyaluronan inhibitor strengthened the inhibitory
effect exerted by YZXJ.Conclusion. Yangzheng Xiaoji has an potent
inhibitory effect on tumour-mesothelial interactions of a variety of
tumour types and also markedly reduces the peritoneal metastasis in vivo.
This effect is likely to be achieved by its effect on the SRC signalling
pathway. Yangzheng Xiaoji presents a new way of treating peritoneal
metastasis.

