Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collagen 1 fibers are a key component in the establishment of
distant pulmonary metastasis by breast cancer cells


We previously observed that silencing COX-2 significantly reduced the
expression of degradative enzymes such as matrix metalloproteinase 1
(MMP1), and altered the expression of ECM components such as hyaluronan
and lumican that play a role in intra-fibrillar collagen spacing [1]. We
have also observed that primary human breast cancers that have
metastasized have higher collagen 1 (Col1) fiber density and volume [2].
Here, for the first time, we have investigated Col1 fiber patterns in
metastatic lung nodules established by metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells and their subclone Clone 13 cells that express shRNA to
significantly reduce, but not silence, COX-2 expression.Second harmonic
generation (SHG) microscopy studies were performed on H&E stained lung
sections obtained from SCID mice five weeks post intravenous injection of
MDA-MB-231 (five mice) and Clone 13 (three mice) human breast cancer
cells. SHG images of 5-7 fields of view per mouse were acquired from the
lung sections on an Olympus FV1000MPE multiphoton microscope, and
analyzed for inter-fiber distance and percentage of fiber per metastatic
area using in-house software [2]. Reducing COX-2 expression resulted in a
significant reduction of metastatic lung burden in mice. Analysis of the
Col1 fiber structures of similar sized metastatic nodules revealed
significantly fewer fibers and larger inter fiber distance in lung
nodules of mice injected with Clone 13 cells compared to parental
MDA-MB-231 cells.Reducing COX-2 resulted in the establishment of
significantly fewer metastatic lung nodules with significantly sparser
Col1 fibers. These data suggest that the ability to lay down Col1 fibers
is a key requirement for the successful establishment of metastatic
lesions. Reducing COX-2 expression in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
affects the ability of these cancer cells to lay down a Col1 fiber
scaffold suitable for cancer cell growth in the lungs. These data
identify new aspects of the role of Col1 fibers and COX-2 in the
establishment of metastatic lesions.References: [1] I. Stasinopoulos et
al., Neoplasia (2008); [2] S. Kakkad et al., J Biomed Opt (2012).This
work was supported by NIH R01CA82337 and P50CA103175.

