Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of HER2 via trogocytosis by CD14+ cells in
HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells is associated with diminishing of
trastuzumab-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity


The transfer of cell-surface membrane proteins and membrane patches from
one cell to another at the time of contact, known as trogocytosis, was
reported in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma patients
and was associated with clinical outcome. However, in solid malignant
tumors, such as breast cancer, there is no evidence that trogocytosis
occurs clinically thus its clinical importance has not been evaluated
yet. In the current study, we found significantly high HER2 expression on
tumor-infiltrated CD14+ cells as compared to control CD14+ cells of PBMCs
in HER2 overexpressing breast cancer patient who had been treated with
trastuzmab. Digested tumor cell suspension and its autologous PBMCs were
co-cultured at 1:10 ratio with 0 and 1 g/ml of trastuzumab as
trogocytosis assay. Percentage of HER2 positive CD14+ cells was higher in
the treatment of 1 g/ml of trastuzumab as compared to that of 0 g/ml of
trastuzumab (17% and 12%, respectively) while HER2 expression of digested
tumor cells was lower in 1 g/ml of trastuzumab treatment as compared to
that of 0 g/ml of trastuzumab (18% and 25%, respectively). These findings
suggested that HER2 might be transferred from HER2 overexpressing breast
tumor cells to CD14+ cells, which was possibility of evidence of
trogocytosis in the HER2+ breast cancer patient, and suggested that CD14+
cell might have an important role in the trogocytosis.We next define the
role of CD14+ cells and CD56+ cells in the process of both trogocytosis
and antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) in experimental
setting using SK-BR-3 and BT-474, both HER2 overexpressing human breast
cancer cell lines, and MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, both HER2 negative human
breast cancer cell lines. We found that trogocytosis was observed
specifically on HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines in in vitro
torogocytosis assay and CD14+ cells have a role for trogocytosis
dominantly as compared to CD56+ cells. HER2 loss was increased as
Effector / Target ratio or concentration of trastuzumab was increased.
HER2 loss on target cancer cells caused by trogocytosis of CD14+ cells
inhibits CD56+ cell-mediated ADCC, however when CD14+ cells are depleted,
such inhibitory effects are recovered and CD56+ cells show better
cytotoxicity. Currently analyzed preliminary clinical sample data and
experimental data of HER2 loss via trogocytosis might explain different
level of treatment response of trastuzumab in individual patients.

