Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a transcription factor driving BET dependency in
SCLC


The regulation, and subsequent recognition, of covalent chromatin
modifications by an array of cellular proteins are key determinants of
gene expression. For instance, the binding of bromodomain and extra
terminal domain (BET) proteins to acetylated histone tails has been shown
to regulate c-MYC transcription in some cell types. Consequently,
pharmacological inhibition of BET proteins leads to an anti-proliferative
activity in cancers dependent on c-MYC activity such as multiple myeloma
and acute myelogenous leukemia. Since c-MYC has been implicated as a
driver of cell proliferation in many cancer types, we investigated if BET
inhibitors may have anti-proliferative activity in solid tumor cancer
cell lines as well. Strikingly, in a panel of over 100 mixed histology
lung cancer cell lines we identified selective growth inhibition of lines
derived from small cell lung cancer (SCLC) histology. To better
understand the mechanism of this dependency we performed 12-point dose
response microarray analyses using the BET inhibitor, JQ1, in order to
identify genes that are regulated by BET proteins in SCLC. In contrast to
what has been observed in myeloma and leukemia, BET inhibition is not
always accompanied by inhibition of c-MYC expression in the SCLC cell
lines. From this analysis a lineage-specific transcription factor was
found to be highly regulated in a dose-dependent manner. Previous studies
have reported this transcription factor to be essential in maintaining
the differentiated neuroendocrine phenotype characteristic of human SCLC.
It has also been shown that loss of this transcription factor results in
growth inhibition in SCLC tumor models. We have confirmed the growth
dependency of SCLC to BET via dysregulation of this transcription factor
using RNAi and a small molecule inhibitor. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by deep-sequencing confirmed binding of
BRD4, a BET family member, and RNA polymerase II, a marker of active gene
transcription, to the enhancer region of this target gene in two
sensitive SCLC cell lines. This binding is disrupted in the presence of
BET compound treatment. SCLC is a disease with high unmet medical need,
and the results of our studies have identified BET inhibition as a
potential novel therapeutic opportunity for this subtype of lung cancer.
Our results have also provided a mechanistic basis for the sensitivity of
SCLC to BET inhibition, and a rationale for the clinical development of
BET inhibitors beyond hematologic cancers.

