Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIC (MDFIC) is a protein that interacts and colocalizes with the
RELT family of TNFRs


Tumor necrosis factor receptors (TNFRs) have been recognized to be
critically important for cellular processes such as apoptosis, cell
proliferation and inflammatory responses. Aberrations in TNFR signaling
have been implicated in a wide range of human diseases such as cancer,
autoimmune diseases and developmental abnormalities. Receptor Expressed
in Lymphoid Tissues (RELT) is a recently identified human TNFR that has
two identified homologous binding partners RELL1 and RELL2. This study
sought to further elucidate the function of RELT by identifying novel
protein interactions with RELT family members. Human I-mfa
domain-containing protein (HIC), also known as MDFIC, was identified in a
genetic screen for novel RELL1 binding partners. HIC is a transcription
factor that was initially identified to differentially regulate HTLV and
HIV gene expression. HIC is now known to regulate many other cellular
processes and the hic gene is located proximally to regions of chromosome
7 (7q31.1) frequently lost in Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) patients. Our
current studies indicate that HIC physically interacts with both RELT and
RELL1, as determined by in vitro co-immunoprecipitations.
Immunohistochemistry was utilized to determine whether HIC co-localizes
with RELT family members using Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK-293) cells.
HIC was observed to co-localize with RELL1 at the plasma membrane of
HEK-293 cells and appeared to co-localize with RELT in intracellular
compartments. A series of deletion mutants of RELT were created that
could be used to identify the regions of RELT required to bind to HIC.
Site-directed mutagenesis was utilized to create eight (8) deletion
mutants of RELT that lacked differing portions of the intracellular
domain. Interestingly, mutants that were designed to lack more than 60
intracellular amino acids proximal to the plasma membrane were barely
detectable by overexposing Western blots, and this may indicate that the
regions of RELT immediately proximal to the plasma membrane are required
for protein stability. Current ongoing studies involve using the created
deletion mutants of RELT to identify which regions of RELT are required
to bind HIC, and to identify the physiological significance of these
protein interactions. It is interesting to note that the hematologically
expressed RELT was previously identified to interact with PLSCR1, a
protein that induces cell cycle arrest, differentiation and apoptosis of
AML cells. Therefore the discovery that RELT also binds to HIC, a protein
that is highly expressed in leukocytes and is located in a region of
chromosome 7 frequently lost in AML patients, is intriguing and warrants
further study.

