Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CA9 expression highly correlates with cancer stem cell markers
during passaging of PDX lines


Tumor-Initiating Cells (TICs), or Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs), are
considered a subpopulation of cells within a tumor that are particularly
aggressive because when isolated, these cells can form secondary tumors.
Along these lines, experiments in which fragments of tumors, derived from
primary patient samples, are re-implanted into nude mice, the majority of
cells within the fragment die. However, day 3 after re-implantation, a
small subpopulation emerges that is able to seed a new tumor. We
hypothesized that these cells are unique and rare within the original
tumor and consequently present an opportunity to identify novel markers
that can identify these aggressive tumor cells. After sorting live human
cells from tumor fragments three days after passaging, we used single
cell PCR to determine the extent of heterogeneity within the fragment
population. We, in fact, found that there is a subpopulation that highly
expresses markers of proliferation and stemness. This is in contrast to
the major population within the fragment that is enriched for genes
associated with hypoxia and stress response. Interestingly, we found that
the hypoxia responsive gene, CA9, does not correlate with other markers
of hypoxia, such as VEGF, when analyzing cells derived from the fragment.
Instead, CA9 was highly expressed among cells that were also enriched for
markers such as Ki67, survivin, and Lgr5. To confirm if CA9 does identify
a more proliferative, stem-like population, we have sorted CA9+ and CA9-
cells from three day PDX fragments and analyzed using DNA microarrays and
real-time PCR. We have consistently found, among several different PDX
lines, that passaging of tumors followed by sorting CA9+ cells enriches
for cells with increased levels of Lgr5, ASCL2, CD133, and Ki67. This is
also validated through IHC analysis in which the majority of the cells
that are positive for Ki67 are also positive for CA9. We are continuing
to investigate the tumorigenicity of these cells by reinjecting CA9+ and
CA9- cells from fragments back into immune-compromised mice. Furthermore,
we are building a gene list derived from the microarrays to inspect by
single cell PCR if any of these genes associate with Lgr5 in a grown
tumor. Thus, we believe this is a functionally relevant and novel method
for identify novel TIC markers.

