Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a critical level of anti-beta glucan IgG
antibody necessary for response to soluble beta-glucan therapy and its
application as a biomarker for analysis in clinical trials


Soluble beta-glucan is a pathogen associated molecular pattern that can
activate the innate immune system and has been shown to enhance
anti-tumor antibody function in animal models and human clinical trials.
Imprime-PGG is yeast derived soluble beta-glucan that is being developed
as an immunotherapuetic drug for administration with approved monoclonal
anti-tumor antibodies. We have previously demonstrated that in vitro
binding and functional response to Imprime-PGG in whole blood correlates
with the level of anti-beta-glucan antibodies (ABA) as determined by
ELISA. In donors with high ABA levels, stimulation with Imprime-PGG
corresponds with higher levels of complement cascade activation,
neutrophil binding, modulation of surface markers and IL-8 production.
Additionally we have shown that when intravenous immunoglobulin
preparations (IVIG) containing high levels of ABA is added to a whole
blood sample, it increases the binding and functional response to
Imprime-PGG in vitro. Based on these data, we hypothesized that the level
of ABA in patient serum could serve as a potential biomarker predictive
of positive clinical outcome. The objective of this study was to
determine a range of IgG anti- glucan at which an individual would be
considered to be biomarker positive with regards to being responsive to
Imprime-PGG treatment. A panel of 8 donors was selected with low IgG ABA
and the levels of ABA were increased by the addition of IVIG to whole
blood samples at 2, 5 and 10 mg/mL final concentrations. Significant
differences were observed in Imprime-PGG activation with increasing IgG
levels in complement cascade activation as measured by C5b-9, neutrophil
binding of Imprime-PGG, surface marker modulation and IL-8 expression.
Addition of IVIG to 2.5mg/mL showed a difference in complement cascade
activation where a level of 5mg/mL was necessary to see a significant
difference in the other endpoints measured. Analyzing previous data in
healthy donors, this ABA range predicted individuals responsive to
Imprime-PGG stimulation. Analysis of clinical trial patient data,
segregating individuals into a biomarker positive group based on this
range of IgG ABA showed a significant survival benefit over the biomarker
negative population. These results confirm that the level of ABA is
critical to Imprime-PGG response and provides evidence for an IgG ABA
range where response to stimulation occurs that can be used a clinical
biomarker. They also provide evidence that in a clinical setting,
addition of exogenous ABA could provide a benefit to patients with low
ABA levels receiving Imprime-PGG treatment.

