Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrative genomic pipeline to target the NCOR1 cistrome with
precision


NCOR1 is a co-regulator of multiple transcription factors (TFs) and is
mutated in major cancers. We mined publically available data-sets to
reveal the diversity, function and druggability of the NCOR1
cistrome.From ENCODE, in K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia cells, NCOR1
ChIP-Seq data were integrated with H3K9me3 (a functional consequence),
CpG methylation levels and open and closed chromatin states in a matrix
of 45 interactions that were combined with RNA-Seq data. Boot-strapping
approaches then revealed significantly affected gene networks.
Surprisingly, only the combination of NCOR1, H3K9me3 and an intermediate
level of CpG methylation, in open chromatin, significantly associated
with a network of 212 repressed genes (lo_gene). By contrast, 15
different NCOR1 combinatorial binding patterns associated with
significantly elevated gene expression. For example, NCOR1 and low CpG
methylation associated with a network of 908 significantly elevated genes
(hi_gene). A simple linear regression model was built on the correlation
of NCOR1 and 11 different histone modifications with RNA-seq values,
across 81 bins spanning gene loci, to reveal the optimal bin predictor of
gene expression. NCOR1 binding at the TSS significantly and positively
correlated with gene expression, and mirrored the patterns of the
activating histone mark H3K4me3.Transcription factor and GO enrichment in
the lo_gene and hi_gene networks revealed these significant associations
with different TFs and GO terms. In the lo_genes network the most
significantly associated TF was regulatory factor X (RFX1), (FDR=1e-4),
whereas in the hi_gene network it was Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived
2)-like 2 (NFE2L2), (FDR=2.7e-23). GO analyses revealed these cohorts
were most associated with skeletal development (FDR, 2e-3) and
transcription regulation (FDR 1.8e-2) terms respectively, underscoring
their diverse functions.Mining the NCI60 database, combined with
bootstrap approaches, identified that the NCOR1 hi_gene (upregulated)
network was most significantly enriched for genes associated with
sensitivity towards HDAC inhibitors, including vorinostat, compared to
other drug classes including RTKi. Finally, mining a GEO microarray data
set of 59 CML patients revealed that significantly up-regulated genes in
Imatinib resistant patients were significantly enriched for targets
associated with vorinostat sensitivity in the NCI60. Together this
integration pipeline in R, from ENCODE, GEO and NCI60, forms a highly
flexible pipeline that can be applied to any DNA binding protein or
epigenetic state as a prelude to drug redeployment and/or precision
medicine approaches. Specifically, these data suggest that cancer related
functions of NCOR1 are surprisingly most associated with sustained gene
expression, and these targets, both in CML cell lines and patients,
associate with sensitivity to clinically approved HDAC inhibitors.

