Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-apoptotic death induced in glioma cells by the indole-based
chalcone, MOMIPP, involves disruption of endolysosomal trafficking and ER
stress


MOMIPP, 3-(5-methoxy,
2-methyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one, is a novel
chalcone-related compound that induces non-apoptotic cell death in
various cancer cell lines, including temozolomide-resistant glioblastoma
(GBM) cells. The unique mechanism of cell death induced by MOMIPP has
been termed methuosis. Morphological hallmarks of methuosis include early
accumulation of large cytoplasmic vacuoles derived from macropinosomes,
followed by detachment of cells from the substratum and necrosis-like
rupture of the plasma membrane. Nuclear changes typical of apoptosis are
absent. The targets of MOMIPP have not yet been identified and the
mechanistic link between MOMIPP-induced vacuolization and cell death is
poorly understood. Previous studies have shown that the non-clathrin
coated macropinosome-derived vacuoles induced by MOMIPP fail to merge
with lysosomes. In the present study we test the hypothesis that the
cytotoxic activity of MOMIPP may entail perturbations of additional
trafficking pathways that interface with lysosomes. We report that the
post-translation proteolytic processing of pro-cathepsin D, which occurs
in conjunction with trafficking of the pro-enzyme from late endosomes to
lysosomes, is impaired in MOMIPP-treated GBM cells. In parallel,
ligand-dependent turnover of the epidermal growth factor receptor is also
attenuated. These findings are consistent with a global block in protein
trafficking between late endosomes and lysosomes. Examining the
lysosome-dependent process of macroautophagy, we found that MOMIPP caused
an accumulation of the autophagosome marker, LC3-II, and decline in
degradation of the autophagosome cargo, p62, consistent with a block in
autophagosome-lysosome flux. Potentially related to the defects in
protein degradation, we detected a robust activation of ER stress, as
measured by increased expression of CHOP and phosphorylated-PERK in
MOMIPP treated cells. In conjunction with the altered trafficking events,
we observed swelling of acridine orange-positive acidic vesicles, in
addition to the previously reported vacuolization of non-acidic
macropinosomes. More precise identification of these compartments is in
progress. Taken together, these results suggest that the induction of
non-apoptotic cell death by MOMIPP may be related, at least in part, to
dysfunctional trafficking at the nexus where macropinosomes, late
endosomes and autophagosomes converge on lysosomes. Supported by NIH
grant R01 CA115495 and the Harold and Helen McMaster Endowment

