Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitors of QSOX1 suppress tumor cell growth and
invasion


Introduction:QSOX1 is a flavin-dependent sulfhydryl oxidase and the only
known human enzyme with both disulfide generating and transferring
activities. Using tissue microarrays, we previously demonstrated that
QSOX1 is over-expressed in multiple tumor types including breast,
pancreas, prostate and myeloma. Loss of QSOX1 leads to a significant
decrease in tumor cell proliferation and invasion. The over-expression of
QSOX1 in tumor cells compared to non-malignant cells combined with its
role in tumor cell proliferation and invasion make it an attractive
target for potential anti-neoplastic agents.Methods:Using a high
throughput screening assay to detect sulfhydryl oxidase activity, we
screened a library of compounds for inhibition of the QSOX1 enzyme. We
used ROS-GloTM, a luciferase-based assay that detects H2O2, to determine
if any compounds in the library inhibited QSOX1-mediated disulfide bond
formation using reduced RNAse A as a substrate. QSOX1 generates H2O2 as a
by-product of disulfide bond formation. To determine if compounds that
showed activity in the enzymatic assay were also active against tumor
cells, we treated pancreatic, breast, and myeloma cells with the
compounds in a dose-dependent fashion, using non-malignant cells as
controls. We assayed growth/viability by MTT and CellTiter-Glo assays.
Invasive activity of tumor cells was assessed using matrigel-coated
inserts in a modified Boyden chamber assay.Results:High throughput
library screening identified 4 compounds that specifically inhibited
QSOX1 activity (designated A-D) compared to a glucose oxidase
counter-screen. Growth/viability assays showed that compound D suppressed
the growth of tumor cells with IC50s between 300nM-750nM, depending on
tumor cell line. In non-malignant cells the IC50s for compound D were
more than 10-fold higher than in tumor cells. Compounds A and D also
inhibited invasion of breast and pancreatic tumor cells through
Matrigel.Conclusion:This is the first report of chemical compounds that
inhibit QSOX1 enzymatic activity. The discovery of QSOX1 inhibitors with
cellular efficacy establishes the chemical tractability of the target.
Our data demonstrate that these First-In-Class compounds have potential
as anti-neoplastic therapeutics via inhibition of QSOX1.

