Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling of cancer cell lines demonstrates a dynamic relationship
between epithelial, mesenchymal and cancer stem states


Our previous work has demonstrated that exposure of M2 - Tumor Associated
Macrophages M2-TAMs) to epithelial cancer cells can induce an Epithelial
to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). The resulting mesenchymal cancer cells
exhibit a more aggressive phenotype, which places patients at a higher
risk of relapse and death. Although most patients are cured by radical
prostatectomy or radiation, it has been demonstrated that the majority of
patients have disseminated tumor cells in their bone marrow at the time
of primary treatment and approximately 10-15% of these men will
eventually suffer a relapse after a period of dormancy. Further
characterization of these disseminated cells both at the time of primary
treatment and over time, is needed. It is unclear if these cells,
especially those destined to eventually proliferate, are mesenchymal,
epithelial, or cancer stem cells (CSCs). In this work, we investigate the
CSC molecular and gene expression profile across multiple cancer cell
lines and cell phenotypes. In part, this was done by utilizing various
culturing conditions, such as 3D growth in stem cell media in order to
generate sphere-like cultures known as tumorspheres. Flow cytometric
analysis was performed based on ALDH, CD44 variant and CD133 expression.
This was followed by gene expression analysis and characterization of the
resulting tumorspheres and standard 2D cultures. The results demonstrate
that there may be a level of plasticity that allows these cancer cells to
alter gene expression and shift towards a CSC state and/or that there is
a common CSC progenitor that exists within the population which can give
rise to both epithelial and mesenchymal cell types. Therefore, furthering
our understanding of the dynamic relationship between CSCs, EMT, and the
converse mesenchymal to epithelial transition, is critical in developing
novel therapeutics and prognostic tools in the field of cancer medicine.

