Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lifetime alcohol consumption and risk of breast cancer, by tumor
androgen receptor expression


Background: The role of androgens in breast cancer etiology has been
hypothesized but not confirmed. Androgen receptors (AR) have important
physiological effects in normal breast development and are expressed in
malignant breast tissue. Clinical studies indicate that AR may be a
prognostic factor for breast cancer survival; however, studies addressing
its role in breast cancer development are limited. Alcohol consumption, a
confirmed breast cancer risk factor, has been hypothesized to exert its
effect, at least partially, through the AR signaling pathway. We
previously reported that alcohol consumption during adult life was
positively associated with breast cancer risk (per 10 grams/day: hazard
ratio [HR] = 1.10, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.07-1.12), and the
association appeared stronger for estrogen receptor (ER) positive tumors.
However, no epidemiologic studies have so far investigated alcohol and
breast cancer risk according to AR status.Methods: We assessed this
association in a prospective study of 105,858 women enrolled in the
Nurses' Health Study. Alcohol consumption was first assessed through food
frequency questionnaire at baseline (1980) and updated six times during
follow-up; cumulative average alcohol use was calculated by averaging
alcohol intake over time starting at baseline. Tumor AR status was
determined through immunohistochemical staining using sections from a
tumor tissue microarray (TMA); ER and progesterone receptor (PR) status
was obtained from the TMA, or secondarily from the medical record
pathology report. We applied a constrained competing risk survival model
that allows for assessment of the alcohol and breast cancer association
by AR status while controlling for ER and PR status, as well as other
breast cancer risk factors.Results: During over 2.2 million person-years
of follow-up from 1980 to 2006, 2706 invasive breast cancer cases with
complete tumor marker data (i.e. AR, ER and PR) contributed to the
analysis. When considering AR separately without adjustment of ER and PR
status, alcohol consumption was positively associated with risk of
invasive breast cancer among tumors expressing AR but not among
AR-negative tumors (per 11 grams/day [equivalent to 1 drink/day] HR
[95%CI]: 1.10 [1.05 - 1.16] and 1.02 [0.93 - 1.12], respectively; P-value
for heterogeneity test = 0.14). After taking into account both ER and PR
status, alcohol intake remained positively associated with risk of
invasive breast cancer among AR-positive tumors but not among AR-negative
tumors (per 11 grams/day HR [95%CI]: 1.10 [1.05 - 1.15] and 1.04 [0.96 -
1.12], respectively). However, the difference in relative risks between
AR-positive and AR-negative tumors was not statistically significant
(P-value for heterogeneity = 0.24).Conclusion: Our data suggest a
positive association between alcohol intake and breast cancer risk for
AR-positive tumors, but larger studies will be needed to confirm this.

