Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 antagonist-expressing liposomes reduce lung metastases and
deliver drugs to CXCR4 expressing cells: a new drug-targeting device


Introduction. CXCR4 is overexpressed in multiple tumors regulating
metastatic dissemination. A new class of cyclic peptides antagonist for
CXCR4 receptors was recently developed1. To improve peptide efficacy and
increase its delivery delivery to target cancer cells the most active
antagonist, Pep R, was coupled to PEGylated liposomes (PL).Experimental
Procedures. PL conjugated to the liposomes (Lip-PepR) were prepared
starting by athiolated derivative of antiCXCR4 peptides coupled to the
pre-formed PL. Doxorubicin (DOX) was then encapsulated by remote loading
method. Lip-PepR was evaluated through migration assay in A498 human
renal cancer cell line in vitro and in an experimental animal model of
pulmonary metastasis development in vivo (C57/BL mice injected with
B16-CXCR4 cells and treated with 0.1 mg/kg Lipo-PepR and
lipo-unconjucated i.v. twice a week for two weeks). DOX-encapsulating
Lipo-PepR was evaluated in CXCR4 positive cells A498 and HT29 (human
renal and colon cancer cell lines, respectivally) versus negative CXCR4
expressing cells FB-1(human anaplastic thyroid cell line), as mean
cellular fluorescence. Finally, the cytotoxic effect of the lipo-DOX-PepR
was examined, in A498, and HT29 cells.Results. To evaluate the
antagonistic CXCR4 function of Lipo-PepR, migration assays were conducted
in A498, CXCR4 expressing cells. A498 cells were treated with the PepR or
with liposome preparation (Lipo-PepR) and induced to migrate toward the
CXCR4 ligand CXCL12. PepR alone inhibited cell migration such as the
CXCR4 antagonist, AMD3100 while the functionalized peptide, Lipo-PepR
(10M) more efficiently inhibited migration CXCL12-induced compared. To
validate the Lipo-PepR efficacy in vivo, metastases development assays
were conducted. C57/BL mice were injected with murine B16-hCXCR4 melanoma
cells and treated twice a week iv with Lipo-PepR versus Peptide R alone.
A significant reduction in lung metastases was detected in mice treated
with Lipo-Pep R even with lower dose of the Lipo-PepR (0.1mg/kg) compared
to the usually used (2mg/kg). Moreover, to allow a target selective drug
delivery, Lipo-PepR liposomes were loaded with doxorubicin (DOX). A CXCR4
dependent higher DOX accumulation was registered in CXCR4 positive cells,
A498 and HT29 resulting in a specific higher cytotoxicity.Conclusions.
Liposomes conjugated- rationally designed CXCR4 antagonist were more
efficient in inhibiting CXCR4 in vitro and in vivo. Moreover Lip-PepR
loaded with a chemotherapeutic drug, such as DOX, demonstrated an
enhanced drug accumulation into CXCR4 overexpressing cells.1. Portella L
et al. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e74548

