Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crucial roles of cytokine-signaling for alteration in functions of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells


Various types of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were generated from immature myeloid
cells (ImCs) according to the state of tumor microenvironments. In human
cancer patients, MDSCs are generally defined as monocytic (CD11b+, CD14+,
and HLA-DR-/low) or granulocytic (CD11b+ and CD15+) myeloid cells with
antitumor and immunosuppressive activities. In order to develop the
effective cancer immunotherapy, these immune suppressor populations
should be restrictlly controlled in tumor bearing hosts.In the present
research, we evaluated the immunological functions of monocytic or
granulocytic myeloid cells, which were collected from tumor tissues of
colorectal cancer patients. We found here that myeloid populations in
tumor tissues significantly induced immuno-modulating factors such as
IL-6, IL-10, VEGF, iNOS, ARG1, IDO1, and IDO2. In addition, we confirmed
that tumor-infiltrating myeloid-populations exhibited a significant
immunosuppressive activity than those prepared from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). To investigate how tumor-infiltrating MDSCs
acquired the immunosuppressive activity, we focused on the effect of
tumor-derived factors (TDFs) on immunosuppressive activity. PBMCs from
healthy volunteers were cultured in the presence of IL-6, TGF-, and
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) for 6 days, and
then differentiated into Mo-MDSCs (CD11b+CD14+CD33+)-like phenotype
cells. The generated Mo-MDSCs were further isolated by using cell sorter
system and cultured with donor matched T cells and stimulated with
anti-CD3/CD28 beads for 3 days. As a result, we confirmed that T cell
proliferation was significantly inhibited by the addition of Mo-MDSCs
generated with IL-6, TGF- and GM-CSF. On the other hand, these
populations showed immunostimulating ability in the presence of IFN-g in
vitro, suggesting the Mo-MDSCs might have multi-differencing
potentials.These results indicated that tumor-infiltrating MDSCs acquired
stronger immunosuppressive activity by tumor-derived IL-6 and TGF-,
however the function might be altered in response to cytokine conditions.
Thus, we concluded that IL-6 and TGF- induced functional maturation of
MDSCs in tumor microenvironments, suggesting promising targets to improve
the immunological responses by immunotherapy for cancer patients.

