Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG oligodeoxynucleotide enhances the efficacy of anticancer
monoclonal antibody in an in vivo xenograft model using human endometrial
cancer cell


Background: CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) has been shown to exhibit a
potent immunostimulatory activity. Therefore, CpG ODN has been considered
to be a promising material for enhancing the therapeutic effect of
anticancer monoclonal antibody. We have previously identified bone marrow
stromal antigen 2 (BST2) as a therapeutic target of endometrial cancer
cells and also demonstrated that an anti-BST2 antibody showed a potent
anti-tumor effect by antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC)
and complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) against BST2 positive cells.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the synergistic anti-tumor effect
by combination of anti-BST-2 antibody and CpG ODN, and to clarify the
mechanisms of its anti-tumor effect, using xenograft model of anti-BST2
positive endometrial cancer cells.Material and Method: We implanted 7-8
week-old female SCID mice with 5106 HEC-88 nu endometrial cancer cells
subcutaneously. Mice with tumor were treated by intra-peritoneal
injection of an anti-BST2 antibody alone (0 - 200 g/mouse, twice a week
for four weeks), intra-tumoral injection of CpG ODN alone (0 - 30
g/mouse, twice a week for four weeks) or combination therapy (anti-BST2
antibody and CpG ODN). Anti-tumor effect was evaluated by monitoring the
changes of tumor volume and also pathological analysis. In addition,
activation of NK cells was evaluated.Results: Intraperitoneal treatment
of anti-BST2 antibody showed a significant anti-tumor effect, dose
dependently. Similarly, intratumoral injection of CpG ODN showed a
significant anti-tumor effect, in a dose dependent manner. Interestingly,
the combination therapy was more effective than the single-agent therapy.
In addition, the combination therapy also resulted in a high activity of
NK cells.Conclusion: We showed that CpG ODN increases the efficacy of
anti-tumor effect of anti-BST2 antibody induced ADCC activity via
potentiating NK cells mediated cancer cell injury. Combination of CpG ODN
and anti-tumor monoclonal antibody is useful cancer therapy.

