Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transformation of epithelial cells through recruitment leads to
polyclonal intestinal cancers


Background: Intestinal tumors in mice and humans can originate from
multiple progenitors. The consequent heterogeneity within these
polyclonal tumors probably causes them to be more resistant to
chemotherapy. Understanding how these tumors arise is therefore likely to
provide insight into more effective prevention and treatment strategies.
Polyclonal tumors could form as a result of cooperation between two or
more independently initiated cells in close proximity, or else
recruitment in which a single initiated cell facilitates the
transformation of nearby cells. We tested these two potential mechanisms
using murine models of human colorectal cancer that carry clinically
relevant gene mutations.Methods: We generated mosaic mice in which the
status of Apc and Pik3ca varied from crypt to crypt in the distal small
intestine and colon. Some cells lost one copy of Apc, expressed an
activated form of Pik3ca, or both and consequently had a high tumorigenic
potential, whereas others were wild type and had an extremely low
tumorigenic potential. These mosaics allowed us to address fundamental
questions regarding the formation of polyclonal tumors.Results: The
clonal structure of 50 tumors from 11 mice was determined. Cells with low
tumorigenic potential were frequently transformed in combination with
cells with high tumorigenic potential: 1 out of 8 tumors (13%) from mice
expressing the activated form of Pik3ca were heterotypic, containing a
mixture of cells with low and high tumorigenic potential; 9 out 14 tumors
(64%) from mice that carried only an Apc mutation were heterotypic; and
12 out of 28 tumors (43%) from mice that carried both mutations were
heterotypic. Tumor progression does not affect the structure. Many
adenomas (9/20; 45%) and adenocarcinomas (13/30; 43%) were polyclonal.
Immunohistochemistry was used to visualize the localization and
expression level of -catenin and pAKT to ascertain the impact of the
cells with high tumorigenic potential upon those with low tumorigenic
potential.Conclusion: These data indicate that initiated cells recruit
cells that would not otherwise form tumors, and that this structure forms
and persists even in settings in which one progenitor would be expected
to have a large growth advantage over another progenitor. Recruitment
might be mediated by Wnt signalling.

