Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) expression as a
potential patient selection marker in patients with refractory solid
tumors administered BIND-014, a PSMA-targeted nanoparticle containing
docetaxel


Background: Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is a transmembrane
protein that is overexpressed in prostate adenocarcinomas and in
non-prostatic tumor neovasculature. As a novel target for therapeutic
approaches, the distribution pattern of PSMA in primary and metastatic
tumors is of significant interest. In this study we addressed the
cellular distribution and heterogeneity of PSMA expression in solid
tumors from patients on a phase 1 study of BIND-014, a PSMA-targeted
nanoparticle containing docetaxel.Methods: Paraffin-embedded sections of
surgical specimens from 1 patient (pt) with prostate carcinoma and 4 pts
with non-prostatic tumors (cervical, NSCLC, breast and hepatobiliary)
were evaluated. Immunohistochemistry by platelet endothelial cell
adhesion molecule (CD31) for the detection of endothelial cells and
monoclonal mouse anti-human PSMA (Clone 3E6) for detection of PSMA were
used to determine the cellular localization and staining intensity for
each tumor type. Results: All pts evaluated experienced some clinical
benefit from BIND-014 (including complete response, partial response or
stable disease) which is targeted to PSMA. We demonstrated differences in
staining intensity and localization of PSMA in neoplastic epithelium and
neoplastic tissue-associated blood vessels. PSMA was detected in the
epithelium of prostate tissue and in neoplastic tissue-associated vessels
of cervical, anal, NSCLC, and hepatobiliary cancers. PSMA was not
detected in benign tissue of any specimens evaluated. Conclusions: Our
findings support the feasibility of developing this assay as a companion
diagnostic to potentially select patients who may benefit from
PSMA-directed targeted therapy. Ongoing Phase 2 studies with BIND-014
include further PSMA expression analysis.

