Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia has different effects on proliferation, migration and
metastasis of various types of tumor cells


Hypoxia promotes angiogenesis and assigns radio- and chemotherapy
resistance and aggressive phenotype to tumor cells. HIF-1 alpha, the main
regulator of hypoxia induced processes, is activated in areas of low
oxygen supply. Rho GTPases such as Rac1, cdc42 and RhoA play an important
role in actin polimerization, depolimerization and stress fiber formation
during tumor morphogenesis, cell adhesion, and cell migration. In the
present study cell lines of melanoma (HT168-M1), fibrosarcoma (HT1080),
colon cancer (HT25, HT29), lung cancer (H1975) and a head-neck cancer
(PECA-PJ15) were cultured under normoxic and hypoxic conditions
containing 1% and 5% O2. Proliferation tests with sulforhodamine B,
migration assays with modified Boyden chamber and time-lapse
videomicroscopy were performed with all cell lines. Furthermore,
investigation of the expression and localization of HIF-1alpha, Rac1,
cdc42 and RhoA mRNA by quantitative RT-PCR and immunfluorescence and the
activation of small GTPases were performed. In addition, we examined the
role of the hypoxic condition (CoCl2 administration) and HIF blockade
(chetomin administration) on the metastatic potential of tumor cells
using orthotopic xenograft models. The various tumor cell lines displayed
different behaviour in vitro and in vivo. In the case of the most motile
cell line (HT-168-M1), proliferation and migration capacity, moreover the
gene expression patterns of small GTPases and HIF-1alpha were
significantly higher under hypoxic conditions compared to normoxic cells.
Migration capacity of the PECA-PJ15 cell line was higher when cultured
under higher oxygen concentration. The hypoxic condition was less
tolerated by both human colon carcinoma cell lines. In HT29 cells RhoA
translocated into the nucleus under the hypoxic condition. The in vivo
experiments demonstrated that primary tumor size and the number of
metastasis were the largest in the CoCl2-treated group, and the smallest
in the chetomin-treated group. In conclusion, our findings support that
different phenotypes of the cancer cells form under hypoxia presumably
via different pathways. This work is supported by OTKA K84173.

