Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow myeloid cells promote multiple myeloma chemoresistance
by DNA mediated signaling


Bone marrow (BM) niche provides a sanctuary for multiple myeloma (MM)
cells allowing them to escape chemotherapy. Previous in vitro studies
have implicated some accessory cells present in BM microenvironment
including stromal cells, macrophages, osteoclasts and plasmacytoid
dendritic cells in MM chemoresistance. However, these cells comprise only
a small fraction of BM niche. The role of the major cellular component of
BM represented by immature myeloid cells, neutrophils, and monocytes in
MM survival from chemotherapy remains unknown. To determine whether
myeloid cells are involved in regulation of MM growth and
chemosensitivity, we initially employed in vivo mouse models that allow
for the modulation of the number of myeloid cells in BM. Using the
CD11b-DTR model, we demonstrated that depletion of myeloid
CD11b-expressing cells from BM led to a significant reduction of MM tumor
growth in these mice and improved the antitumor effect of doxorubicin.
Conversely, GM-CSF-induced expansion of myeloid cells in the BM of
MM-bearing mice resulted in reduced survival and increased resistance to
chemotherapy. CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells isolated from BM of MM-bearing or
control tumor-free mice demonstrated chemoprotective effects on mouse MM
cells. Human CD33+CD14-CD11b+ myeloid cells isolated from BM of patients
with MM or healthy donors were able to protect human MM cells from
doxorubicin and melphalan-induced apoptosis in vitro. The addition of
supernatant collected from myeloid cells to MM cells was sufficient to
induce chemoprotection in mice and human cells. The protection was
completely lost when myeloid cells were separated from MM cells by
transwell insert. Our further studies demonstrated that myeloid cells,
but not other BM accessory cells, were able to release substantial amount
of DNA. Importantly, treatment of these cells with DNAse I abrogated the
chemoprotective effect of myeloid cells on MM. The addition of genomic
DNA isolated from myeloid cells promoted chemoresistance of MM cells.
Further, Stimulation of TLR9 with its ligand CpG oligonucleotides
mimicked the chemoprotective effect of DNA on MM cells. Cell-free DNA
up-regulated spliced XBP-1, a transcription factor involved in unfolded
protein response. Pharmacological inhibition of IRE-1, a kinase required
for XBP-1 splicing, reversed myeloid cell induced MM chemoprotection.
Finally, in vivo depletion of myeloid cells in BM of MM-bearing mice
resulted in decreased expression of spliced XBP-1 in MM cells and
improved response to chemotherapy. Taken together, our data demonstrated
a critical role played by myeloid cells in growth and chemosensitivity of
MM cells and identified a novel mechanism that mediates this effect. Our
results suggest that targeting myeloid cells or TLR9 in MM may reduce
tumor growth and improve response to the chemotherapy in this disease.

