Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erk inhibition as a therapeutic option for the treatment of Raf-
and Mek- inhibitor resistant tumors


The MAPK pathway represents a prime target for therapeutic intervention
in cancer. Recent approvals of B-Raf and Mek inhibitors lead to exciting
antitumor activities and survival benefits. However the observation of
resistance to such Raf and Mek inhibitors has been documented in both
clinical and preclinical trials. These phenomena stimulated further
research into the regulation of the MAPK pathway and led to the
suggestion to target the downstream kinase Erk, as well as to combine its
targeting with Raf and Mek inhibitors.Here we report that Erk inhibitors
result in efficient growth inhibition of tumor cells that are resistant
to Raf and Mek inhibitors. AEZS-134 - a highly potent and selective ATP
competitive Erk inhibitor - overcomes the Raf inhibitor induced
paradoxical cell activation and the aquired resistance to Mek inhibitors
in tumor cells. We demonstrate potent antiproliferative activity of
AEZS-134 in B-Raf wildtype, B-RafV600E mutant, Ras wildtype and K-Ras
mutant tumor cell lines in comparison to common Raf inhibitors.
Furthermore we show that AEZS-134 is efficacious in Mek inhibitor
resistant Hct116 and MDA MB231 cells which have been well characterized
in terms of Mek F129L allosteric binding pocket mutation, varying degrees
of K-Ras amplification, cellular proliferation assays and MAPK pathway
phosphorylation studies.Our data provide a rational for new therapeutic
opportunities by using Erk inhibitors in oncology. In order to maximize
therapeutic benefit for patients and considering that Erk is directly
downstream of B-Raf and Mek, targeting Erk may be more effective than
targeting Raf or Mek in a variety of MAPK resistance settings. AEZS-134
and related compounds provide potent and selective tools to help address
this question.Development of the Erk inhibitors by terna Zentaris is
integral part of our inhouse kinase research program comprising the
investigation of different compounds for single Erk inhibition, single
PI3K inhibition and dual kinase inhibitions of Erk and PI3K. All
compounds are exclusively synthesized by our medicinal chemistry
department.

