Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic control of the tumor suppressive microRNA miR-34a in
bladder cancer


Bladder cancer is the sixth most common cancer in the world and the
incidence is particularly high in southwestern Taiwan. One of the
hypotheses suggests that cancers arise from cancer stem-like cell (CSC)
with surface antigen CD44. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous,
non-protein-coding RNAs that can regulate the expression of their target
mRNAs. Up to 90% of human genes can be regulated by this mechanism.
However, the role of miRNAs in the regulation of CSC in bladder cancer is
not fully explored. Bioinformatics prediction identified that miR-34a
regulates the expression of CD44. In this study, we aimed to investigate
how miR-34a are regulated in bladder cancer. Expression analysis showed
that miR-34a was down-regulated in UMUC3 bladder cancer cells. COBRA
assay and bisulphite pyrosequencing demonstrated extensive DNA
methylation of miR-34a in this cell. Treatment of DNMT inhibitor, 5-aza
restored miR-34a expression in UMUC3 cells thus suggesting that miR-34a
is epigenetically silenced in UMUC3 cells. Over-expression of miR-34a
resulted in a reduction of chemo-resistance to cisplatin in UMUC3 cells.
This may be due to a down-regulation of CD44 and another predicted
miR-34a target, c-myc in this cell. Recently, additional mechanism
namely, competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) hypothesis in controlling the
function of miRNAs are demonstrated. To test this hypothesis in bladder
cancer, we overexpressed 3UTR of CD44 in TSGH8301 bladder cancer cells
which expressed miR-34a, and resulted in an up regulation of another
target of miR-34a, c-myc in this cells. Since amplification of chromosome
8q24 where c-myc resides is frequently observed in bladder cancer, we
investigated the relationship between expression of c-myc and CD44 in a
publicly available expression array data set (GDS1479) using 60 bladder
cancer patients. Interestingly, a positive correlation was found between
the expression of c-myc and CD44 (P=0.0016) in this data set. In
conclusion, aberrant promoter methylation and ceRNA mechanism may
contribute to attenuate the function of miR-34a in bladder cancer. The
tumor suppressive role of miR-34a in controlling CSC phenotype in bladder
cancer deserves further investigation.

