Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development study of hypoxia responsive chemiluminescent probe
for tumor hypoxia imaging


Introduction: The tumor microenvironment is recognized as a major factor
that influences not only the response to conventional anticancer
therapies but also the potential for malignant progression and
metastasis. Therefore, it is considered that tumor hypoxia imaging is
critical for cancer diagnosis and therapy. As optical modalities offer
the advantages of non-invasive, easy-to-handle, and cost-effective
imaging, much effort has been done to develop synthetic fluorescent
imaging probes for tumor hypoxia. In particular, we focus our attention
on chemiluminescence imaging which can avoid interference from tissue
autofluorescence and scattering light. We therefore show the development
of hypoxia responsive chemiluminescent probe, which has the advantage of
lower detection limits and improved signal-to-noise ratio compared to
existing fluorescent probes.Results and discussion: In our molecular
design, luminescence is derived from 1,2-dioxetane cleavage triggered by
hypoxia-selective enzymatic reduction of electron-deficient aromatics. At
the start, nitrobenzyl moiety was chosen as a bioreductively cleavable
protective group linked to 1,2-dioxetane moiety through phenyl ether
linker to construct synthetic probe NB-Adm. The compound was synthesized
from 2-adamantanone in 19% (overall yield, 6 steps). Then NB-Adm was
attempted to be reduced by nitroreductase, however, no luminescence was
observed. HPLC analysis of the reaction mixture indicated that our
expected reduction did not occur, probably because bulky adamantane
moiety prevented the enzymatic reaction owing to steric hindrance.
Therefore, a self-immolative linker was employed to keep away
1,2-dioxetane moiety from enzyme recognition moiety. In this time,
quinone moiety was chosen as a protective group which was expected to be
better substrate than nitrophenyl one in terms of their redox potential.
This newly designed compound, TMQ-Adm was synthesized from 2-adamantanone
in 16% (overall yield, 6 steps). By the use of TMQ-Adm, we successfully
observed luminescent emission from the reaction with nitroreductase. This
implied that our bioredctively activatable probe can be applicable for
chemiluminescence imaging for tumor hypoxia. Now we are investigating to
develop chemiluminescent probe to realize in vivo imaging of tumor
hypoxia by improving luminescent quantum yield under physiological
condition.

