Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SAH-p53-mediated inhibition of cell migration via alteration of
actin dynamics


The mutation of p53 is critical for the increased metastatic potential of
cancer cells. As such, it is essential not only to understand the
mechanisms underlying the functional implications of p53 mutation, but
also to identify ways to regulate their impact on cancer cell physiology.
I have found that a hydrocarbon-stapled p53 transactivation domain
peptide (SAH-p53) designed to disrupt the interaction of p53 with its
negative regulators HDM2 and HDMX retains its function in cells harboring
a mutant TP53. A common gain-of-function activity of the mutant p53
protein (mtp53) is the enhancement of cell migration and invasion;
however, I found that SAH-p53 has the ability to inhibit the migration
and invasion of HS578T and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells (mtp53), while
exhibiting no change in proliferative ability at the same dose. This
effect was accompanied by sustained alterations in actin stress fiber
dynamics and inhibition of focal adhesion assembly and signaling.
Furthermore, treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with various growth factors
(EGF, TGF-, PDGF, HGF) was unable to rescue the migratory ability of
cells in the presence of SAH-p53. The combination of SAH-p53 and TGF-
resulted in a decrease in the total expression levels of both EGFR and
FAK. Moreover, it was shown that the combined treatment of SAH-p53 and
TGF- enhanced the localization of EGFR to early endosomes and eventually
to lysosomes, prompting the use of fluorophore-capped SAH-p53 to track
the localization of the peptide in relation to EGFR. It was determined
that over time SAH-53 localizes to vesicles containing EGFR, but not
other RTKs (ie. PDGFR). SAH-p53 was able to retain its ability to inhibit
migration in the absence of functional HDMX/HDM2 or mutant p53,
suggesting the possibility of an alternative target. We are currently
using a photoactivatable and capped SAH-p53 that can cross-link to a
target protein in the presence of UV in order to determine the identity
of the target of SAH-p53 responsible for the anti-migratory effects seen
in mutant p53- or p53-null cells. These data show that the use of a
stapled peptide provides a novel avenue to study the molecular
interactions that drive metastatic behavior in cancer cells.

