Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel evidence for chemopreventive effects of curcumin and
boswellic acid through regulation of mir-27a and mir-34a in human
colorectal cancer


Purpose: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common causes of
cancer-associated mortality worldwide, but it is truly a preventable
disease. Accumulating evidence indicates that several dietary botanicals,
including curcumin and boswellic acids, have potent anti-inflammatory and
anti-tumorigenic properties. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
the anti-cancer potential of these compounds remain poorly understood.
More recent data suggest that the chemopreventive effects of these
botanicals may in part be mediated through regulation of key
cancer-related microRNAs (miRNAs), and their downstream gene targets.
This study aimed to determine whether curcumin and 3
acetyl-11-keto--boswellic acid (AKBA) exert their anti-tumorigenic
effects through modulation of specific miRNAs in CRC cell lines and a
xenograft mouse model.Experimental Design: We first determined the
effects of curcumin and AKBA on cellular proliferation, apoptosis and
cell cycle dynamics in a panel of CRC cell lines. Next, we used
Illumina's Human HT-12 V4 array gene expression arrays to systematically
identify specific gene signaling pathways regulated by curcumin and AKBA.
Subsequently we used combined bioinformatics and in-silico approaches to
identify miRNAs and molecular pathways activated by curcumin and AKBA
individually, and their combination. We determined the functional role of
curcumin and AKBA-related miRNAs in CRC cell lines, and validated these
findings for the chemopreventive efficacy of curcumin and AKBA in a
xenograft animal model.Results: Both curcumin and AKBA inhibited cellular
proliferation, induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrests in all CRC cell
lines, and these effects were significantly enhanced with combined
vis--vis individual treatments with the botanicals. Gene-expression
arrays revealed that curcumin and AKBA regulated key cell cycle
controlling genes including: cMYC, CCND1, CCNE1 and CDK4. Combined
bioinformatics and in-silico analysis identified apoptosis, proliferation
and cell cycle regulatory signaling pathways as the key modulators of
curcumin and AKBA-induced anti-cancer effects, and further discovered
miR-27a and miR-34a as the most significantly differentially expressed
miRNAs following treatment with the two botanicals. In support of our in
vitro findings, mouse xenograft experiments further confirmed that both
curcumin and AKBA suppressed tumor size and volume in mice, and that
these effects were orchestrated through modulation of miR-27a and miR-34a
expression in the animal model.Conclusion: We provide novel mechanistic
evidence for the chemopreventive effects of curcumin and AKBA through
regulation of specific miRNAs in CRC. The enhanced anti-tumorigenic
effect by combined treatment with these botanicals provides a potential
rationale for the use of such diet-based botanicals for the
chemoprevention of this malignancy.

