Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic alcohol consumption inhibits iNKT cell activation-induced
antitumor response in B16BL6 melanoma-bearing mice


Alcohol consumption increases the incidence of many types of cancer
including melanoma. It is not well understand how chronic alcohol
consumption affects tumor progression and survival. We previously found
that chronic alcohol consumption activates CD8+ T cells in the non-tumor
injected mice and at the early stage after tumor inoculation; however, it
accelerates CD8+T cell dysfunction during further tumor growth. The
underlying mechanism regarding modulation of CD8+ T cells by alcohol and
how the functional changes in the immune response affect tumor growth and
survival remain to be elucidated. Herein, we investigated how alcohol
modulates iNKT cells in melanoma-bearing mice and how different immune
treatment regimens affect tumor growth and survival. We found that
alcohol increases iNKT cells in non-tumor injected mice, and that
activation of these iNKT cells induces a Th1 response. With tumor
progression, alcohol reverses iNKT cell cytokine profile to aTh2-dominant
one. Chronic alcohol consumption inhibits melanoma growth, but this is
does associated with increased survival. Immunization with a melanoma
cell lysate significantly inhibits tumor growth and increases survival
compared to the non-immunized alcohol-consuming, tumor-bearing mice.
Immunization in the water-drinking control mice did not significantly
increase survival compared to respective non-immunized mice. Immunization
coupled with iNKT cell activation with alpha GalCer significantly
increases the survival of water-drinking melanoma-bearing mice. However,
the survival of mice consuming alcohol was significantly decreased
compared to their water-drinking counterparts. Collectively, chronic
alcohol consumption interacting with melanoma alters the iNKT cell
cytokine profile from Th1-dominant to Th2- dominant, which in turn
contributes to inhibition of antitumor immunity and decreases survival of
melanoma-bearing mice. Supported by NIH grants R01AA07293 and K05AA017149
and funds provided for medical and biological research by the State of
Washington Initiative Measure No. 171.

