Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR inhibition causes growth delay and induces apoptosis in
HPV-positive head and neck cancer


Purpose: Cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody inhibiting the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), is approved for use in the treatment of head and
neck cancer (HNC). However, studies of cetuximab were performed with
HPV-negative cells, clinical trials were performed without regard to HPV
status, and current studies on HPV+ HNC treatment with cetuximab are
contradicting. This study was performed to determine whether HPV+ HNC
responds to cetuximab and to examine the mechanisms through which
cetuximab affects HPV+ HNC.Methods: Four HPV+ cell lines were assessed
for EGFR expression by immunoblot. Sensitivity to cetuximab was tested by
examining cell proliferation and colony formation. Apoptosis was measured
by caspase activation, flow cytometry for Annexin V, and immunoblot. Cell
cycle was assessed by immunoblot and flow cytometry for propidium iodide
stained cells. HPV+ HNC subcutaneous flank cell line xenografts and
patient-derived xenografts were placed in immunocompromised mice treated
with cetuximab, tumor size was measured twice weekly.Results: Cetuximab
treatment resulted in significant delay in cell proliferation and
significant decrease in colony formation. Cetuximab caused an increase in
apoptosis in all methods measured. Also, as previously seen in HPV- cell
lines, cetuximab resulted in a G1 cell cycle arrest. Using both cell line
and patient-derived xenograft models of HPV+ HNCs, cetuximab resulted in
significant tumor growth delay (median time to tumor quadrupling: 15 vs.
24 days, and 42 vs. 89 days, respectively).Conclusions: Epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibition by cetuximab is effective in slowing
proliferation and inducing apoptosis in HPV+ HNC. The proposed mechanism
of action appears to be similar to that shown in HPV- HNC. These results
suggest that cetuximab may play a role in the management of patients with
HPV+ HNC.

