Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-148a promotes apoptosis in urothelial cell carcinoma of the
bladder cells in part by targeting DNMT1


Introduction: MiRNAs are now recognized as major players in cancer.
MiR-148a has been shown to be a tumor suppressor in the context of
several cancers including prostate, gastric, and lung but a study
investigating its role in bladder cancer has never been performed. Here
we characterized the expression and role of miR-148a in bladder
cancer.Methods: Real time PCR was used to assess the levels of miR-148a
across several bladder cancer cell lines. MiR-148a mimics were employed
in T24 and UM-UC-3 cells to assess proliferation by CCK-8 proliferation
assay, colony formation assay, and flow cytometry. Mimics were also used
to assess apoptosis by immunoblot and annexin-V staining coupled to flow
cytometry. Immunoblot was used to probe for targets of miR-148a and siRNA
was used to knock-down DNMT1 to phenocopy miR-148a treatment results.
CCK-8 proliferation assays and crystal violet staining were used to
assess the additive effects of miR-148a with either cisplatin or
doxorubicin on T24 and UM-UC-3 cells and CCK-8 proliferation assays were
also used to assess the role DNMT1 plays in cisplatin
sensitivity.Results: All bladder cancer cell lines had significantly
reduced expression of miR-148a than that of a control immortalized
urothelial cell line. MiR-148a mimic treatment of T24 and UM-UC-3 cells
led to large decreases in viability. Flow cytometry demonstrated an
increase in S-phase and no major G1 or G2/M arrests in miR-148a mimic
treated cells versus control oligo treated cells suggesting that the
effects observed on viability were due to increased apoptosis.
Immunoblots for cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP along with annexin-V
staining coupled to flow cytometry showed as expected a strong induction
of apoptosis in miR-148a mimic treated cells. Immunoblots demonstrated
that miR-148a targets DNMT1 and DNMT1 knock-down was able to partially
phenocopy results from miR-148a mimic treatment suggesting DNMT1 is
downstream of miR-148a. Finally, we found that miR-148a can be used with
either cisplatin or doxorubicin for an additive effect in inducing
apoptosis and that DNMT1 targeting is involved in sensitivity to
cisplatin.Conclusions: Our work demonstrates for the first time that
miR-148a plays a tumor suppressive role in bladder cancer and suggests it
could be used as a novel therapeutic agent either alone or in conjunction
with chemotherapeutics.

