Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathologic response pattern of breast cancer after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy: its correlation with molecular subtypes


Background: Several ways to assess pathologic response of breast cancer
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) are currently used, including
Miller-Payne system and residual cancer burden. However, the relationship
between pathologic response pattern and molecular subtype of breast
cancer is unclear. Methods: We investigated the pathologic response
pattern of breast cancer after NAC in each molecular subtype. Female
breast cancer patients who received NAC and subsequent breast operation
were retrospectively analyzed. The NAC regimen used for breast cancer was
primarily anthracycline and taxane-based, depending on the axillary lymph
node involvement. We evaluated the molecular subtypes by
immunohistochemistry, pretreatment tumor sizes by MRI, absolute invasive
tumor cellularities in pretreatment biopsy and operation specimens,
pathologic complete response (pCR) rates, posttreatment pathologic tumor
sizes, overall residual tumor cellularities, and grades for Miller-Payne
system. Results: A total of 119 patients (age: 45.2 9.5 yr) were
enrolled. Sixty-six cases were hormone receptor positive (ER or PR
positive), 18 cases were HER2 positive (ER and PR negative), and 35 cases
were triple negative. There were no significant differences in
pretreatment tumor size by MRI and absolute cellularity in biopsy between
three groups. After NAC, hormone receptor positive tumors showed the
lowest pCR rate (18.2 %) while triple negative tumors showed the highest
pCR rate (45.7 %, p=0.013). In patients with residual carcinoma, hormone
receptor positive tumors showed the largest ypT size (p=0.016), the least
reduction of tumor size (p=0.001), and the least absolute invasive tumor
cellularity (p=0.006). Overall residual tumor cellularity and
Miller-Payne grade were not significantly different between three groups
(p=0.4 and p=0.703, respectively). Conclusion: These results suggest that
each molecular subtype of breast cancer shows characteristic pathologic
response patterns following NAC.

