Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-dihydrotestosterone down-regulates HER2 and sensitizes breast
cancer cells to Herceptin-induced apoptosis in vitro


Androgen inhibits growth of malignant breast cancer (BCa) cells by
mechanisms that remain poorly defined. Here, we have investigated how
androgen suppress proliferation and induces apoptosis in BCa cells.
Treatment of MCF-7 cells with 1nM 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) inhibited
cell proliferation as well as endogenous HER2 expression, both at mRNA
and protein levels, suggesting a link between androgen receptor (AR) and
HER2 signaling pathways. Expression of HER2 and AR was also determined in
patients with BCa. We found a survival advantage of AR expression in
patients with HER2 positive BCa, whereas, loss of AR expression was
associated with poor survival. This finding would suggest that AR loss
may provide a growth advantage to HER2 over-expressing tumors. We showed
the functional consequence of the stimulation of AR-signaling and
inhibition of HER2-signaling on breast epithelial cell growth and on
expression of 84 genes involved in BCa and estrogen-mediated signaling
pathway. Exposure to a combination therapy of DHT and Herceptin resulted
in additive anti-proliferative effect in human MCF-7 cells as compared to
either agent alone. Furthermore, combined treatment of DHT with Herceptin
reduces the expression of genes predominantly involved in proliferation,
invasion, anti-apoptosis and cell cycle regulation.These findings provide
the key insights into how Herceptin and DHT produce anti-proliferative
effect in BCa cells. In conclusion, adding DHT to Herceptin may provide a
rational treatment option for BCa, not only by direct inhibition of cell
proliferation, but also causing changes in the expression of many genes
that are critically involved in the control of proliferation.
Establishment of any interaction between AR and HER2 may improve the
understanding of carcinogenesis and will provide helpful information in
the development of novel preventive and therapeutic strategies.

