Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of EZH2 as an epigenetic switch of the TGF-/SMAD4 targets
in regulating EMT in ovarian cancer


The TGF- signaling regulates numerous cellular processes, including cell
proliferation, cell differentiation, apoptosis, migration and cell fate.
It was also demonstrated that TGF- functions as a tumor suppressor in
normal ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) cells but promotes tumor
proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during ovarian
cancer progression. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms leading to
this divert role of TGF- signaling in ovarian cancer remains to be
elucidated. Our previous studies demonstrated that several TGF-/SMAD4
regulated targeted are epigenetically silenced by DNA methylation and
histone modification including H3K27me3. We therefore hypothesized that
the histone-lysine N-methyltransferase, EZH2 may act as an epigenetic
switch to facilitate the TGF- mediated EMT in ovarian cancer. In this
study, we utilized our previously identified TGF- responsive targets
using combined ChIP-chip and expression arrays in an immortalized ovarian
surface epithelial (IOSE) cell which showed TGF- growth inhibition.
Bioinformatics analysis using ENCODE ChiP-Seq data identified that
several of these TGF- targets are marked by EZH2. To investigate the
effect of TGF- signaling on the methylome of ovarian cancer, we performed
MBDcap-Seq in SMAD4 knockdown CP70 cells. Our result showed that there
are 99 and 73 TGF- targets showing hyper- or hypo-methylation
respectively after SMAD4 knockdown. Analysis of the gene functions on
DAVID has uncovered that some of these hypermethylated genes are
associated with EMT process and the TGF- signaling pathway. On the other
hand, the hypomethylated genes are associated with transcription
repressor activity. We selected one of the hypermethylated target, LTBP2
which was previously found to be a tumor suppressor for further
experiment. This gene was expressed in IOSE but down regulated in a panel
of ovarian cancer cells showing overexpression of EZH2. Except for IOSE,
promoter hypermethylation of LTBP2 was found in ovarian cancer cells as
revealed by bisulphite pyrosequencing. In consistent with deep sequencing
result, knock-down of SMAD4 further increased the promoter methylation in
CP70 cells. Treatment of demethylation agent, 5azaDC partially restored
its expression in these cancer cells. Interestingly, synergistic
treatment of 5azaDC and EZH2 inhibitor, GSK343 resulted in a dramatic
increase of LTBP2 expression in MCP3 and CP70 cells. Taken together, our
result suggested that EZH2 may be involved in the epigenetic silencing of
TGF-/SMAD4-regulated tumor suppressors in ovarian cancer. The
differential occupancy of EZH2 into these SMAD4 loci may act as an
epigenetic switch to turn the function of TGF- from a tumor suppressor
into an EMT regulator. The therapeutic potential of targeting EZH2 in the
inhibition of EMT in ovarian cancer deserves further investigation.

