Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined BCL-2/XL and mTor inhibition promotes apoptosis in small
cell lung cancer


The Bcl-2 family genes have emerged as potential targets for the
treatment of small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Bcl-2 is a central apoptotic
inhibitor associated with tumor progression and treatment resistance.
Overexpression occurs in up to 80% of SCLC. ABT-263 (navitoclax) is an
orally bioavailable small molecule, which inhibits Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL,
disrupting their interactions with pro-death proteins, and leading to the
initiation of apoptosis. However a recent clinical trial of single-agent
ABT-263 (navitoclax) showed a low rate of response in advanced and
recurrent SCLC, discouraging development.Our laboratory had previously
shown that SCLC cells rendered deficient in the Fanconi Anemia (FA)
repair pathway by inhibition of FANCD2 were more sensitive to navitoclax
compared to FA competent cells, and that 15% of small cell lung cancer
patients' tumor samples, evaluated by immunofluorescence for FANCD2 foci
formation are FA functionally deficient. In the search for pharmacologic
inhibition of FANCD2, which could potentially expand the pool of
susceptible patients to navitoclax, we learned that the mTOR inhibitor
AZD8055 induced downregulation of the FANCD2 protein. Thus, we
hypothesized that mTOR inhibition would potentiate the activity of
navitoclax.First we treated the human SCLC cancer cell H179 with
navitoclax and AZD8055 at a dose of 5M, either as single agents or in
combination. MTT assay showed that the cell survival rate was 39% for
AZD8055 and 52% for navitoclax when the cell was treated for 72 hours.
Western analysis showed that AZD8055 inhibited FANCD2 protein expression
completely, and when the cell was treated with the combination, the
survival rate decreased to 24%. Increased apoptosis by Western immunoblot
PARP cleavage assay was observed for the combination, as compared to
navitoclax or AZD8055 alone.Despite evidence showing that the clinically
available mTOR inhibitor temsirolimus only inhibits TORC1 at clinically
meaningful concentrations, we decided to evaluate if this agent could
also inhibit FANCD2. Western immunoblot analysis with anti-FANCD2
antibody showed that temsirolimus caused marked FANCD2 protein reduction.
Subsequent clonogenic assays using the human SCLC cells H719 and H792
showed that either temsirolimus or navitoclax treatment alone was
cytotoxic to both SCLC cell lines. The cell survival rate for H719 was
48% for temsirolimus and 62% for navitoclax10 days following treatment.
For H792 the survival rates were 59% for temsirolimus and 32% for
navitoclax. Navitoclax and temsirolimus in combination led to further
reduction in cell colony survival (5% for H719 and 14% H792). Western
analysis showed that the apoptotic rate was increased for the combination
as compared to single agent treatment.The encouraging in vitro results
described above suggest that evaluation of activity for the combination
of navitoclax and temsirolimus in small cell lung cancer patients should
be considered.

