Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paxillin enhances angiogenesis through transcriptional regulation
of Src in ovarian cancer


Purpose: Paxillin (PXN) expression is increased in various cancer types,
but its biological and clinical impact is not well understood. Here, we
examined the biological effects of paxillin in ovarian cancer.Methods:
The in vivo (HeyA8 and HeyA8-MDR orthotopic mouse models of ovarian
cancer) and in vitro (tube formation assays, reverse phase protein array
(RPPA) analysis, RT-PCR chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay)
effects of paxillin were examined in ovarian cancer.Results: Paxillin
silencing using siRNA incorporated in DOPC nanoliposomes resulted in 55%
reduction in tumor growth in a HeyA8 orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse
model (pPurpose: Paxillin (PXN) expression is increased in various cancer
types, but its biological and clinical impact is not well understood.
Here, we examined the biological effects of paxillin in ovarian
cancer.Methods: The in vivo (HeyA8 and HeyA8-MDR orthotopic mouse models
of ovarian cancer) and in vitro (tube formation assays, reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) analysis, RT-PCR chromatin-immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay) effects of paxillin were examined in ovarian
cancer.Results: Paxillin silencing using siRNA incorporated in DOPC
nanoliposomes resulted in 55% reduction in tumor growth in a HeyA8
orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse model (p<0.05). There was an unexpected
effect of marked reduction in vascular density (67%, pPurpose: Paxillin
(PXN) expression is increased in various cancer types, but its biological
and clinical impact is not well understood. Here, we examined the
biological effects of paxillin in ovarian cancer.Methods: The in vivo
(HeyA8 and HeyA8-MDR orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer) and in
vitro (tube formation assays, reverse phase protein array (RPPA)
analysis, RT-PCR chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay) effects of
paxillin were examined in ovarian cancer.Results: Paxillin silencing
using siRNA incorporated in DOPC nanoliposomes resulted in 55% reduction
in tumor growth in a HeyA8 orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse model
(p<0.05). There was an unexpected effect of marked reduction in vascular
density (67%, p<0.01). In addition, tumor proliferation was decreased by
60% (pPurpose: Paxillin (PXN) expression is increased in various cancer
types, but its biological and clinical impact is not well understood.
Here, we examined the biological effects of paxillin in ovarian
cancer.Methods: The in vivo (HeyA8 and HeyA8-MDR orthotopic mouse models
of ovarian cancer) and in vitro (tube formation assays, reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) analysis, RT-PCR chromatin-immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay) effects of paxillin were examined in ovarian
cancer.Results: Paxillin silencing using siRNA incorporated in DOPC
nanoliposomes resulted in 55% reduction in tumor growth in a HeyA8
orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse model (p<0.05). There was an unexpected
effect of marked reduction in vascular density (67%, p<0.01). In
addition, tumor proliferation was decreased by 60% (p<0.01) in PXN-siRNA
treatment group. This anti-proliferative effect of siPXN was not observed
in vitro. In contrast, a significant anti-angiogenic effect was observed
in vitro using a tube formation assay, where condition media collected
from ovarian cancer cells treated with siPXN compared to siControl
resulted in a prominent (60%,pPurpose: Paxillin (PXN) expression is
increased in various cancer types, but its biological and clinical impact
is not well understood. Here, we examined the biological effects of
paxillin in ovarian cancer.Methods: The in vivo (HeyA8 and HeyA8-MDR
orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer) and in vitro (tube formation
assays, reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis, RT-PCR
chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay) effects of paxillin were
examined in ovarian cancer.Results: Paxillin silencing using siRNA
incorporated in DOPC nanoliposomes resulted in 55% reduction in tumor
growth in a HeyA8 orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse model (p<0.05). There
was an unexpected effect of marked reduction in vascular density (67%,
p<0.01). In addition, tumor proliferation was decreased by 60% (p<0.01)
in PXN-siRNA treatment group. This anti-proliferative effect of siPXN was
not observed in vitro. In contrast, a significant anti-angiogenic effect
was observed in vitro using a tube formation assay, where condition media
collected from ovarian cancer cells treated with siPXN compared to
siControl resulted in a prominent (60%,p<0.01) reduction in tube
formation ability of endothelial cells. RPPA analyses pointed to Src
protein expression being significantly decreased following PXN silencing
in HeyA8 cells. Using RT-PCR and western blotting techniques, we observed
that Src mRNA and protein levels were significantly decreased in
siPXN-treated cells. Moreover, p-Src protein level was also found to be
decreased following PXN silencing. ChIP analysis showed direct PXN
binding to the Src promoter.Conclusion PXN exerts indirect effects on
tumor angiogenesis, mediated through Src. These findings provide a new
understanding of the role of PXN in malignant biology.

