Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene profiling of multiple myeloma: MAPK pathway deregulation,
which is regulated by PIM-1 and MOS, is associated with relapse within 6
months after autoSCT in MM patients


Substantial advances have been made in understanding the biology of
multiple myeloma (MM) through the study of the bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment. Dynamic interplay between bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs) and MM cells regulated the relapsed MM after autologous bone
marrow transplantation (ABMT). In this study, we performed gene
expression profiling with microarray data to better dissect the molecular
phenotypes and prognoses of relapsed multiple myeloma (MM). Using gene
expression and clinical data, we applied gene expression signatures
reflecting deregulation of oncogenic pathways to highlight molecular
changes in bone marrow aspirate from 28 patients with relapsed MM. The
patient subgroups were defined according to relapse-free interval, within
6 months versus more than 6 months. The microarray results revealed that
dyregulation of MAPK pathway was associated with relapse within 6 months
after ABMT. Among them, the expression of PIM-1 gene and MOS gene was
higher in samples from patients with relapsed MM than MM cell lines
(p=0.0037; p=0.0021). Also, IL-6, sIL-6R, and HGF expression in patients
who relapsed within 6 months after ABMT was higher than the patients
whose relapse-free interval were longer than 6 months. Treatment of shRNA
PIM-1 gene and shRNA MOS gene in U266 and MOLP8 dramatically led to
decreasing IL-6/sIL-6R mediated ERK phosphorylation and HGF-mediated MET
phosphorylation. Similar results were noted for cluster genes for
PIM-1/MOS. Especially, functional analysis of PIM-1 leads to inactivate
the MAPK pathway through regulating p38 mediated signaling and
Wnt/-catenin pathway. Recent studies suggested that p38 activity in
myeloma inhibits osteoblast differentiation and bone formation, but also
enhances osteoclast maturation and bone resorption. p38 regulated the
expression and secretion of the Wnt pathway antagonist DKK-1 and the
monocyte chemoattractant MCP-1. Conclusionally, Our analysis suggested
that MOS gene and PIM-1, which regulates MAPK pathway, is a noble
prognostic marker for relapse of MM. The importance of the PIM-1-MOS-MAPK
pathway as a prognostic marker in relapsed MM should be reassessed in the
novel therapeutic agent era.

