Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAR-2 activation is required for cancer stem cells maintenance
through upregulation of POSTN


Backgrounds: PARs are seven transmembrane-spanning domain G-protein
coupled receptors (GPCRs) which act as targets of certain serine
proteinases, such as thrombin and trypsin. PAR2 is the only member in the
family which cannot be activated by thrombin. The studies in knockout
mice revealed that PAR2 plays more important roles in tumor formation
compared to other PARs.Aims: To investigate the roles of PAR2 activation
in cancer stem cell maintenance and possible mechanisms.Methods and
Results: In human colorectal cancer samples, PAR2 was significantly
correlated with CD133 at mRNA level measured with real time PCR. With six
colorectal cancer cell lines, it was found that the cell line with higher
level of PAR2 expression presents higher rate of CD133+ cells and vice
versa. To test whether PAR2 is required for cancer stem cell, we
developed cell lines with knock down of PAR2 stablely. It was found that
inhibition of PAR2 expression in cancer cells not only reduced the level
of CD133 but also significantly blocked the ability of sphere formation
in vitro. In addition, we found that PAR2 activation induced the
expression of POSTN, which is a well established secreted protein related
to cancer stem cell maintenance. Deficiency of PAR2 in cancer cell also
reduced the level of POSTN. More importantly, recombinant POSTN protein
was able to restore the ability of sphere formation decreased by PAR2
deficiency in cancer cells. Furthermore, Activation of PAR2 caused TGF
activation without affecting levels of total TGF. Given that TGF(5ng/ml)
only could stimulate POSTN expression, it is very possible that PAR2
stimulates POSTN expression through TGF-related pathway. Finally, to test
the role of PAR2-induced POSTN in cancer stem cell maintenance in vivo,
we measured the correlation of PAR2 and POSTN in paired primary and
metastatic ovarian cancer samples. Not surprisingly, significant
correlation of PAR2 and POSTN expression was only observed in metastatic
ovarian cancer group, which express significant higher level of cancer
stem cell-related genes compared with primary group.Conclusion: Our study
strongly indicated that PAR2 activation was involved in cancer stem cell
maintenance through TGF- mediated POSTN expression.

