Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modes of metastasis evolution in human and murine cancer revealed
by whole exome sequencing


Despite that fact that 90% of cancer deaths are due to metastasis,
relatively little is known about how metastases evolve from primary
cancers. We subjected 101 trios consisting of primary tumor, brain
metastasis, and normal reference tissue to whole exome sequencing (WES).
To analyze the data, we developed novel computational tools to derive
high quality allelic copy-number profiles directly from the WES data.
These were used to perform an integrative analysis of somatic copy-number
alterations (SCNAs) and somatic single nucleotide variants (SSNVs). This
analysis allowed us to estimate the clonal architecture of the primary
and metastatic samples from each patient, and to reconstruct a single
phylogenetic tree relating all of the subclones detected in both
samples.We determined that all of the matched metastases analyzed likely
formed from a single clone. In all cases, we observed a sibling
relationship between the metastasis and primary tumor samples, indicating
that they share a common ancestor, but ongoing evolution in the primary
tumor resulted in fully clonal mutations in the primary biopsy that were
not present in the metastasis sample. An important corollary of this is
that in no case was a metastasis-founding subclone detected in a primary
tumor sample. Using mutational spectra associated with tobacco exposure
in lung cancers, we determined that most of the evolution leading up to
the brain metastasis like occurred within the lung.In contrast with these
findings, analysis of related primary tumor and metastasis families in a
mouse model of small cell lung cancer using identical methodology
revealed evidence of more variable patterns of metastatic spread.
Analysis of draining lymph nodes revealed that multiple subclones of the
primary contributed to these metastases. In addition, we uncovered
evidence for the sequential spread of metastases, consistent with
multiregion sequencing of primary and metastatic human pancreatic cancer.
The extension of this finding to a mouse cancer model suggests this may
be a more frequent feature of cancer metastasis, and raises the
possibility of genetically dissecting these processes in this
experimental system.

