Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of p53/PTEN confers a specific epigenetic profile
regulated by IL6-SOCS3 signaling


Recent studies by us and others suggested that activation of inflammatory
feedback loop play critical role in metastasis and therapeutic resistance
by regulating EMT/CSC phenotype. Of these cytokines, IL6 is a key
regulator of inflammatory responses and orchestrates these physiological
functions by controlling the Stat3/NF-kB pathway which is negatively
regulated by the suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3). Consistent
with these reports, we demonstrated in our preliminary data that SOCS3 is
abundantly expressed in non-malignant MCF10A cells as well as in luminal
and HER2+ tumors where it negatively regulates the IL6/Stat3/NF-kB
signaling. In contrast, SOCS3 protein was undetectable in basal
cluadin-low breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors which express
substantially higher levels of IL6. We developed transformed MCF10A model
by simultaneous knockdown of p53 and PTEN. In this model single p53 and
PTEN deletions result in hyperplasia or DCIS-like lesions. Interestingly,
SOCS3 protein expression was undetectable in MCF10A-p53-PTEN- cells
compared to parental MCF10A, single p53 (MCF10A-p53-) or PTEN
(MCF10A-PTEN-) deleted cells. We demonstrated that IL6 mediated
Stat3/NF-kB signaling is negatively regulated by SOCS3 that strongly
inhibited the IL6/Stat3/NF-kB pathway when overexpressed in
MCF10A-p53-PTEN- cells. Moreover, enforced SOCS3 expression in these
cells reduced the tumor growth and inhibited metastasis. Furthermore,
loss of SOCS3 expression is strongly associated with increased risk of
recurrent disease in breast cancer patients. We hypothesized that loss of
SOCS3 in TNBCs results in activation of IL6 feedback loop which drives
aggressive metastatic phenotype. Interestingly Stat3/NF-kB signaling
drives expression of SOCS3 in response to inflammation and serves as
negative feedback loop, although molecular mechanism of SOCS3 expression
in cancer has not been investigated. IL6 signaling has been previously
reported to be involved in epigenetic regulation. We therefore correlated
the gene expression and methylation profile after enforced SOCS3
expression. Our analysis revealed that expression levels of a significant
number of genes involved in transcription, migration and metabolism were
reverted to those of the parental non transformed cells and their
transcription was regulated by methylation. These results suggest that
interplay between genetic and epigenetic changes during malignant
transformation of mammary epithelial cells may activate multiple
signaling cascades and reconstitution of SOCS3 may have therapeutic
utility in TNBC.

