Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel triazole nucleoside inhibits heat shock factor 1 and
androgen receptor to fight against prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers and leading
cause of cancer-related mortality in men in developed countries. While
most patients initially respond to first-line androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT), many become refractory to hormonal and other conventional
therapies and eventually develop castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) with time. CRPC is often characterized by the reactivation of
androgen receptor (AR) and constitutes the most important therapeutic
target in CRPC.It is known that AR is bound to heat shock protein (HSPs)
complex to maintain its stable and mature conformation with high affinity
to androgen. Targeting HSPs are therefore to result in perturbation of
AR. Using a lead optimization process, we have recently identified a
novel triazole nucleoside VM-1 which can down-regulate heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1), the dominant upstream transcriptional
regulator for HSPs. The down-regulation of HSF1 by VM-1 leads to the
simultaneous suppression of multiple HSPs and results in growth
inhibition of various prostate cancer cells. Interestingly, VM-1 displays
more potent antiproliferation activity in AR-positive LNCaP, C4-2 and
22RV-1 cells than AR-negative PC-3 cells. Our further studies have showed
that VM-1 reduces the expression of AR and a panel of AR targeted genes
as well as inhibits AR transactivation, which consequently leads to
effective caspase-dependent apoptosis in LNCaP, C4-2 and 22RV-1 cells.
Moreover, VM-1 arrests cell cycle of prostate cancer cells in AR-governed
phase suggesting the potential functionality of this compound involved in
the crosstalk between AR and cell cycle pathways. Taken together, the
above data suggest the role of HSF1 in regulation of AR, and the
inhibition on both HSF1 and AR contribute to the activity of VM-1 in
prostate cancer cells. Therefore, VM-1 may serve as a novel structural
motif in the search of anticancer candidates to fight against prostate
cancer via inhibiting HSF1 and AR.

