Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serial whole exome sequencing showed the genetic aggravation of
refractory osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma is the most common malignant bone tumor in children and
adolescents with frequent lung metastasis. As the survival has not been
improved with chemotherapy for the last two decades, novel therapeutic
approaches are required to efficiently treat osteosarcoma. Genomic
analyses have revealed biologically useful information and genetically
altered therapeutic targets. The subject of this study was a 25 year old
patient with conventional high-grade osteosarcoma with multiple
metastasis of lung, lymph nodes and chest wall, who had failed from
several palliative systemic chemotherapies and radiotherapy. We performed
whole exome sequencing of the gDNA from peripheral blood mononucleated
cells (PBMC) and formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues of
primary tumor, secondary (recurrence 1) and tertiary (recurrence 2)
metastatic tumors. Samples were sequenced using one lane of paired-end,
100 bp reads on Illumina Hiseq for each sample. Here, we present an
analysis result using VarScan and custom-made programs for the detection
of somatic mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOHs) in exome data from
changes of genetic variations throughout the disease progression compared
to blood germ-line sequencing data. As a result, we observed the 36
common somatic mutated genes, including p73 and TSHR, in three tumor
types. And we indentified the somatic mutations affecting the functions
of known cancer genes, RBM15, SYNE1, GNAQ and XPA, which were only
present in the secondary and/or tertiary metastatic tumors but not in the
primary tumor. Especially, GNAQ mutations which is found in the
metastatic tumors, is known to be mutated in 50% of melanoma and driven
constitutive activity of the MAPK pathway. Therefore, GNAQ mutation in
recurrent osteosarcoma patient might be a potential marker for new
therapeutic strategies of inhibiting MAPK pathway. In conclusion, the
ability to track clonal evolution in cancers may provide new strategies
and opportunities for drug development, especially in refractory and rare
diseases.

