Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective killing of oncogenically transformed cells by arsenic
trioxide and trolox


Background: A major disadvantage of cytotoxic chemotherapy is the
difficulty in selectively targeting tumor cells. Although arsenic
trioxide (ATO) is an effective therapy in acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), its use in solid tumors is limited by the toxicity observed at
concentrations required to induce apoptosis in non-APL cells. We
previously found that trolox, a vitamin E derivative, enhances
ATO-induced apoptosis in APL cells, while simultaneously protecting
normal cells. The objective of the current study is to understand the
mechanism(s) by which trolox switches from cytoprotective to cytotoxic
upon the oncogenic transformation of cells.Materials and methods: This
study was conducted using two isogenic models: mouse embryonic fibroblast
(MEFs) and MEFs stably-transfected with either E6/E7 or E1A/Ras
oncogenes. Apoptosis was assessed via staining with Propidium Iodide
(Cell Signaling) followed by FACS analysis. Cells were treated with
various concentrations of ATO alone or in combination with 100M trolox
for 48 hours. SubG0 cell population results were obtained by staining the
cells with PI, followed by analysis using CellQuest software.
Mitochondrial ROS levels were measured with MitoSox (Life Technologies),
followed by FACS analysis. Cells were treated with 5M ATO alone or in
combination with 100M trolox for 18 hours. Mitochondrial fluorescence was
examined by staining the cells with MitoSOX (Life Technologies). For the
visualization and enumeration of mitochondria, cells were examined with
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). Intracellular pictures were taken
with TEM at FEMR, McGill University. Changes in cellular metabolism were
measured with an XF96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse
Bioscience).Results: In both the E6/E7 and E1A/Ras models, trolox
enhances ATO-induced death. In contrast, trolox has a protective effect
from ATO toxicity in their untransformed counterparts. In the transformed
cell lines, cell death correlates with enhanced formation of
mitochondrial superoxide when treated with arsenic in combination with
trolox. The functionality of mitochondria is closely linked to their
structure. Preliminary analysis of TEM images indicates that
mitochondrial structural integrity in transformed cells deteriorates when
treated with ATO in combination with trolox. Finally, these results are
supported by changes in cellular metabolisms in the transformed cell
lines.Conclusion: Transformed cells are more sensitive to cytotoxicity
induced by arsenic trioxide in combination with trolox than their
wild-type counterparts. We hypothesize that the predominant mechanism of
action by which transformed cells are sensitized to the actions of trolox
and ATO is due to a dysfunction of mitochondrial activity. The results of
this study will provide a means to expand the therapeutic spectrum of ATO
beyond APL by enhancing tumor selectivity and protecting normal tissue
from toxicity.

