Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the seed and the soil of cancers with selective
small-molecule inhibitors of CDK8/19: Chemopotentiating, chemopreventive,
anti-invasive and anti-metastatic activities


Cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (CDK8), along with its closely related paralog
CDK19, are transcription-regulating kinases that, unlike some other
members of the CDK family, do not regulate cell cycle progression and are
not required for the growth of normal cells or most of the tumor cell
types. CDK8 has been identified as an oncogene that enhances the activity
of several tumor-promoting transcription factors, mediating the
elongation of transcription of newly activated genes. We have previously
reported the discovery of the first selective small-molecule inhibitors
of CDK8/19 and their ability to block chemotherapy-induced
tumor-promoting paracrine activities of both tumor and normal cells
(Porter et al., PNAS 109, 13799, 2012). We now conducted chemical
optimization of the original inhibitors, yielding an optimized
preclinical lead compound, Senexin B. Senexin B inhibits CDK8/19 in low
nanomolar range in vitro and in vivo as an ATP pocket binder, with very
high target selectivity as indicated by kinome profiling. It is highly
water-soluble, bioavailable, and produces no limiting toxicity upon
prolonged administration in mice, at doses that yield plasma
concentrations exceeding cellular IC50 by 2-3 orders of magnitude.
Senexin B has been tested for efficacy in several animal models
addressing different aspects of tumor growth and progression. (i)
Pretreatment of tumor-free mice with Senexin B significantly inhibited
the growth of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells inoculated into
mice subsequently to Senexin B administration, indicating a general
chemopreventive effect on the normal tissue soil. (ii) Senexin B
potentiated the tumor-suppressive effect of doxorubicin on established
TNBC xenografts. (iii) Senexin B inhibited invasive growth into the
muscle layer in an orthotopic xenograft model of MDA-MB-468 TNBC cells.
(iv) In a spleen-to-liver metastasis model of syngeneic mouse CT26
tumors, Senexin B treatment of mice had the same effect as CDK8 knockdown
in tumor cells: suppression of metastatic growth in the liver without a
significant effect on primary tumor growth in the spleen. Taken together,
these results indicate that CDK8/19 inhibition produces
chemopotentiating, chemopreventive and anti-metastatic effects in
different types of cancer, inhibiting tumor progression at the organismal
level.

