Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of molecular drivers of human hemangioblastoma


Hemangioblastoma of the central nervous system is the most common
manifestation of Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, an autosomal dominant
inherited cancer syndrome. The underlying molecular mechanism of
hemangioblastoma is not known. To discover the molecular drivers of
hemangioblastomas, 17 hemangioblastoma human tissue cases were submitted
to MIP (molecular inversion probe) analysis to assess copy number
alteration. Surprisingly, a focal loss of chromosome 17q was observed in
15 of 17 cases. Further analysis discovered a specific deletion involving
HNF1B (Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 homeobox B), a nuclear transcription
factor. To elucidate the molecular effects of HNF1B loss, we used three
different sequences of shRNA to knock down Hnf1b in mouse embryonic
fibroblast (MEF) cells. Loss of Hnf1b resulted in significantly fewer
cells arrested in G2/M in response to nocodazole treatment. Cell cycle
related protein levels such as cyclin B1, cyclin D1 and
phospho-Tyr15-Cdk1 were correspondingly changed. Of note, the cyclin
dependent kinase inhibitor Cdkn1b (p27) was remarkably suppressed while
another cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor, p21, was not affected at all.
To elucidate the mechanism of Hnf1b dependent p27 regulation, the
proteasome inhibitor MG132 was used to treat Hnf1b knockdown cells, which
failed to increase p27 levels. An in vitro ubiquitination assay
demonstrated that Hnf1b did not affect p27 ubiquitination. Both results
indicated that Hnf1b regulation of p27 is not via posttranslational
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Real time-polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments demonstrated that
Hnf1b regulated p27 at the mRNA level and specific consensus binding
regions were identified. We then showed that p27 overexpression by
lenti-virus infection in Hnf1b knockdown cells normalized the percentage
of G2/M arrested cells.Hemangioblastoma are highly vascularized tumors.
We discovered a dramatic up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth
factor (Vegf) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in cells with Hnf1b
knockdown. These findings provided further evidence that loss of Hnf1b is
one of the major drivers of the hemangioblastoma disease phenotype. Taken
together, our findings for the first time identified HNF1B as a major
gene loss in hemangioblastoma patients, and provide molecular evidence
that Hnf1b transcriptionally regulates cell cycle protein p27, and drives
the proangiogenic phenotype. This novel study sheds insights into
molecular mechanisms of hemangioblastoma and provides tools to develop
prevention and treatment strategies for the disease.

