Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining molecular targeted drugs to inhibit both cancer cells
and activated stromal cells in colon cancer


Recent studies have shown that tumor growth and metastasis are not
determined by cancer cells alone but also by a variety of stromal cells.
We have shown previously that platelet-derived growth factor receptors
(PDGF-Rs) are overexpressed by various stromal cell populations, but not
by cancer cells themselves in human colon cancer tissues. Blockade of
PDGF-R signaling pathways in tumor-associated stromal cells has been
shown to inhibit the stromal reaction. Activation of phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/ mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling is
frequently observed in many cancer types and has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of various diseases. mTOR is a central regulatory kinase
that increases the production of proteins that stimulate key cellular
processes such as cell proliferation, metabolism, survival, and
angiogenesis. However, the effects of mTOR inhibitors on the stromal
component of tumor tissues have not been studied.In the present study,
the effects of nilotinib (PDGF-R tyrosine kinase inhibitor) and
everolimus (mTOR inhibitor) on tumor development and metastasis, were
examined using orthotopic and experimental liver metastatic models of
human colon cancer, whereby KM12SM cells were implanted into the cecum
and spleen of nude mice, respectively. Groups of mice received saline
(control), nilotinib (100mg/kg/day) or everolimus (1mg/kg/day), or a
combination of nilotinib (100mg/kg/day) and everolimus (1mg/kg/day) by
daily oral gavage. After 4 weeks of treatment, primary tumors and
metastatic lesions were resected, and specimens were analyzed
histologically and immunohistochemically for comparison between the
treatment group and control group.After treatment with nilotinib, the
stromal reaction was significantly decreased. After treatment with
everolimus, the stromal reaction was not decreased, but tumor cell
proliferation and microvessel density were decreased. With the
combination therapy, both tumor cell proliferation and the stromal
reaction were decreased and apoptosis of tumor cells was increased,
resulting in a remarkable decrease in tumor size and the number of
metastatic liver lesions.Therefore, concurrent inhibition of tumor cells
and activated stromal cells by combination therapy may represent a novel
molecular-targeted approach for patients with colon cancer.

