Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clofarabine, a potent anticancer compound with limited penetration
in an orthotopic murine model of ependymoma


Clofarabine, a deoxyadenosine analog, was a potent hit in our in vitro
high-throughput screening against murine ependymoma neurospheres. To
prioritize clofarabine for further preclinical efficacy studies, we
evaluated the plasma pharmacokinetic (PK) disposition and central nervous
system penetration in a murine model of ependymoma. A plasma PK study of
clofarabine (45 mg/kg IP) was performed using CD1 nude mice bearing
ependymoma cortical allographs (Ink4a/Arf-null + RTBDN) to obtain initial
plasma PK parameters. These estimates were used to derive D-optimal
plasma sampling time-points (e.g., 0.25, 2.5, and 5 hr) for cerebral
microdialysis studies. Comparison of the clofarabine systemic exposure
obtained from the plasma PK study and that simulated from pediatric
patients using a published population PK model (Bonate, Cancer
Chemotherap Pharmacol, 2011) suggested a dosage of 30 mg/kg in mice would
be equivalent to a pediatric dosage of 180 mg/m2 given as a 2 hr
infusion. Cerebral microdialysis was applied in CD1 nude mice bearing
ependymoma cortical allographs (Ink4a/Arf-null + RTBDN), which permitted
repeated in situ sampling of clofarabine tumor extracellular fluid
(tECF). A microdialysis probe (BASi; 1 mm membrane) was introduced into
the tumor through a cannula inserted during tumor cell implantation.
After microdialysis probe equilibration, 7 mice were dosed with 30 mg/kg
of clofarabine IP. In each mouse, serial plasma samples were collected at
0.25, 2.5, and 5 h post-dose, and tECF dialysate fractions were collected
over 60 min intervals for up to 5 h post-dose. To measure clofarabine in
both plasma and tECF, a robust, sensitive LC-MS/MS method was developed
and validated. Both within-day and between-day precision (%CV) were 5.1%
and accuracy ranged from 86% to 109%. A two-compartment model with
absorption and tumor compartments linked to a central compartment was
fitted to plasma and tECF concentration-time data using a nonlinear mixed
effects modeling approach (NONMEM 7.2.0). For modeling purposes, the
volume of the tECF compartment was fixed to published values. Unbound
fraction of clofarabine in murine plasma was 0.82 0.14. The model derived
area under unbound concentration-time curve (AUCu,0-8) values for 30 and
45 mg/kg dosages were 5185 550 g/L*hr and 7677 699 g/L*hr, respectively.
Clofarabine was absorbed rapidly from the peritoneal cavity with Tmax
(time to reach maximum concentration) value of 0.33 0.17 hr. Tumor to
plasma partition coefficient (Kpt,uu: ratio of tumor to plasma
AUCu,0-inf) of clofarabine was 0.12 0.05. The model predicted mean tECF
clofarabine concentrations were below the in vitro 1-hr IC50 (1.34 M) for
ependymoma neurospheres. In summary, we have shown the tECF clofarabine
concentrations were below that required for antitumor effect in our in
vitro washout studies, thus we have not pursued clofarabine for detailed
efficacy studies in our preclinical pipeline.

