Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shed syndecan-1 downregulates histone acetyltransferase activity
and shuttles HGF to the nucleus of tumor and host cells


The cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-1 (CD138) is
expressed by myeloma tumor cells, is proteolytically shed from the cell
surface and accumulates in the serum. High levels of serum syndecan-1 are
an independent indicator of poor prognosis. Our lab has demonstrated that
shed syndecan-1 drives myeloma tumor progression in vivo, but the
mechanism(s) mediating this are not fully understood. The role of heparan
sulfate proteoglycans on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix
has been extensively studied, but their presence and function within the
nucleus is often overlooked. However, recent findings indicate that
nuclear heparan sulfate has important regulatory functions. Based on
preliminary findings, we hypothesized that shed syndecan-1 binds to the
tumor cell surface and translocates to the nucleus where it regulates
gene expression thereby promoting aggressive tumor behavior. We utilized
murine myeloma cells which were grown in the presence of medium
containing human shed syndecan-1. Strikingly, the shed syndecan-1 was
rapidly taken up by these cells and translocated to the nucleus.
Additionally, exogenous human shed syndecan-1 added to murine stromal
cells also bound to the cell surface and translocated to the nucleus.
This is the first demonstration that shed proteoglycans can translocate
to the nucleus of cells. When stromal cells were grown in the presence of
tumor-derived shed syndecan-1, acetylated histone H3 was decreased.
Additionally, tumor cells engineered to express high levels of shed SDC1
have a 58% reduction in histone acetyltransferase activity. This may be
due to syndecan-1 directly binding to p300/CBP-associated factor, a HAT
enzyme. Moreover, HGF bound to shed syndecan-1 was shuttled to the
nucleus of myeloma cells as a complex. Shed syndecan-1 and HGF
translocation to the nucleus is dependent on intact heparan sulfate
chains present on the syndecan-1 core protein. These data reveal a novel
mechanism of tumor-host crosstalk whereby syndecan-1, shed by tumor
cells, alters histone acetyltransferase activity and shuttles
heparin-binding factors to the nucleus to reprogram cells and alter gene
expression. Therapeutic regulation of syndecan-1 shedding, its binding to
the cell surface or translocation to the nucleus represent novel
strategies to control the progression of myeloma and other cancers.

