Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal depletion by a docetaxel nanoparticle for enhanced therapy
of breast and pancreatic cancer


Tumor stroma consists of genetically normal cells that express abnormal
phenotype in the tumor microenviroment, and are drivers of tumor cell
proliferation and migration processes. Stromal cells can represent a
significant fraction of tumor mass, and represent a barrier to drug
delivery, given that stromal fibroblasts exert contractile forces which
reduce vascular perfusion and increase interstitial fluid pressure. In
the field, the stroma is widely recognized as a target for therapy, both
to normalize the reactive microenvironment, and to reduce drug delivery
barriers, but with limited clinical success.We have developed a
nanoparticle delivery system for docetaxel (Cellax), a conjugate of
carboxymethylcellulose and PEG, which condenses into well defined 120 nm
particles suitable for intravenous administration. In addition to
enhanced pharmacokinetics, 5-10X improved tumor uptake, and enhanced
anti-tumor efficacy compared to approved taxanes such as native DTX
(Taxotere) and nab-PTX (an albumin-paclitaxel nano-formulation,
Abraxane), we have observed an anti-stromal effect in breast and
pancreatic models. In a 4T1 orthotopic breast cancer model in mice, 85%
of Cellax particles were taken up by cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF),
a major component of stroma. Further, in 4T1 and MDA-MB-231 breast
models, Cellax treatments reduced CAF by 82 and 70% respectively, while
native DTX and Nab-paclitaxel exerted no anti-stromal activity.
Concomitant effects were 70-fold increased perfusion, 3-fold decreased
interstitial fluid pressure (IFP), and a 7-24 fold reduction in lung
metastases. In a primary human pancreatic xenograft model (OCIP19), we
measured a 50% reduction in SMA+ cells (activated pancreatic stellate
cells) and macrophage within 1 day of Cellax treatment, while nab-PTX
only decreased the macrophage population 3-7 days post therapy. In
addition, vascular perfusion in the Cellax treated pancreatic tumor was
increased 12X relative to nab-PTX and control treatment groups, with
significantly reduced metastases. Preliminary mechanistic studies
indicate that albumin absorbs to Cellax particles, promoting interaction
with SPARC-expressing stromal cells, leading to stroma-specific activity.

