Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of Guizhi Fuling Wan (GFW) on bladder tumor growth in a
mouse model


Bladder cancer is the second most common malignancy of the genitourinary
tumors in the world and tenth most common cancer in Taiwan. The most
common type of bladder cancer is urothelial carcinoma (UC, formerly known
as transitional cell carcinoma, TCC). The incidence rate is particularly
high in southwestern coast of Taiwan. Treatment for superficial
non-invasive bladder carcinoma is currently using intravesical
chemotherapy with mitomycin C and BCG after transurethral resection of
bladder tumor (TUR-BT). However, this therapy usually causes adverse
effects including urinary frequency, urinary urgency, hematuria and
tuberculosis infection. Therefore, we intend to find a complementary and
alternative medicine for bladder cancer treatment which can bring a good
result with less side effects. In our previous study, we found that a
traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), Guizhi Fuling Wan (GFW) had an effect
on growth inhibition of human bladder cancer cell lines as same as
mitomycin-C, doxorubicin and cisplatin, but had mild toxicicity on normal
human bladder epithelial cells. In this study we investigated whether GFW
could be used as an intravesical chemotherapy agent in our orthotopic
bladder cancer mouse model and compared its adverse effect with
mitomycin-C and BCG. A mouse bladder cancer cell line, MB49, was selected
and evaluated its response to GFW treatment. Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8)
assay was employed to analyze cell viability and flow cytometry was used
to determine cell cycle and apoptosis. MB49 cells were implanted into
female C57BL/6 mice to generate our orthotopic bladder tumor model which
was confirmed under a microscope in histology by hematoxylin and eosin
staining. Our data showed that GFW was a potent inhibitor of the
proliferation of mouse bladder cancer cells in vitro as well as inhibited
the tumor growth on MB49 bladder cancer orthotopic model. In addition,
bladder hemorrhage which was observed in bladder cancer mice had
completely disappeared 17 days after the intravesical GFW-treatment.
These results support GFW as a strong candidate for intravesicle
chemotherapy against bladder cancer.

