Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin inhibits hypoxia-induced proliferation, angiogenesis and
lipogenesis in prostate cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo


Hypoxia (low oxygen conditions) in prostate tumors is associated with
aggressive phenotype and poor prognosis. Also, hypoxia is considered the
first major challenge faced by growing mass of neoplastic cells, as cells
in hypoxic areas are surrounded by metabolic waste, acidic pH and
necrotic cells. To overcome these hostile conditions, tumor cells
activate transcriptional machinery leading to neo-angiogenesis, altered
metabolism and selection of resistant clones. This suggests that prostate
cancer (PCa) growth and progression could be prevented via targeting
hypoxia-induced signaling. Here, we analyzed silibinin effect on
hypoxia-induced proliferation, angiogenesis and metabolic changes in
human PCa cells both in vitro and in vivo. Silibinin inhibited LNCaP
cells clone formation (exposed to 1% O2 for 48 hrs and then returned to
normoxic culture conditions) by 90-100% at 25-50 M doses. Under similar
hypoxic conditions in 22Rv1 cells, silibinin inhibited the clone
formation by 63-77% at 25-50 M doses. Importantly, conditioned media
collected from PCa cells under hypoxic conditions (1% O2 for 24 hrs)
induced tube formation by human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)
on matrigel, whereas conditioned media from silibinin-treated hypoxic PCa
cells or silibinin addition in hypoxic-conditioned media abrogated HUVEC
tube formation. Interestingly, we observed higher lipid accumulation in
LNCaP cells under hypoxia, which was decreased (70%) by silibinin.
Molecular analyses showed that silibinin decreases hypoxia-induced HIF-1
expression without affecting HIF-1 in PCa cells. Furthermore, silibinin
increased the level of FIH (factor inhibiting HIF) and prolyl-hydroxylase
2, involved in HIF-1 degradation. Also, silibinin decreased the level of
phosphorylated mTOR and ERK1/2 in PCa cells under hypoxia, and strongly
inhibited lipid synthesis via activating AMP-activated protein kinase and
decreasing acetyl Co A carboxylase, fatty acid synthase, acetyl Co A
synthetase, fatty-acyl Co A synthetase and lipin expression. In vivo,
silibinin effect on hypoxia-induced proliferation, angiogenesis and
metabolism was analyzed in 22Rv1 xenograft model. Mice with established
22Rv1 tumors were imaged at base-line as well as 6 and 15 days following
silibinin administration (200 mg/kg body weight) by diffusion weighted
(DWI), dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE)-MRI and 18FDG-PET. At the study
end, endogenous tumor metabolites were assed by NMR and various
biomarkers by IHC. In vivo results showed that silibinin feeding reduced
the tumor volume (by 47%), inhibited HIF-1 signaling, decreased
proliferation and angiogenesis (DCE-MRI), induced apoptotic death and
modulated tumor metabolism (PET and NMR). Together, these findings
further support silibinin usefulness in PCa prevention through inhibiting
hypoxia-induced proliferation, angiogenesis and lipogenesis.

