Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow-derived stromal cells contribute to a protumorigenic
inflammatory environment that promotes drug resistance


Therapeutic resistance is a major cause of failure to eradicate cancer.
Whereas mutational events are primarily responsible for the development
of clones of tumor cells intrinsically resistant to therapy, the tumor
microenvironment (TME) plays a critical role in allowing tumor cells to
become transiently resistant to therapy before they acquire an
irreversible form of resistance. The bone marrow, the site of metastasis
of many cancers including neuroblastoma, represents a unique sanctuary
for metastatic tumor cells that promotes this form of
environment-mediated drug resistance (EMDR). Here we show that when
exposed to neuroblastoma cell-derived exosomes, human bone marrow
mesenchymal stromal cells (BMMSC) express multiple cytokines and
chemokines that have a pro-tumorigenic function including interleukin
(IL)-6, IL-8, vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF)-A and
macrophage chemotactic protein (MCP)-1 (CCL-2). Exposure of human
neuroblastoma cells to conditioned medium (CM) of 48 hour co-cultures of
tumor cells and BMMSC increased their resistance to the topoisomerase II
inhibitor etoposide (IC 50 = 0.73, p Therapeutic resistance is a major
cause of failure to eradicate cancer. Whereas mutational events are
primarily responsible for the development of clones of tumor cells
intrinsically resistant to therapy, the tumor microenvironment (TME)
plays a critical role in allowing tumor cells to become transiently
resistant to therapy before they acquire an irreversible form of
resistance. The bone marrow, the site of metastasis of many cancers
including neuroblastoma, represents a unique sanctuary for metastatic
tumor cells that promotes this form of environment-mediated drug
resistance (EMDR). Here we show that when exposed to neuroblastoma
cell-derived exosomes, human bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells
(BMMSC) express multiple cytokines and chemokines that have a
pro-tumorigenic function including interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, vascular
endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF)-A and macrophage chemotactic
protein (MCP)-1 (CCL-2). Exposure of human neuroblastoma cells to
conditioned medium (CM) of 48 hour co-cultures of tumor cells and BMMSC
increased their resistance to the topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide
(IC 50 = 0.73, p < 0.0001) and activated several signaling pathways, in
particular signal transduction and activator of transcription (STAT)-1
and -3 and extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK1/2). In support of
these pathways playing an active role in promoting drug resistance, we
demonstrated that the sensitivity of neuroblastoma cells to etoposide in
the presence of CM was restored, when tumor cells were pre-treated with a
JAK2/STAT3 kinase inhibitor (Ruxolitinib; 1 M) in combination with a MEK
inhibitor (Trametinib; 1M) whereas alone, each inhibitor had no effect.
We also found that in vivo co-injection of human neuroblastoma cells and
human BMMSC resulted in a significant increase in tumor formation and
tumor growth in NOD/SCID mice compared to tumor cells alone.
Interestingly, a similar effect on drug resistance was observed in the
presence of mesenchymal-like cells harvested from a fresh primary
neuroblastoma tumor. Like BMMSC, these cells expressed the
fibroblast-associated protein , a marker of tumor-associated fibroblasts
(TAF), and differentiated into osteoblasts. Our data thus demonstrate
that BMMSC contribute to drug resistance in neuroblastoma and support the
concept that these cells are a source of TAF in primary tumors. They also
suggest that blocking pathways that these cells activate in tumor cells
can restore drug sensitivity and increase response to therapy.

