Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERR)
characterized as a novel transcriptional regulator of the oncogenic
fusion gene TMPRSS2:ERG in prostate cancer


The expression of androgen-responsive TMPRSS2:ERG fusion gene, which
results in aberrant expression of the oncogenic transcription factor ERG
under the regulation of androgen receptor (AR), is characterized as the
predominant factor responsible for the initiation and also advanced
progression of prostate cancer (PCa). However, its upstream
transcriptional regulation in androgen-independent PCa is still not fully
understood. Recent studies show that the orphan nuclear receptor
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERR/NR3B1) plays certain regulatory
roles in the advanced progression of prostate cancer, such as its
cross-talk with AR signaling. Based on this, we hypothesize that besides
AR, ERR could also regulate or target to the promoter of fusion gene
TMPRSS2:ERG in prostate cancer cells. Here we showed that treatment with
an ERR-specific inverse agonist (XCT790) or knockdown of ERR could
decrease the TMPRSS2:ERG expression in AR-positive VCaP prostate cancer
cells. Besides, the expression levels of TMPRSS2:ERG could be elevated by
ectopic ERR expression, with further elevation by co-expression with a
genetically modified ERR-specific coactivator PGC1(2X9), in AR-negative
NCI-H660 prostate cancer cells. By ChIP and luciferase reporter analysis,
three putative ERR transactivation DNA binding sites were identified in
the promoter region of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion gene. Besides, in vitro
phenotype characterization studies showed that ectopic expression of
TMPRSS2:ERG, using an ERR-responsive and TMPRSS2:ERG fusion gene
promoter-driven expression plasmid in AR-negative prostatic cell lines,
including PC-3 prostate cancer cells and BPH-1 immortalized prostatic
epithelial cells, could promote their invasion capacity. Moreover, both
ERR and TMPRSS2:ERG showed elevated expressions in a xenograft model of
castration-resistant prostate cancer cells (VCaP-CRPC). Besides,
luciferase reporter assays showed that both TMPRSS2:ERG promoter and
ERR-binding element (ERRE) transcriptional activities were elevated in
VCaP-CRPC cells as compared to the VCaP parental cells; and their
transcriptional activities could be suppressed by XCT790 or sh-ERR. Based
on these results, we conclude that ERR could directly transactivate the
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion gene in prostate cancer and may contribute to its
transactivation in AR-negative prostate cancer cells and the advanced
castration-resistant prostate cancer.This study is supported by a General
Research Fund from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (Project
code: 2140629).

