Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages confer resistance to cisplatin in MTLn3 and MDA-MB 231
breast cancer cells


Drug resistance presents a clinical challenge to the treatment of breast
cancer. Stromal cells such as macrophages may play a role in drug
resistance. The purpose of this study is to examine the interaction
between breast cancer cells and macrophages and its effects on drug
therapy resistance. The five-year survival for localized hormone
sensitive disease is 98% and as low as 15% for triple negative
(ER/PR/Her2) and metastatic disease. Most targeted anticancer therapies,
as well as cytotoxic therapies, are burdened by the development of cancer
cell resistance. It is hypothesized that the tumor microenvironment may
confer innate resistance to drug therapy. It is well established that
chemotactic factors found in the tumor microenvironment can promote
motility and invasion. We hypothesize that tumor associated macrophages
can confer drug resistance to breast cancer cells via overexpression of
epidermal growth factor (EGF). EGF is overexpressed in many tumor types
and is clinically correlated with a poor overall prognosis. Previous
studies have shown that EGF is produced by non-tumor cells in the
microenvironment; in particular tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) and
endothelial cells. We have previously shown that macrophages and tumor
cells, via a paracrine loop, are necessary and sufficient for comigration
and invasion. Breast cancer cells produce colony stimulating factor 1
(CSF-1) which positively feeds back to increase macrophage expression of
EGF. Increased EGF expression in turn leads to tumor growth and invasion.
We selected two triple negative breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB 231
(human mammary adenocarcinoma) and MTLn3 (rat mammary adenocarcinoma)
that were transfected to express GFP. Co-culture cell survival assays
were performed with macrophages, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. All
tissue culture was completed in DMEM (HyClone) plus 10% FBS. Cells were
grown for 24 hours in co-culture, treated with chemotherapy (doxorubicin
or cisplatin at a range of concentrations) for 24 hours, and then
analyzed at 72 hours using the DXP-10 Calibur analyzer. Prior to
analysis, cells were again replated to measure replating efficiency i.e.
chemoresistant cell survival. We found that coculture with macrophages
increased tumor cell survival upon exposure to cisplatin. We conclude
that macrophages are an important component of the tumor microenvironment
that may play a role in chemotherapy resistance.

