Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D gel system to study tumor metastasis and EMT


Carcinoma invasion and metastasis is under intensive investigation. Even
though long been depicted as tumor cell autonomous phenotype due to gene
mutation, recent studies point out that metastatic potential are acquired
through exposure of epithelial cancer cells to the tumor
microenvironment, triggered by paracrine signals, environmental stimuli
and ECM topologies. It is always a technical hurdle to replicate in vivo
environment with proper scaffolds and tailorable mechanical properties.
In our newly developed 3D Col-Tgel, scaffolding's stiffness can be
controlled by collagen peptide concentration and crosslinking density.
Tumor cell metastasis and EMT-MET switches were studied. Three cell
types, MDA-MD-231 (breast cancer), HCT116 (colon cancer), and CFPAC
(pancreatic cancer) were cultured in Col-Tgel in the range of 50-1000
pka. Tumor cells in Col-Tgel showed cell type specific responses to 3D
gel rigidity, with changes in morphology, proliferation rate, and
resistance to drugs. At different depths from the surface, cells adapted
different morphologies to reflect their different nutritional states and
matrix topology. For a prolonged culture (> 6day), cell migration was
observed out of the at the edge the gel in the selected gel conditions
for specific cell type. As expected, the cells migrated out of the gel
were positively stained for vimentin. Surprisingly, a belt of cells
located around 200-500um from the edge of the gel were also positive for
vimentin, suggesting that tumor cell activation for migration or invasion
is more likely environmental dependent than their own gene feature
(stemness). Next, migrated cells were harvested by a scrapper and
reseeded back into the 3D Col-Tgel. The originally vimentin positive
cells uniformly lost the vimentin expression in 3D gel condition in the
first day 6. After then, cells in the gel start to migrate as in the
previous cycle, suggesting that these cells are flexible to
re-differentiated back to epithelial cell phenotype (MET). HIF-1 positive
zone overlapped vimenting positive staining zone, indicating hypoxia
induced by local environment may be a driving force for EMT. Time-lapsed
images were taken showing majority of cells migrated out the matrix by
squeezing through the gel (pathway finding) instead of crawling. From
migration time (30 min period) and distance, we speculate that cell
migration is integrin independent. Tumor EMT is now thought to play a
fundamental role in tumor progression and metastasis. Clinical EMT
markers always correlate adversely to the prognostic outcomes. However,
the origins of these cells are under debate questioning whether malignant
migratory cells are cancer stem cells or somatic tumor cells. This study
directly proof of the cell fate in well controlled environments. This
system may provide a toolbox to study EMT and test therapeutic options.

