Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce ribosomal protein
acetylation and modulate breast cancer cell viability


Dysregulation of protein synthesis is crucial for tumorigenesis. The
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway regulates ribosomes and mRNA translation.
Inhibition of this pathway is an important approach under clinical
evaluation for the treatment of malignancies including breast cancer.
However, many are resistant to PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors, necessitating
alternative inhibitors of oncoprotein synthesis. Our studies in breast
cancer cells implicate histone deacetylase inhibition (HDACi) in the
impairment of ribosome function and oncoprotein synthesis. In particular,
pan-HDAC inhibitors like Trichostatin A (TSA) induce decay of specific
oncogenic transcripts (e.g. HER2) within 6 h of treatment via a
polyribosome-dependent mechanism. Furthermore, we found that TSA induces
the acetylation of the large ribosomal subunit protein L24. TSA also
decreased 80S ribosome formation and selectively reduced the expression
of the cap-dependently translated oncoproteins NBS1, cyclin D1, and
survivin without inhibition of -tubulin and GAPDH.To elucidate the link
between ribosomes and HDACi, we used tandem mass spectrometry to
interrogate global acetylation changes within ribosomal proteins
following treatment of HER2-positive SKBR3 breast cancer cells by either
TSA or the HDAC6-selective inhibitor tubacin. Control and treated SKBR3
ribosomal proteins were immunoprecipitated by an anti-acetyl-lysine
antibody and subsequently digested by trypsin. The resulting
acetyl-lysine peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (AB SCIEX TripleTOF
5600) and identified from Mascot and ProteinPilot databases. Peptides
were quantitated by Skyline MS1 Filtering. We identified three ribosomal
proteins (RPL24, RPL37A, RPL7A) with acetylation induced at least
two-fold by 2 h of TSA treatment and 12 others whose acetylation was
induced two-fold or greater by 6 h of TSA treatment (RPL19, RPL22, RPL27,
RPL28, RPL3, RPL35A, RPL3L, RPL6, RPS13, RPS17L, RPS23, RPS27A). The
profile of ribosomal proteins acetylated by treatment with the HDAC6
selective inhibitor tubacin was significantly different.To further
evaluate the cancer-association of these ribosomal proteins with
pan-HDACi-induced acetylation, we analyzed a publically available
microarray dataset including mRNA from breast cancers and normal mammary
tissue from the same patient. Of the ribosomal protein genes with
HDACi-inducible acetylation, we found 6 whose mRNA expression levels were
significantly higher in breast cancers relative to matched normal mammary
tissue: RPL19 (p=0.001), RPL24 (p=0.001), RPL3 (p=0.001), RPL7a
(p=0.002), RPS23 (p=0.004), and RPL22 (p=0.05). These findings point
toward a novel role of HDACi in modulating the acetylation of ribosomal
proteins, some of which are upregulated in breast cancer. This
acetylation could result in altered ribosome function, decreased
oncoprotein translation, and ultimately reduced breast cancer cell growth
and survival.

