Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polo box-targeted PLK1 inhibitors: structure activity
relationships and activity in cells resistant to ATP-based inhibitors


Polo-like Kinase 1 (PLK1) performs critical roles in the coordination of
mitosis. PLK1 is also an oncogene over-expressed in many cancer types and
is being targeted therapeutically. ATP-binding site inhibitors of PLK1
have progressed to clinical trials, and one was recently given FDA
breakthrough status to treat acute myeloid leukemia. However, recent data
suggests that there are major disadvantages of the conventional approach
to blocking the kinase activity of PLK1. First, both general kinome and
PLK family specificity is an issue with ATP competitive compounds because
they commonly inhibit all paralogs in the PLK family, including PLK3, a
known tumor suppressor. Second, a single point mutant in the active site
of PLK1 (Cys67Val) results in dramatic resistance to structurally
distinct ATP competitive inhibitors in clinical trials (Burkard,
Santamaria, and Jallepalli, ACS Chem. Biol. 2012, 7, 978981), suggesting
that the emergence of resistance in the clinic against these agents is a
near certainty. We have validated the innovative REPLACE strategy by
discovering non-ATP competitive and PLK1 selective inhibitors as a
potential therapeutic strategy. The Polo-box domain (PBD) of each PLK is
a phospho-peptide binding motif that determines substrate recognition and
subcellular localization. Our approach is to target the PBD of PLK1 to
achieve desired PLK1 selectivity and improve efficacy. Our first
generation of fragment-ligated inhibitory peptides (FLIPs) (Mol. Cancer
Ther., 2012;11:1683-1692) included a compound that contained a
butyl-benzamide group and possessed a binding affinity to the PLK1 PBD of
8.6 M, and insignificant levels of PLK3 binding (IC50 > 600 M).
Subsequent modeling and design produced a FLIP with an octyl-benzamide
group, which possessed IC50 of 0.3 M for the PLK1 PBD, and an IC50 of
93.5 M for PLK3, a >300-fold selectivity (unpublished results). We also
report the investigation of our PBD inhibitors in cells expressing the
mutant C67V PLK1 that is resistant to ATP-based inhibitors. Indeed, we
find that our compounds are equally active in cells expressing wild-type
or C67V PLK1, whereas cells expressing C67V PLK1 are dramatically
resistant to a model ATP-based inhibitor, BI 2536. We also further
explore the structure-activity relationship and structural basis of PLK1
versus PLK3 selectivity with selected modifications to PBD binding
peptides and FLIPs. In summary, these exciting developments demonstrate
the validity of our approach to produce drug-like lead PBD inhibitors
that are PLK1 selective and will be active against tumors resistant to
ATP inhibitors.

