Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal-mediated collagen I signal in promoting bladder cancer
progression


Bladder cancer is the fifth most common malignancy, which is mostly
incurable as invasive disease. It is clinically important to study the
mechanisms underlying bladder cancer progression. While the tumor
microenvironment is widely established to play an active role in
epithelial cancers, its contribution to bladder cancer remains
unexplored. The presence of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs),
characterized by the co-expression of vimentin, alpha-smooth muscle
actin, and tenascin C, has been associated with invasive bladder cancer.
Nevertheless, functional contributions of CAFs to bladder cancer
progression have not been studied.Here,we report the successful isolation
and molecular characterization of bladder CAFs. We further investigate
their functional roles on bladder cancer progression, with an emphasis on
stromal secreted collagen I in the paracrine activation of discoidin
domain receptor (DDR1) signaling in neighboring bladder cancer
cells.Using bioinformatics analysis we found that invasive bladder cancer
patients with elevated expression of CAF genes have a poorer survival
than those with lower CAF gene expression. Subsequently, we isolated and
characterized CAFs from patient-derived tissues. Co-transplantation of
CAFs and bladder cancer cells as xenograft tumors revealed high collagen
I (COL1) deposition in these tumors formed, while molecular analyses
uncovered CAFs as the primary source of COL1. Further experiments
verified that COL1 as a single extracellular matrix component could
phenocopy the tumor phenotype resembling those co-transplanted with CAFs
and cancer cells. Further, pre-stimulation with COL1 could also enhance
metastatic colonization of bladder cancer cells to lung. Molecular
analysis of these COL1 stimulated cancer cells revealed up-regulation of
the collagen receptor DDR1, but not integrins. Immunohistochemical
analysis confirmed the presence of DDR1+ cancer cells adjacent to CAFs in
the primary tumor site, with enhanced and exclusive expression of DDR1 in
paired lung metastasis. Oncomine analysis showed that invasive bladder
cancer expressed higher mRNA levels of COL1 and DDRs than non-invasive
cancer, indicating that collagen I-DDR1 interaction may be a generalized
phenomenon during invasive bladder cancer progression. To delineate the
molecular mechanism downstream to collagen I-DDR1 we studied the
interaction of DDR1 and STAT3, a factor we previously reported to drive
invasive bladder cancer progression. Stimulation of bladder cancer cells
with COL1 revealed a time kinetic increase in total and activated DDR1
protein associated with STAT3 phosphorylation. Further analysis of lung
metastasis confirmed the co-localization of DDR1 and nuclear active
STAT3. Collectively, these findings uncovered a role of CAFs in bladder
cancer progression via stromal mediated collagen I signaling and warrant
further analysis of therapeutic options to target signaling components
downstream to collagen I.

