Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genotype discordance between circulating tumor cells in blood and
disseminated tumor cells in bone marrow at single cell level in breast
cancer patients


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in blood and disseminated
tumor cells (DTCs) in bone marrow are being studied to monitor disease
and guide therapy, but the relationship between CTCs and DTCs is weak and
may confound clinical decision-making. Because blood sampling is easier
than sampling bone marrow, CTC analyses are used more frequently than DTC
analyses, although the relationship between CTCs and DTCs and the
mutational heterogeneity within both populations at the single cell level
are not usually examined simultaneously.Methods: We used the MagSweeper
to immunomagnetically isolate single tumor cells from blood and bone
marrow samples in breast cancer patients. Isolated tumor cells were used
for immunohistochemical identification, PIK3CA gene mutation analysis,
and to propagate cells in culture. In one patient, CTC and DTC single
cell genotypes were compared during multiple treatment courses as the
disease course progressed.Results: 242 individual tumor cells were
isolated from 17 breast cancer patients. All tumor cells were assayed for
single nucleotide mutations on exons 9 and 20 of the PIK3CA gene, and 48
mutated cells were identified in three patients. Heterogeneity and
temporal discordance were observed in and between CTCs and DTCs in the
same patient. All DTCs from bone marrow overgrown by tumor cells in a
metastatic breast cancer patient carried the same PIK3CA single
nucleotide mutation even though CTCs isolated within the same time period
were wild type or heterogeneous for the mutation, providing evidence of
both concordance and discordance of single cell PIK3CA genotype between
CTCs and DTCs at different blood sampling time points. DTCs isolated by
the MagSweeper could be directly cultured and consistently maintained the
mutant PIK3CA genotype despite morphological changes over time in cell
culture.Conclusions: DTCs isolated live by the MagSweeper can be
propagated in culture, and a DNA single nucleotide mutation was
maintained as a stable marker during cell culture multiple passages. This
same mutation was used to monitor CTCs and DTCs at the single cell level.
Although others have shown variable correlation between presence of CTCs
and DTCs in the same patients, we show here potential discordance at the
genotype level of single CTCs isolated from the same patient at different
time points and between individual CTCs and DTCs. Our data support that
CTCs and DTCs can have independent clinical value and suggest that it may
be necessary to independently sample both during overall treatment course.

