Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced anti-tumor activity of erlotinib in combination with FAK
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is over-expressed in
approximately 90% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and as such,
blockade of EGFR activity has been a primary therapeutic target for
NSCLC. As patients with wild-type EGFR have demonstrated only modest
benefit from EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) there is a need for
additional therapeutic approaches in patients with wild-type EGFR. The
extracellular matrix (ECM) has been shown to play an important role in
tumor growth and response to therapy, and focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
expression, a key component of signaling downstream of ECM binding to
cell surface integrins, has been shown to correlate with aggressive stage
in NSCLC. As the FAK-Src signaling axis can activate EGFR signaling
independently of EGFR ligand-binding and kinase activity, the use of FAK
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in combination with EGFR TKIs was assessed as
a means of enhancing response to treatment in NSCLC. Treatment of EGFR
TKI-resistant NSCLC cells (A549 and H1299 with wild-type EGFR, and H1975
with T790M acquired resistance mutation in EGFR) with FAK tyrosine kinase
inhibitor PF-573,228 alone decreased cell viability. Treatment of these
cell lines with a combination of PF-573,228 and the EGFR TKI erlotinib
was more effective at reducing cell viability and cell migration than
either treatment alone. Additionally, the growth of EGFR TKI-resistant
NSCLC cells in 3-dimensional culture was significantly impaired with a
combination of FAK inhibitor and erlotinib compared to either treatment
alone. Interestingly, although erlotinib alone could inhibit the
phosphorylation of Akt to an extent in NSCLC cell lines, the combination
of erlotinib and FAK inhibitor was able to almost completely inhibit Akt
phosphorylation. As persistent Akt activity is associated with lack of
response to EGFR TKIs, the enhanced reduction in cell viability seen with
the addition of a FAK inhibitor to treatment with erlotinib appears to
be, at least in part, due to enhanced inhibition of Akt activity in these
cells. The efficacy of the combination treatment was confirmed in vivo
using a xenograft model with subcutaneously implanted A549 cells in nude
mice. Significant inhibition of tumor growth was observed for
A549-derived tumors when erlotinib was used in combination with FAK
inhibitor, with some animals not yet developing palpable tumors by the
end-point of the experiment. Thus, the combination of FAK inhibition with
EGFR TKIs such as erlotinib results in decreased growth of NSCLC cells
both in vitro and in vivo and could prove to be an effective therapeutic
approach for patients with EGFR TKI-resistant NSCLC.

