Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic oral cancer cell adhesion to vascular and lymphatic
endothelial cells is sialyl Lewis A/X-dependent


Background: The vast majority of mortalities from cancer, including oral
cancer, are due to metastatic disease. Previous studies have shown that
sialylated cell surface glycoconjugates mediate the extravasation of
circulating tumor cells from several different tumor types. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether metastatic oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) cells overexpress and employ sialyl Lewis A/X (sLeA/X)
to adhere to E-selectin on endothelial cells. Materials and methods:
Twenty-one matched-pairs of primary and nodal metastatic OSCC tissue
sections were evaluated immunohistochemically using anti-sLeA (clone
KM231) and anti-sLeX (clone KM93) monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). q-PCR was
performed to measure relative transcript expression of a panel of
glycogens potentially involved in sLeA/X synthesis in OSCC cells. sLeA/X
cell surface expression was assessed by flow cytometry and fluorescence
immunocytochemistry. sLeA/X involvement in OSCC cell adhesion behavior
was evaluated using static and flow adhesion assays employing recombinant
E-selectin (rE-selectin) and TNF--stimulated human dermal microvascular
endothelial cells (HuDMEC) or human lymphatic endothelial cells (HLEC),
respectively. Several approaches to prevent OSCC cell binding to
rE-selectin or HuDMEC were tested including the use of anti-sLeA/X mAbs,
neuraminidase, fucosidase, IELLQAR, chondroitin sulfate, swainsonine and
FUT3 siRNA. Results: Immunohistochemistry analysis showed sLeA/X to be
mainly expressed by well- to moderately-differentiated OSCC. sLeA/X
expression on primary OSCC correlates with lymph node metastasis but not
tumor differentiation status. The metastatic OSCC cells, TR146, displayed
higher sLeA/X expression than the non-metastatic OSCC cells, SCC4 and
Cal27, and this was at least partially related to up-regulated gene
expression of fucosyltransferase III. Knocking down FUT3 expression in
TR146 cells reduced sLeX but not sLeA levels. TR146 cells adhered to
rE-selectin and TNF--stimulated HuDMEC/HLEC in significantly greater
numbers than SCC4 cells. Attachment of TR146 cells to rE-selectin was
significantly reduced following incubation with anti-sLeA/X mAbs,
neuraminidase and FUT3 siRNA. Treatment of TR146 cells with neuraminidase
also caused a significant decrease in cell adhesion to HuDMEC under
hydrodynamic flow conditions. Conclusions: Elevated levels of sLeX in
metastatic OSCC cells results from increased FUT3 expression. Metastatic
OSCC cell binding to HuDMEC/HLEC is sLeA/X-mediated and may be a target
for anti-metastasis therapy.

