Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stimulation of fatty acid synthesis by Spot14 enhances tumor cell
proliferation but decreases metastasis in vivo


We have recently observed that Spot14 (S14), also known as Thyroid
Hormone Responsive Protein, stimulates de novo fatty acid biosynthesis in
mammary epithelial cells by increasing Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN)
activity. In the presence of S14, FASN had increased Vmax, decreased Km,
and shifted product formation toward medium chain fatty acids. Numerous
studies have suggested that high expression of FASN is associated with
higher tumor grade and poor clinical outcome, and likewise elevated
expression of S14 has been linked to a poor clinical outcome for patients
with invasive disease. In contrast, our analysis of S14 expression in
databases of human breast tumors representing a variety of stages,
grades, and subtypes suggests that high S14 is associated with
ER-positive status, the luminal intrinsic subtype, and consequently, a
favorable patient outcome. To determine the effect of S14 on mammary
tumorigenesis in vivo, we crossed S14 null mice to MMTV-PyMT mice. Tumor
latency was not altered in mice lacking S14; however, tumor cell
proliferation was significantly decreased. Tumors arising in MMTV-PyMT
mice lacking S14 were less dense and had a cystic morphology. There was a
decrease in the phosphorylation of Src at Y416 and Akt at S473,
indicating that activation of both signaling molecules was decreased in
tumors lacking S14. Furthermore, tumors lacking S14 had reduced levels of
de novo synthesized fatty acids. We also crossed MMTV-S14 transgenic mice
expressing S14 in the mammary epithelium, to MMTV-Neu line 202 mice and
observed that S14 overexpression significantly shortened tumor latency,
increased tumor cell proliferation and increased concentration of fatty
acids in tumor cells. Despite the increased proliferative index observed
in the MMTV-Neu tumors expressing S14, there was a decrease in metastatic
lesions detected in the lungs compared to MMTV-Neu mice. Gene expression
profiling of mouse tumors revealed that tumors overexpressing S14
displayed features of lobular differentiation including increased
expression of Elf5, a proposed master regulator of mammary
differentiation, and expression of milk protein genes. Elevated fatty
acid synthesis is a distinguishing feature of many solid tumors compared
to adjacent normal tissue and this activity is thought to be acquired
during tumor progression, as rapidly proliferating cancer cells have a
heightened requirement for membrane phospholipid precursors. Our studies
suggest that increased de novo fatty acid biosynthesis is sufficient to
stimulate tumor cell proliferation; however, this is not correlated with
increased metastasis, and in fact, tumors that expressed high levels of
S14 appeared to have a more differentiated phenotype that may correlate
with improved clinical outcome.

