Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting miRNA-driven aggressive behavior of pancreatic cancer
stem cells by a novel drug


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal malignant disease, which is in part
due to lack of early detection biomarkers. Once diagnosed, the majority
of PC patients are already in advanced stages. Currently there are no
effective treatments in improving the overall survival. Therefore, the
majority of PC patients die within 5-6 months due to therapeutic
resistance and early metastatic disease. Recently, a sub-population of
cancer stem cells (CSCs) (Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a lethal malignant
disease, which is in part due to lack of early detection biomarkers. Once
diagnosed, the majority of PC patients are already in advanced stages.
Currently there are no effective treatments in improving the overall
survival. Therefore, the majority of PC patients die within 5-6 months
due to therapeutic resistance and early metastatic disease. Recently, a
sub-population of cancer stem cells (CSCs) (<0.1%) have been identified
from many different tumors including PC, and these cells are believed to
be responsible for treatment resistance, tumor recurrence and metastasis.
Many studies have shown that the existence of CSCs has important clinical
implications because CSCs are involved in cell migration/invasion, drug
resistance, and metastasis, which leads to poor clinical outcome.
Therefore, selective killing or complete elimination of CSCs by novel
approaches would likely become newer treatment strategy for PC in the
improvement of overall survival. However, the regulation of CSC
characteristics during tumor development and progression has not been
well understood. In this study, cell and molecular biology techniques
were used to investigate the CSC characteristics and its regulation to
find a new effective approach for the treatment of PC. We found that
cancer stem-like cells (CSLCs) which is reminiscent of CSCs isolated from
human PC cell line, MiaPaCa-2 cells as triple-marker positive cells
(CD44+/CD133+/EpCAM+ cells) cells displayed aggressive phenotypes, such
as increased clonogenicity, cell migration, and self-renewal capacity,
along with over-expression of CSC marker microRNAs (miRNAs) such as
miR-21 and miR-210. Under-expression of miR-21 and miR-210 by
transfection of anti-miRNAs led to decreased clonogenicity, cell
migration and self-renewal capacity, along with reduced expression of
CSC-associated markers/mediators such as CD44, EpCAM, EZH2, Notch-1, and
Snail in CSLCs. Similarly, under-expression of CSC-associated mediator
Notch-1 led to decreased cell migration, self-renewal capacity, and
expression of EpCAM and Snail in CSLCs. Finally, CDF, a novel synthetic
small molecule showed reduced aggressive behavior of CSLCs such as cell
survival/growth, migration, clonogenicity, self-renewal capacity, and
decreased expression of miR-21 and miR-210. From these results, we
conclude that CDF may serve as an effective anti-tumor agent via
targeting miRNA-driven aggressive behavior of CSLCs.

