Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erk inhibitor overcomes type II interleukin 1 receptor, a decoy
receptor, associated Regorafenib resistance in colorectal carcinoma


We have previously demonstrated that type II interleukin 1 receptor
(IL1R2), which is an IL-1 decoy receptor and inhibits exogenous IL-1
signaling, activates the expression of several proinflammatory cytokines.
We also found that enhanced expression of IL1R2 promotes tumor growth and
increases tumor angiogenesis through activated IL-6/VEGF-A signalings.
Recently, we observed a close association of enhanced expression of IL1R2
and Regorafenib resistance in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines.
Regorafenib is the newly approved multi-kinase inhibitor used for
treatment of late-stage metastatic CRC by US FDA. To have a better use of
Regorafenib against CRC, we conducted experiments to understand the
mechanism underlying which IL1R2 is involved in Regorafenib resistance.
In the present study, we demonstrated that silencing of IL1R2 in HT29
cell overcame its resistance to Regorafenib whereas ectopic expression of
IL1R2 decreased the sensitivity of HCT116 cell to Regorafenib in in vitro
and in vivo systems. IL1R2 silencing also enhanced the apoptotic proteins
expression in Regorafenib-treated cells. In addition, we have established
Regorafenib-resistant DLD-1 colon cancer cells by growing them in the
presence of Regorafenib. Consistently, higher IL1R2 expression was found
in Regorafenib-resistant cells than the parental cells. Mechanistically,
we observed that Regorafenib treatment significantly resulted in enhanced
expression of extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (Erk), which
functions as a survival factor, in IL1R2-overexpressing cells. Therefore,
pretreatment of IL1R2-overepressing CRC cells with Erk inhibitor, U0126,
reversed their Regorafenib resistance, suggesting that Erk signaling
cascade is crucial in Regorafenib resistance resulted from IL1R2
overexpression. Taken together, our present study suggested that
combination of Regorafenib and Erk inhibitor is a rationale regime to
overcome IL1R2 overexpression-induced Regorafenib resistance in CRC
patients, but also IL1R2 is a potential biomarker for colon cancer
therapy.

