Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloperoxidase (MPO) dependency for DNA damage, genotoxicity and
cytotoxicity induced by etoposide (VP-16): Implications for
therapy-induced second malignancies


Use of the phenolic anticancer agent etoposide (VP-16), which targets DNA
topoisomerase II (topo II), can lead to an increased incidence of acute
myeloid leukemia linked to rearrangements in the MLL gene. Previous work
(Mol. Pharm. 79: 479-87, 2011) demonstrated that MPO, found in myeloid
progenitor cells, oxidized VP-16 to its phenoxyl radical form and led to
enhanced DNA topo II-mediated strand cleavage through redox cycling
resulting in MLL translocations. In the present study, we utilized MPO
shRNA in myeloid leukemia HL-60 cells to further examine MPO dependency
for VP-16-, VP-16 catechol (VP-OH)-, and VP-16 ortho-quinone
(VP-oQ)-induced: 1) DNA strand breaks; 2) oxidative DNA damage; 3)
caspase 3 activation; 4) cytotoxicity. Using Comet assays, VP-16 induced
a concentration-dependent increase in DNA strand breaks which was
attenuated in MPO knockdown cells, as well as in cells incubated with
succinylacetone (SA), a heme synthesis inhibitor which depletes cells of
active MPO. Similar MPO dependency was demonstrated using VP-OH, and
parthenolide (PTL), a sesquiterpene lactone, whose activity is known to
be dependent on MPO. In contrast, DNA damage induced by VP-oQ, a fully
oxidized VP-16 metabolite, and by the topo I inhibitor camptothecin
(CPT), was independent of MPO. VP-16 and VP-OH also induced DNA abasic
sites in MPO-replete HL-60 cells. In MPO depleted cells, VP-16 diminished
oxidative DNA damage to levels below those seen in controls.
Paradoxically, caspase 3 activation induced by VP-16 and VP-OH was
decreased in MPO-replete compared to MPO-depleted cells. By comparison,
PTL-induced caspase 3 activation was MPO dependent and CPT-induced
caspase 3 activation was MPO independent. Cytotoxicity (trypan blue
exclusion) induced by VP-16 and VP-OH was inversely related to, while
that of PTL corresponded to, MPO levels and activity. VP-oQ, CPT, and
podophyllotoxin (PDT) were equally cytotoxic regardless of MPO levels or
activity. Clonogenic assays revealed similar paradoxes where VP-16
cytotoxicity was diminished in MPO-replete compared to MPO knockdown
cells. In contrast, the effects of VP-oQ, CPT, and PDT on colony
formation were not influenced by expression of MPO. Mass spectrometric
analysis demonstrated MPO-dependent production of VP-oQ GSH adducts. The
production of these inactive adducts were reduced in MPO depleted cells
accounting, in part, for the unexpected increase in VP-16 cytotoxicity in
MPO knockdown cells. Together, results strongly suggest that
MPO-catalyzed oxidation of VP-16 to redox active species leads to
enhanced genotoxic events linked to the known leukemogenic action of this
anticancer agent. Future studies will be directed toward use of
nutritional antioxidants to diminish formation of genotoxic radical
species of VP-16 in MPO-containing myeloid precursors as a strategy to
prevent drug-induced second malignancies.

