Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF-3) expression is a
potential marker of tumor response to the HDAC inhibitor Pracinostat


BACKGROUND: Bladder cancer is the fifth most common cancer affecting the
Western world. About 90% of bladder cancer is superficial and the
remaining 10% is muscle invasive. Surgery followed by platinum based
chemotherapy is the standard treatment for high grade tumors, and results
in BACKGROUND: Bladder cancer is the fifth most common cancer affecting
the Western world. About 90% of bladder cancer is superficial and the
remaining 10% is muscle invasive. Surgery followed by platinum based
chemotherapy is the standard treatment for high grade tumors, and results
in <50% 5 year survival rate following surgery.ATF3 can play a key role
as either an oncogenic suppressor or an inducer depending on the degree
of malignancy. Decreased ATF3 expression in bladder cancer has been
associated with tumor progression and a reduced survival rate
[1].Pracinostat (SB939) is an orally available highly potent histone
deacetylase inhibitor with a sustained inhibitory effect on tumor tissues
[2].This study aimed to determine whether ATF3 expression which is
silenced in bladder cancer could be induced by Pracinostat and used as a
potential marker of response in HDACi mediated cancer therapy.METHODS: A
series of human bladder cancer cell lines of different grades and origin
were utilized to characterize ATF3 expression. Proliferation,
clonogenecity and migratory properties of Pracinostat treated cells were
assayed by vialight, soft agar and scratch wound methods respectively.
Athymic balb/c mice were used to study in vivo anti tumor effect.RESULTS:
Treatment with Pracinostat activated the expression of ATF3 in a time and
dose depended manner coincident with acetylation of histone 3 and 4.
Pracinostat treated cells exhibited a dose depended effect on migratory
properties that was abrogated in cells where ATF3 was depleted using
short hairpin siRNA knockdown. Treatment with Pracinostat also showed a
significant effect on proliferative and colony forming capacity of
bladder cancer lines and induced growth arrest at the G1/G0 phase of the
cell cycle and retinoblastoma (Rb) activation. In vivo experiments
demonstrated a significant reduction in the tumor volume of the
Pracinostat treated mice compared to the control group. Furthermore,
reactivation of ATF3 expression was detectable in xenograft tumor cells
which were in non - proliferating state.CONCLUSION: HDAC inhibitor
Pracinostat activated expression of ATF3 has a significant impact on the
malignant behavior of bladder cancer cell lines in vitro including
activation of tumor suppressor genes and cell growth arrest. Pracinostat
shows efficacy as an anti tumor agent in bladder cancer xenografts
accompanied by reactivation of the expression of ATF3 suggesting its
potential as a biomarker of response.1.Yuan, X., et al., ATF3 Suppresses
Metastasis of Bladder Cancer by Regulating Gelsolin-Mediated Remodeling
of the Actin Cytoskeleton. Cancer Research, 2013. 73(12): p.
3625-3637.2.Novotny-Diermayr,V.,et al.,SB939, a Novel Potent and Orally
Active Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor with High Tumor Exposure and
Efficacy in Mouse Models of Colorectal Cancer. Molecular Cancer
Therapeutics, 2010. 9(3): p. 642-652.

