Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Double-targeted theranostic gold nanoparticles for treatment of
brain tumors


Therapeutic drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is not
only inefficient but also nonspecific, thereby posing a major shortcoming
in effective treatment of brain cancer. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a
localized treatment modality, relying on both a photosensitizer and drug
activation using a specific wavelength. The widespread use of PDT in
brain tumor therapy has been partially hampered by non-targeted
phototoxicity towards healthy tissue. The development of nanoparticles
selectively targeted to cell surface receptors that can act as drug
delivery vehicles is critical for improving the treatment and therapeutic
responsiveness in inaccessible tumors, such as glioblastomas. Gold
nanoparticles (Au NP) provide an excellent platform with a surface that
can be tailored to attach biomolecules for targeted drug delivery and
biocompatible coatings that can efficiently encapsulate the hydrophobic
photosensitizer drug, Pc 4, thereby reducing off-site cytotoxicity. In
this study, we demonstrate a novel double targeted, noncovalent Au NP
drug delivery agent, which selectively delivers drugs to brain tumors for
PDT. These double-targeted Au NPs loaded with Pc 4 have been compared
with previously studied single targeted Au NPs. Hydrophobic Au NPs have
been cap exchanged with mono- and bi-functional PEG linkers. Specific
targeting of the PEGylated Au NPs to glioma cells is achieved by coupling
receptor-binding peptides to the carboxyl moiety of the bi-functional PEG
linker. Subsequently, hydrophobic Pc 4 is adsorbed in the PEG corona
(mono-functional linker) to form Pc 4 loaded and targeted Au NPs.
Packaging of Pc 4 within the PEG core impedes leaching of the drug into
the extracellular environment and improves circulation in vivo. UV-Vis
absorption measurements indicate encapsulation of Pc 4 within the
PEGylated Au NPs. Hydrodynamic diameter of these agents lies well within
the limits needed to cross the BBB as determined by dynamic light
scattering. In vitro cell uptake studies in glioma cell lines, LN229 and
U87, which express differential patterns of the epidermal growth factor
(EGF) and transferrin (Tf) receptor targets, show a significant increase
in cellular uptake and intracellular localization for double targeted
conjugates as compared to either single targeted Au NPs. Titration
studies have been carried out in cells to optimize delivery; the optimal
concentration for double targeted Au NPs is 500 nM, half of the current
clinical standard observed for single targeted Au NPs over the same
period of incubation. In vivo imaging utilizing real time, longitudinal
fluorescence in mice shows notable accumulation of these agents in the
tumor. Co-localization of the targeted Au NPs in regions overexpressing
EGF and Tf receptors has been validated by immunohistochemistry. Future
experiments involve activation of Pc 4 by PDT after delivery by the
double-targeted Au NPs and monitoring tumor cell death.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

