Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the pro-glycolytic transcription factor MondoA
enhances malignant potential of ALL in vivo


Introduction. Most cancer cells use glycolysis for energy production
regardless of whether they are under normoxic or hypoxic condition
(Koppenol et al., 2011). Warburg described this metabolic hallmark of
cancer cells, named aerobic glycolysis. The high dependence of tumor
cells on glucose utilization may be exploited for therapeutic
intervention. One of the genes, which have effects on glucose metabolism,
is MondoA. It is a transcription factor (Stoltzman et al., 2008) highly
over-expressed in ALL (Wernicke et al. 2012). MondoA:MLX heterodimers
have been discussed as a parallel network to MYC:MAX, which have broad
effects on cellular growth, proliferation and survival (Kaadige et al.,
2010; Sloan and Ayer, 2010). Knockdown experiments revealed that MondoA
impacts on metabolic activity of leukemic cells and their glucose
utilization. Furthermore MondoA knockdown resulted in a more
differentiated leukemic phenotype and shifted gene expression towards a
signature favoring apoptosis and thus reducing the signs of
aggressiveness of leukemia cells in vitro (Wernicke et al. 2012). Based
on our previous work, we hypothesized that assessing survival of leukemia
bearing mice may reveal the role of MondoA in ALL in vivo.Methods. The
murine/human xeno-transplantation model of leukemia was used (Richter et
al. 2009). NALM-6 ALL cell lines were transduced by retroviral gene
transfer of constructs, harboring specific for MondoA short hairpin RNA
(shRNA), and injected into immune deficient Rag2-/-C-/- mice. The tumor
burden were measured and compared to the one in control mice bearing
leukemia cells transduced with nonfunctional siRNA. Tumor burden of mice
were evaluated by cyto- and histochemistry and by measuring the CD10+
blast cells content in blood, spleen and bone marrow by flow
cytometry.Results. These experiments showed that MondoA knockdown
significantly reduced leukemia cells' proliferation in mice as compared
to control group. Although signs of leukemia engraftment were observed in
all mice, the differences in amount of CD10+ blasts cells in blood, bone
marrow and spleens in the controls and in the MondoA knockdown group were
significant (p= 0,0079). Experimental results also showed a decrease of
the leukemic infiltration-induced swelling of the spleen in the group
with MondoA knockdown. Median spleen weight was 0.22g and 0.08g in the
control and in the experimental group.Conclusion. These findings
demonstrate that the downregulation of MondoA by RNA interference
significantly delays leukemic burden and malignancy of B cell ALL in vivo
and further confirm that MondoA is an attractive target for targeted and
immune therapy of ALL.

