Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune-tolerance due to aberrant expression of Natural Killer-Cell
Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIRs) on cancer cells and enhanced
cancer-platelet interactions


Background: Metastatic cancer cells spread through blood vessels where
they constantly interact with platelets and leukocytes, forming tumor
microemboli and thereby protected from otherwise rapid elimination from
host immune defense cells such as NK cells. We previously demonstrated
that metastatic cancer cells with aberrant expression or with forced
ectopic expression of Natural Killer Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIRs)
are more resistant to NK killing than those with null or low KIR
expression. Here we report that KIR-expressing cancer cells interact more
strongly with platelets leading to significantly increase in NK tolerance
than those cancer cells with null or low KIR expression. We have
demonstrated that certain anti-platelet antagonists are capable of
reversing the NK tolerance of these cancer cells in vitro.Methods:
Aberrant expressions of KIR genes in metastatic cancers derived from
orthotopic rat models were detected by DNA microarray analysis and
verified with immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. Stable
transformants with ectopic expression of KIR2DL1 or KIR3DL1 were enriched
by cell sorting. Binding of cancer cells with human platelets were
analyzed by flow cytometry. NK killing of GFP-tagged cancer cells with
differential KIR expressions in the presence and absence of human
platelets, with or without pretreatment of anti-platelet antagonists or
anti-KIR antibodies, was accessed with a fluorescent plate
reader.Results: Using in vitro NK cytotoxic assays, we have found that
KIR (aberrant or ectopic) expression or platelet coating on cancers
clearly increased their resistance to NK cell killing when compared with
parental cells. Interestingly, platelet coating on those metastatic
cancer cells with high (aberrant or ectopic) KIR expression increased
their IC50 values by 6 to 14 folds respectively when compared with
parental cells. We show that NK tolerance correlates positively with
platelet coating and the levels of KIR expression on the cancer cells
(with correlation coefficient = 0.90 to 0.98), and that the NK resistance
is significantly increased when both KIR aberrant expression and platelet
coating are present on the cancer cells. However, pretreatment with
anti-KIR antibodies and anti-platelet antagonists effectively reverse NK
resistance.Conclusion: Aberrant KIR expression on cancer cells enhances
their interaction with platelets leading to significant increase in NK
tolerance. Anti-platelet antagonists and anti-KIR antibodies alone or in
combination may have clinical potential for the treatment or prevention
of metastatic and immune resistant cancer cells.

