Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome scale identification of autoantibody biomarkers in
colorectal cancer


It is widely appreciated that early detection is the key to making
inroads in the fight against cancers. Despite the availability of
endoscopic screening, compliance is poor. The diagnosis of CRC is often
made in advanced stages, and the consequence is a dismal 50% five year
survival across all CRC. There is urgent need for biomarkers with
performance that can meet the need of early diagnosis. Like most cancers,
colorectal cancers (CRCs) express tumor antigens that can induce humoral
immune response. The identification of the autoantibodies against tumor
antigens may facilitate early diagnosis of CRC. The goal for this pilot
project was to demonstrate the feasibility of discovering autoantibody
biomarkers for colorectal cancer using Nucleic Acid Programmable Protein
Arrays (NAPPA). Autoantibodies in serum samples collected from 40
patients with DNA mismatch repair proficient colorectal cancer who had
died of their cancer within 18 months of their blood draw and from 40
age-gender matched healthy controls were profiled on NAPPA arrays with
randomly selected 2000 human protein. The fact that p53, a tumor antigen
that has been previously reported to be related to various cancers
including CRC, was one of the top candidates based on the statistical
analysis demonstrates the validity of our discovery platform. Besides
p53, thirty-one candidate antigens were identified to have sensitivity
greater than or equal to 25% at 95% specificity and fifty-one candidate
antigens had an area under the ROC curve (AUC) equal to or greater than
0.6. Validation of the combined 83 unique genes selected based on these
two different data analysis methods in an independent sample set in a
blind fashion is on-going. This pilot study using late stage cancer
samples demonstrates the feasibility and power of an immunoproteomics
study using protein arrays. This approach may rapidly lead to
identification of markers that could have relevance in monitoring disease
progression as well as in early cancer detection.

