Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPINK1 insufficiency induces impaired autophagy resulting in
chronic pancreatitis


Background& Objective: Several studies reported that chronic pancreatitis
is a risk factor for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Serine
protease inhibitor Kazal type 1 (SPINK1), also known as pancreatic
secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI), was originally isolated from the
pancreas. In mice, the homologous gene is designated as Spink3.
SPINK1/Spink3 covalently can bind to activated trypsin within the
pancreatic acinar cells to form an inactive and stable complex and to
prevent acute pancreatitis, a major inflammatory disorder of the
pancreas. The mutations of SPINK1 gene are associated with various forms
of idiopathic pancreatitis. We previously showed that deletion of Spink3
causes pancreatitis-like changes in the mouse. A careful molecular and
pathological analysis of this genetically engineered mouse model will
reveal the chronic of nflammation in the pancreas. The aim of this study
was to rescue the Spink3-/- phenotype by generating Spink3-/- mice with
knocked-in SPINK1, and to analyze molecular mechanisms that initiate
pancreatitis or drive its progression from acute to chronic disease in
this genetic model. Methods: We placed SPINK1 minigene (KI) into mouse
Spink3 locus, using the Cre-loxP technology and generated chimeric mice
(Spink3KI/+). Spink3KI/+ mice were crossed to Spink3+/- mice, thus
generating Spink3KI/-. Mice were followed up to 8 weeks old.
Time-dependent changes in pancreatic histology, stellate cell ctivation,
and serum amylase were measured. Results: Spink3KI/KI mice showed no
abnormalities in pancreas or any other organ during the 8 weeks age of
observation, indicating that human SPINK1 can rescue Spink3 deficiency in
physiological condition. Spink3KI/- mice showed slight growth etardation.
The pancreas of Spink3KI/- mice at birth contained normal acinar cells.
The Spink3KI/- mice time-dependently developed pathologic features of
chronic tissue damage, including loss of acinar cells, intralobular
fibrosis with activated pancreatic stellate cells. Interlobular ducts
were dilated and contained protein plugs, which resembled chronic
pancreatitis in human. In the pancreas of Spink3KI/- mice, we found that
trypsin activity increased, and large vacuoles, derived from autophagy,
appeared in acinar cells. p62, which is a selective substrate for
autophagy aggregated in acinar cells, suggested that autophagy is
impaired in Spink3KI/- acinar cells. Conclusions: We demonstrated that
SPINK1 insufficiency caused chronic pancreatitis in vivo. Impaired
autophagy and high trypsin activity may contribute to cause chronic
pancreatitis in human.We established chronic pancreatitis model in human
SPINK1 knockin mice and identified shared pathological alterations in
human and mouse chronic pancreatitis.Thus,this mouse model provides a
suitable tool to analyze the oncogenesis from chronic pancreatitis.

