Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of allografts derived from a
genetically engineered mouse model of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Introduction: Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM) represent an
attractive system for preclinical research since GEMM tumors develop in
the presence of a competent immune system, thereby closely resembling the
tumor microenvironment in patients. One example is the KP model (DuPage
et al., 2009), which reflects the tumorigenesis of NSCLC in humans. KP
tumors carry Kras and Trp53 mutations, comparable to subtypes of human
NSCLC. Typical drawbacks of GEMM tumors include differences in their
genetic make-up to human tumors and the very slow and heterogeneous tumor
development, making the use of these models challenging for routine in
vivo efficacy studies. The latter can be improved by grafting primary
tumors on a genetically dissimilar member of the same strain, so-called
allografting. Thus, the advantages of xenograft and GEMM models can be
combined. Here, we described the establishment and characterization of
allografts from the KP GEMM.Material & Methods: KP tumors were excised
from the lungs of KP mice and implanted subcutaneously (s.c.) into
C57BL/6N female mice. When tumor growth was detected, passaging steps
from animal to animal were performed. Furthermore, two cell lines derived
from KP tumors, KP1 and KP4 (provided by Mller et al.), were injected
s.c., the developing tumors excised and directly re-implanted as
described above. The passages were analyzed molecularly, histologically,
and via IHC (e.g. Ki67 proliferation marker) , and compared to the
original in-situ tumors. A therapeutic study with Erlotinib and BEZ235
was performed on KP1 allografted mice.Results: All investigated
allografts showed similar histological patterns. Ki67 scores reflected
the average time from implantation to passaging. The average passage
times ranged from 193 days (KP4 cell line) to 266 days (KP1 cell line).
Allografts from the original KP model showed a time to passaging of 235
days.The mRNA expression of EpCAM (CD326) was on average 10-fold higher
in KP and KP1 allografted tumors compared to normal C57BL/6 lung tissue,
which could be confirmed by flow cytometry and cell-binding assay,
determining >99% EPCAM positive cells in KP1 tumors. All allografts
carried the Kras mutation and loss of function point mutations in
Trp53.The therapy study revealed no effect of Erlotinib on tumor growth,
but a significant (p=0.0003) tumor load reduction in mice treated with
BEZ235 (519 244 mm, n=5) compared to the control group (1678 275 mm, n=4)
on day 28, respectively.Conclusion: The generation of s.c. transplantable
allografts from the KP GEMM was successfully conducted. The allograft
models enable the use of immunocompetent mice in a feasible time frame
and still resemble key aspects of human disease. Further studies will
elucidate the interaction of the allografts with the host and compare
sensitivity characteristics between GEMM and allograft of the same model.

