Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression and proteomic analysis to identify predictive
biomarkers of response in the ENCHANT-1 Trial (NCT01677455), a Phase 2
Proof of Concept study evaluating first-line ganetespib monotherapy in
women with metastatic HER2 positive or triple negat


Background: The chaperone protein HSP90 is required for the stabilization
and activation of many client proteins critical to breast cancer growth
and aggressiveness, such as HER2, HIF1-, EGFR, ER, PI3K, AKT, P53 and
VEGFR. Ganetespib, a novel triazolone inhibitor of HSP90, has shown
activity in breast cancer in both preclinical models (HER2+, ER+/PR+ and
TNBC), and in early clinical trials (patients with HER2+ disease, as well
as TNBC). Ganetespib has been well tolerated in clinical trials with a
favorable safety profile. The ENCHANT-1 trial was designed to further
evaluate ganetespib single agent activity in metastatic breast cancer
(mBC) and identify potential predictive biomarkers.Methods: The ENCHANT-1
trial is an international, first-line phase 2 study in mBC patients:
Cohort A, HER2+ (up to n=35) and Cohort B, TNBC (up to n=35). Patients
with previously untreated metastatic disease are eligible for treatment
with ganetespib at 150 mg/m2 twice weekly on 3 out of 4 wks. Primary
endpoint: ORR assessed using RECIST1.1 criteria. Key secondary endpoints
include early metabolic effects as assessed by PET/CT at week 3. Tissue
samples were collected from all pts at baseline prior to initiation of
treatment; fresh biopsies at C1D18 and end of treatment were optional.
Gene expression will be evaluated using RNAseq to survey mutations and
gene expression levels in breast cancer genes. A reverse phase protein
microarray assay will be used to map the activated protein signaling
architecture of laser capture micro-dissected tumor cells from collected
tissue samples to evaluate the level of phosphorylation/activation of
HSP90 clients and coordinated signaling pathways. Analysis of 150
signaling proteins is planned.Results and Conclusions: The study was
initiated in 27 centers globally. At the time of submission, a total of
35 patients were enrolled; TNBC (n= 30) and HER2+ (n=5). In an interim
analysis, of the evaluable 4 patients in HER2-positive cohort, 2 had
objective response (OR), and 2 stable disease (SD). In the TNBC cohort,
of the evaluable 10 patients, 2 had OR, 3 SD and 5 PD. Full molecular
analysis to identify biomarkers of response is underway and will be
reported at the meeting.

