Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct protein expression patterns of solid pseudopapillary
neoplasm of pancreas


Solid pseudopapillary neoplasm (SPN), is an uncommon pancreatic tumor
with distinct clinicopathologic features. SPNs are characterized by
mutation in exon 3 of CTNNB1. However, little is known about SPN
tumorigenesis but CTNNB1 mutation. In order to identify the
characteristic gene expression patterns of SPN, we performed proteome
analysis of SPN and compared to gene expression data. We analyzed pooled
SPNs and pooled non-neoplastic pancreas tissues using LTQ-Orbitrap. In
total, we identified 862 (444 up-regulated and 418 down-regulated)
proteins showed differential expression in SPN compared to non-neoplastic
pancreas. We compared proteome profiling compared to mRNA expression of
SPNs, and then selected 544 significant proteins presented the same
expressional tendency.Many of the overexpressed proteins are related to
the activated signaling pathways of SPN consistently with our previous
study. Specifically, DKK4 (6.1-fold), APC (1.5-fold), RUVBL1 (1.4-fold)
and -catenin (1.3-fold) involved in Wnt signaling were up-regulated in
protein level of SPNs compared to non-neoplastic pancreas. Besides Wnt
signaling, we detected several up-regulated proteins including FUS and
NONO. The interaction of -catenin with FUS was reported that involved in
the regulation of pre-mRNA splicing. We identified that FUS and NONO
interacted directly with -catenin by immunoprecipitation in -catenin
active cell lines (SW480, HCT116). We found that molecules involved in
glycolysis, metabolism and sumoylation were activated in SPNs; HK1
(3.2-fold), PKM2 (3.3-fold), ENO2 (2.1-fold), PDHA (1.5-fold) and SUMO2
(1.6-fold). We also detected that several proteins involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition were up or down-regulated including
CTSB (3.98-fold), VIM (1.98-fold) and JUP (-2.29-fold).Our proteomic
profiling study of SPNs provides 1) SPN-specific molecular mechanism for
solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm tumorigenesis similar with mRNA expression
pattern including Wnt signaling, 2) SPN-specific epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, and 3) a metabolism is activated in SPNs. These findings can
be used for an early diagnosis biomarker development or molecular
therapeutic target.

