Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G-rich DNA genomic sequences derived from the promoter region of
pro-oncogenes selectively inhibit tumor growth and demonstrate strong
synergies


Introduction: Many cancer-related pro-oncogenes have quadruplex forming
oligonucleotide sequences in their promoter regions. These genes include,
amongst others, c-Myc, Bcl-2, K-ras, or HIF-1a which are individually or
together over-expressed in the vast majority of neoplasms. For instance,
c-Myc, a key regulator of cell cycle and proliferation, is commonly
over-expressed in both hematological and solid cancers. The c-myc
promoter region contains a guanine-rich sequence (PU27), capable of
forming four-stranded quadruplex DNA structures, which negatively
regulates c-myc transcription. Also, Bcl-2, is commonly over-expressed in
a variety of hematological malignancies and the Bcl-2 quadruplex-forming
sequence is located upstream of the P1 promoter of the Bcl-2 gene; it is
also implicated in negative regulation of Bcl-2 transcription. Treatment
of cancer cells over-expressing c-Myc and / or Bcl-2 with
oligonucleotides encoding the c-Myc (PU27) and Bcl-2 (Bcl-2-GRO)
guanine-rich sequences, located in their respective promoter regions,
selectively inhibits c-Myc or Bcl-2 gene expressions, cancer cells
proliferation and induces cell death.Methods: Four cancer cell lines
obtained from ATCC were used in these studies (Raji, HL-60, U937, A549).
Cell Titer-Glo Assay was used for the cell proliferation experiments.
Cell cycle analysis was determined in the HL-60 cell line using fixed
doses of PU27 and Bcl-2-GRO and time dependent FACS analysis.
Internalization studies were analyzed by FACS analysis using FAM labeled
PU27 and DY647 labeled Bcl-2-GRO. In vivo tumor growth inhibition studies
were done in females NOD/SCID mice (6 animals per group); 5x106 cells in
a Matrigel mixture were implanted in the flank of the animals; tumors
developed and treatments with PU27 and Bcl-2-GRO at different dose levels
alone and in combination were performed while body weights were monitored
during the course of the study.Results: Treating the Raji, HL-60, U937,
or A549 cancer cell lines with PU27 or Bcl-2-GRO causes inhibition of
proliferation with IC50 between 200 nM and 5mM after 144 hours depending
on expression of the target pro-oncogene. When treating the same cell
lines using a combination of these two sequences, a significant synergy
is observed, leading to more than 100 fold increase in potency. The same
synergistic effect was seen when PU27 was combined with paclitaxel,
leading to picomolar IC50. Internalization of these oligonucleotides was
very rapid and quantitative. Localization studies show that PU27 and
Bcl-2-GRO are localized in the nucleus. Cell cycle results showed a
significantly increase in G0-G1 cell cycle arrest for the combination. In
vivo xenograft tumor growth inhibition studies confirmed the in vitro
synergistic results with 60 to 80% tumor growth inhibition while
treatments were well tolerated (no body weight loss).

