Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome and metabolome reprogramming in EGFR-mutant NSCLC
early adaptive drug-escape against erlotinib


Background. Advanced NSCLC with sensitizing EGFR mutation is being
treated with EGFR inhibitor first-line. Despite initial tumor response,
targeted therapy invariably fails due to acquired resistance. Classical
studies of acquired drug resistance focusing on late clinical events in
rebiopsy studies have identified some resistance mechanisms including
T790M-EGFR, MET amplification and AXL upregulation.Methods. HCC827 and
PC-9 NSCLC cells (sensitizing EGFR exon 19-del) were used in vitro and in
vivo drug-sensitive models. MTS viability assay, TLVM cell mobility
assay, immunoblot and immunofluorescence and in vivo xenograft IHC
analysis were performed. Transcriptome analysis of HCC827 cells under
erlotinib inhibition time-course was performed using Affymetrix
microarray gene expression profiling (Human GeneChip 1.0 ST arrays) in
triplicate at 0 hr, 8 hr, 9 days of erlotinib-treatment, and 9 days
pretreatment with erlotinib followed by 7 days drug-washout. Data
analysis was performed using PCA, heatmap, BAMarray and PathwayStudio 6.0
analysis. We also performed mass-spectrometry-based global profiling
analysis of cellular metabolome in 5 replicate.Results. We analyzed
drug-sensitive HCC827 and PC-9 cells under erlotinib inhibition to
characterize the adaptive response that engenders drug resistance. We
identified an early adaptive drug-escape that emerged after 9 days of
erlotinib, characterized with MET-independent mitochondrial BCL-2/BCL-xL
prosurvival priming to result in 100-fold IC50 increase towards
resistance. These cells displayed a quiescence state associated with
retarded cell proliferation/cytoskeletal functions. Transcriptome
profiling analysis of the early adaptive resistant HCC827 cells revealed
a remarkable genome-wide adaptive reprogramming of gene expression
signature, involving pathways of cell adhesion, cell cycle regulation,
cell division/mitosis, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, response to DNA
damage stimulus, and DNA repair. Metabolomic profiling revealed a global
adaptive metabolic reprogramming also, with resultant suppression of
glucose and TCA cycle metabolism, and lipid bioenergetics. Our studies
also identified autocrine TGF2 signaling pathway in mediating the early
adaptive resistance in the mutated-EGFR lung cancer cells that escaped
erlotinib inhibition through a combination of quiescence-state and EMT,
cellular metabolic reprogramming and STAT3/BCL-2/BCL-xL mitochondrial
prosurvival priming.Conclusion. Early adaptive drug-escape emerges within
a subpopulation of EGFR-mutant NSCLC under erlotinib inhibition. This
constitutes an early-stage minimal residual disease leading to eventual
resistant tumor relapse. These early drug-escaping tumor cells undergo
global cellular reprogramming with upregulated mitochondrial prosurvival
priming, representing attractive therapeutic targets to eradicate drug
resistance.

