Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding breast cancer resistance to chemotherapy:
Characterization of cancer cell sub-populations in residual and relapsed
tumors


Tumor recurrence fueled by residual tumor cells having survived
chemotherapy represents the principal cause of breast cancer treatment
failure. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous disease
at both molecular and cellular level, and the presence of different tumor
cell sub-populations is likely the reason for this heterogeneity and for
the incomplete response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy observed for most
TNBC. To identify and isolate tumor cell sub-populations that resist to
chemotherapy, we used a panel of 45 antibody fluorochrome conjugates in
combination with multi-parameter flow cytometry to screen for the
expression of a set of cell surface markers during the course of tumor
chemotherapy. This set of markers represented both proteins involved in
stem cell function and proteins known to be over-expressed in stem cells
or cancer stem cell sub-populations. As a source of tumor samples, we
used a panel of TNBC patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). These tumor
models are known to preserve the morphology, molecular characteristics
and drug response profile of the original patient tumors. We used TNBC
PDX models to reproduce in vivo chemotherapy-induced tumor regression and
relapse. Tumor dissociation, depletion of mouse cells and multi-parameter
flow cytometry allowed us to measure the percentage of marker expression
only in the fraction of human tumor cells.We found that the expression of
most of markers was very heterogeneous among the different TNBC models
analyzed. In residual tumors, we observed enrichment or depletion of
several cell populations expressing stem and cancer stem cell markers
such as CD44+ and CD133/1+. Interestingly, in the majority of relapsed
tumors, the percentage of these marker-positive cells shifted back to
pre-treatment levels. Moreover, the percentage of certain tumor cell
sub-populations was higher in untreated chemotherapy-resistant tumors
compared to untreated chemotherapy-sensitive ones. To study the
properties of enriched tumor cells sub-populations, we coupled cell
separation of marker-positive tumor cells to large scale molecular
analysis. Microarray-based gene expression analysis of sorted tumor cells
revealed cell sub-populations with up-regulated signaling pathways
related to stem cell function, cell migration or EMT. Further in vivo and
in vitro assays with sorted sub-populations are currently being performed
to search for possible functional role of selected markers during tumor
resistance to chemotherapy and initiation of tumor relapse.In summary, by
coupling PDX and cell surface marker screening technologies, we have
identified distinct tumor cell sub-populations which are associated with
tumor resistance to chemotherapy. We believe that this approach will help
gaining knowledge of tumor cell adaptation and selection in response to
chemotherapy, which will ultimately lead to design tailored treatments
for TNBCs.

