Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Seamless fluorescence guided surgery for pancreatic cancer is
facilitated by a hand held electrocautery pencil with excitation light
source


Fluorescent labeling of tumors with the goal of fluorescence guided
surgical resection (FGS) continues to be perfected and investigated. In
addition to a bright fluorophore that specifically and selectively labels
tumor tissue, a specific excitation light source that can be turned on as
needed by the surgeon without having to take their hands off the
dissecting instruments would be the most ideal system. The optimal method
for tissue excitation would therefore require the excitation light source
to be on the surgeon's dissecting or cutting instrument that could be
easily turned on or off as needed and in direct line with the labeled
tumor tissue. In designing the excitation light source we decided to use
the NIR window (600-1000 nm) due to it's favorable imaging qualities that
would allow for fluorophore excitation without the necessity of
eliminating white light from the field and with little to no tissue
autofluorescence. An electrocautery pencil was fitted with LEDs at the
base of the tip with an emitted signal between 633-660nm. The
complementary dye selected for labeling was DyLight 650 (Ex: 652 nm, Em:
672 nm). Nude mice were implanted with patient-derived orthotopic
xenograft (PDOX) pancreatic tumors and allowed 4 weeks for engraftment.
Anti-CA 19-9 antibody was then conjugated to DyLight 650 and injected
intravenously 24 hours prior to FGS. After 24 hours the mice underwent
surgical exploration for an attempt at FGS with the new device. A Canon
EOS 60D camera fitted with a 672 nm emission filter connected to a 19
inch monitor was selected as the fluorescence image-capturing device. The
mice were grounded appropriately to a surgical monopolar generator
selected to power to the electrocautery pencil. After initial incision
and tumor exposure under bright light the tumor was illuminated by the
excitation LEDs by simply pushing forward on the cautery activation
button on the device. The fluorescently labeled image of the tumor was
easily seen and confirmed on the monitor in real-time as the surgery
proceeded. The tumor was brightly visible with good background contrast.
Using this method had the benefit of allowing tumor resection with
electrocautery using both ambient light and the fluorescent image
simultaneously to confirm a complete resection. In this respect, critical
surrounding structures are visible with the ambient light, helping to
avoid inadvertent tissue injury. Coupling an excitation LED light source
to an electrocautery pencil allows for good imaging of pre-labeled tumors
during resection without mounting an external excitation light source.
The set-up is very compact, efficient, easy to sterilize and works very
efficiently during surgical resection without the need to eliminate
background light. This is highly advantageous and allows simultaneous
visualization of the surgical field in white light and the labeled tumor
via an imaging device connected to a monitor.

