Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A platform to assess multiple therapy options simultaneously in a
patient's own tumor


Proper selection of anti-cancer agents at the earliest stage of patient
treatment following diagnosis of disease relapse is expected to
substantially impact clinical response to treatment. Currently, genomic
approaches to personalized cancer treatments have been yielded mixed
results, while empirical tests to assess tumor responsiveness have been
limited to ex vivo systems that disrupt the native tumor microenvironment
and show limited predictive value. To address the need for multiplexed in
vivo chemosensitivity testing, we have developed a technology that allows
simultaneous assessment of multiple cancer therapeutics directly in a
patient's tumor. This technology could provide a valuable decision-making
tool to prioritize effective treatments in the oncology clinic. Data
herein highlight how this technology enables controlled and reliable
microinjection of multiple drugs simultaneously in preclinical tumor
models, canine lymphoma, and human lymphoma patients. Consistent with the
controlled drug delivery of this system, spatially localized, readily
detectable, and mechanism-specific cellular changes were observed around
sites of microinjection in response to classic chemotherapy drugs
(vincristine and doxorubicin) as well as to a small molecule inhibitor of
TOR kinase. Importantly, localized response (or lack thereof) to
individual components of CHOP combination therapy correlated with
response to long-term systemic drug administration across multiple cell
line and patient-derived xenograft models of lymphoma. Underscoring the
importance of assessing drug efficacy in the context of an intact in vivo
system, tumor responses to vincristine were impacted by the local tumor
microenvironment. Our results also emphasize the importance of selecting
effective therapies early in the course of treatment, as drug resistance
mechanisms induced cross-resistance to otherwise efficacious drugs. These
studies set the stage for use of this platform in oncology drug
development, where the ability to more rapidly assess drug efficacy using
clinically relevant in vivo tumors may decrease the current reliance on
in vitro cell-based models of cancer and possibly increase the likelihood
of clinical success. This platform may thus be useful a clinical
decision-making tool for selection of patient-specific anti-cancer
therapies.

