Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surface-functionalized nanoparticles for inhalation delivery of
chemotherapeutics to lung cancer


Aerosol delivery of chemotherapeutics is an attractive strategy for
treating lung cancer as it offers high local drug levels and limited
systemic exposure. However, many chemotherapeutic agents have poor
aqueous solubility, which presents significant formulation challenges.
Encapsulation of such drugs in polymeric nanoparticles (NPs) can overcome
solubility issues and improve their delivery to tumor cells. In addition,
NPs enable sustained drug release and prolonged drug exposure in the deep
lungs and limit drug entrapment in the nasopharyngeal region.In our
studies, we investigated NPs formulated from the biodegradable polymer,
poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA), for inhalation delivery of
paclitaxel. NPs were aerosolized using ultrasonic atomization. Aerosol
output (20 g drug/min) and mass median aerodynamic diameter (1.57 m) of
the aerosol droplets were measured using a cascade impactor. Particle
deposition studies in mice showed that inhalation delivery of
NP-encapsulated paclitaxel results in high drug concentration (14 g/g) in
the lungs following a 33 minute exposure.Following deposition in the
lungs, penetration of NPs within the tumor occurs predominantly through
diffusion. The tumor extracellular matrix (ECM) is a dense and tortuous
network of biopolymers which significantly hinder effective intratumoral
distribution of NPs. The presence of leaky blood vessels in the tumor
also leads to the formation of cross-linked fibrin clot in the ECM. We
hypothesized that degrading fibrin in the tumor ECM will lead to enhanced
intratumoral distribution of NPs.In order to improve the tumor
penetration, we surface functionalized NPs with fibrinolytic enzymes,
streptokinase and tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). NPs were
characterized for particle size (240 nm), zeta potential (-20 mV) and
drug loading (10% w/w). We used a plasmin generation assay to quantify
the amount of active enzyme on the surface of NPs. We also compared the
diffusion of NPs across fibrin gels using an in vitro transwell assay. We
found that enzyme-functionalized NPs diffused through fibrin gels more
efficiently than non-functionalized NPs. In vivo studies in tumor bearing
mice also demonstrated a greater intratumoral distribution of
enzyme-functionalized NPs compared to non-functionalized NPs.In
conclusion, our studies show that inhalation delivery of NP-encapsulated
paclitaxel results in high drug concentrations in the lungs. Further,
functionalization of NPs with fibrinolytic enzymes can improve their
transport through tumor ECM. Future studies will examine the
pharmacokinetics and anticancer efficacy of aerosolized
enzyme-functionalized NPs in an orthotopic mouse model of lung cancer.

