Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High content multiparametric functional screen for regulators of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition identifies genes associated with
chemoresistance


Metastasis accounts for the majority of treatment-refractory cancers and
poor prognosis of the disease. The phenotypic transition of non-motile
epithelial tumor cells to migratory and invasive mesenchymal cells
enables the escape of cancer cells from the primary tumor into the
circulation. Morphological changes from cobblestone epithelial cells to
elongated and spindle-shaped cells is a key feature of this process. This
transition is also marked by upregulation of vimentin, an intermediate
filament found in mesenchymal cells. We have previously developed a
bladder cancer model with a step-wise enhancement in the metastatic
cascade that we have used to interrogate the role of tumor cell
plasticity in metastasis (1). Given the need to elucidate pathways and
assign functions to particular genes involved in this process, we
conducted a high content screening assay across genome wide siRNA, miRNA
and kinase inhibitor (131 compounds) libraries to systematically identify
modulators of EMT/MET. We identified candidate gene regulators of EMT in
TSU-Pr1-B1 bladder cancer cells using the readouts of morphological
change (cells stained with CMFDA) and a vimentin promoter activity (dsRed
reporter construct). Following integration of the predicted target genes
for miRNA hits and kinase inhibitors with siRNA hits, initial validation
using a siRNA deconvolution strategy was performed for 400 targets. 221
siRNAs were classified as inducing statistically significant effects on
cell shape and/or vimentin promoter reporter activity (defined as at
least 2/4 duplexes inducing the effect for a given target). Gene ontology
and pathway analyses feature cell cycle and various developmental
pathways. Furthermore, the validated gene list was associated with
bladder cancer histology and drug sensitivity in clinical specimens in
multiple cancer types (Oncomine). Molecules identified in this assay will
be further analysed using functional assays to determine their role in
maintaining the epithelial phenotype and as regulators of
chemoresistance.(1) Chaffer et al. (2005) Clin Exp Metastasis 22: 115-25.

