Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycoproteomic analysis of breast cancer cell lines for biomarker
discovery


Glycosylation is one of the most ubiquitous protein post-translational
modifications observed in eukaryotic organisms. In cancer, key cellular
pathways and interactions, related to invasion and metastasis, are
disrupted by altered protein glycosylation. Many current clinical cancer
biomarkers are glycoproteins (i.e. CEA, CA15-5, CA125, and PSA).
Glycosylation is known to be aberrant in breast cancer. However,
systematic studies to identify glycoproteins in cancer have been limited,
and typically focus on single proteins of interest or glycans released
from proteins. We have developed a novel protein fractionation and
enrichment strategy for glycoproteomic analysis of the secreted proteins,
incorporating lectin affinity capture for glycoprotein enrichment, intact
protein separation, and enzymatic digestion followed by LC-MS/MS
analysis. Here, we apply this workflow to capture and analyze
glycoproteins in the cancer secretome, which includes proteins secreted
and/or shed from cancer cells into the extracellular space.Four breast
cancer cell lines (HCC70, HCC1806, BT474, and ZR75-1) and one normal
mammary epithelial cell line (MCF10A) were subjected to glycoproteomic
analysis. Proteins corresponding to 3360 unique gene names were
identified. Subsequent data analysis yielded a variety of types of
information about glycoproteins in the cell line secretomes. 1)
Fucosylated and branched-sugar containing glycoforms of proteins were
identified by lectin binding properties. For example, PHA-P/PHA-L lectins
showed high affinity for aldolase, immunoglobulins, and
inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor, suggesting these proteins contain branched
sugar structures. 2) Enrichment of some proteins was observed in breast
cancer cell lines compared to the normal mammary epithelial cell line and
vice versa. For example, high expression of fucosylated vimentin was
observed in MCF10A, but not breast cancer cell lines. 3) Differences in
glycosylation patterns of proteins were observed between cell lines. For
example, the protease legumain was observed to be highly fucosylated in
MCF10A, but had a higher affinity for PHA-P/PHA-L in HCC70. Additional
substrates and inhibitors of legumain were also identified. Proteins of
interest were further studied in additional follow-up experiments
including western blotting and glycostaining. Additional proteins of
interest were measured in plasma samples from women with (benign or
malignant) breast lesions.

