Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specificity of the human autoantibody response against the stress
oncoprotein LEDGF/p75


Overexpression of self-antigens in malignant tissues may lead to the
elicitation of autoantibodies (AAbs) that could serve as tools for the
characterization of novel tumor-associated antigens (TAA). We and others
have demonstrated that the stress survival protein LEDGF/p75 (lens
epithelium derived growth factor p75, also known as DFS70, dense fine
speckled nuclear antigen of 70 kD) is targeted by IgG AAbs in some
patients with prostate cancer (PCa), leukemia, non-rheumatic inflammatory
conditions, and even in healthy individuals. These AAbs are thought to be
sensors of events associated with malignancy or inflammation, or
protective antibodies that influence host immunosurveillance against
LEDGF/p75-overexpressing tumors. LEDGF/p75 is overexpressed in cancer
cells and tumors of the prostate, colon, and thyroid, and promotes
chemoresistance. A better understanding of the significance of the
autoantibody response to LEDGF/p75 requires establishing its specificity.
Our objective is to determine whether this response, particularly in
healthy individuals, is a component of the host immunosurveillance of
LEDGF/p75-overexpressing tumors. Recent studies by our group showed that
LEDGFp75 interacts with MeCP2 (methyl CpG binding protein 2) in PCa cells
to influence transcriptional activation of Hsp27. Interestingly,
non-human antibodies against MeCP2 produce an identical molecular weight
and dense fine speckled (DFS) nuclear distribution as AAbs to LEDGF/p75,
as assessed by immunoblotting and indirect immunofluorescence (IIF)
microscopy, respectively, in cancer cells. These observations led us to
determine if human AAbs producing the DFS-IIF pattern, considered
specific for LEDGF/p75, are exclusive to this protein or may also target
MeCP2. We screened in immunoblots of PC3 cell lysates over 90 human sera
producing the LEDGF/p75-associated DFS-IIF pattern to determine if they
possess dual reactivity against the two antigens, or are specific for one
or the other. Initial results showed that the sera exhibited different
reactivity strengths against a 75 kD protein. A group of 20 strongly
reacting sera was selected for subsequent studies. Immunoblots of lysates
from PC3 cells with LEDGF/p75 knockdown showed that the selected sera did
not recognize the 75 kD band, indicating their specificity for LEDGF/p75.
We also confirmed the specificity of these sera by demonstrating that
they recognized the signature caspase-mediated cleavage pattern of
LEDGF/p75 in PC3 cells treated with the apoptosis inducing drug TRAIL.
These findings suggest that human AAbs producing the DFS-IIF pattern are
specific for LEDGF/p75 and are not reactive with its interacting partner
MeCP2. These results enhance our understanding of the specificity of the
autoantibody response to this TAA, and have implications for the future
development of LEDGF/p75-based vaccines to induce immunity to
LEDGF/p75-overexpressing tumors.

