Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-vivo evaluation of the anti-metastatic efficacy of small
molecule Cathepsin L inhibitor KGP94 in a prostate cancer model


It is estimated that 85% of patients with advanced prostate cancer
develop skeletal metastases; an occurrence that results in a substantial
reduction in the quality of life and a drastic worsening of the
prognosis. The development of novel therapeutic strategies that impair
the metastatic process and associated skeletal adversities is therefore
critical to improving prostate cancer patient survival.Tumor cells rely
on proteolytic enzymes for successful establishment of metastases.
Cathepsin L (CTSL) is a lysosomal cysteine protease that is up regulated
in a wide range of human cancers including prostate cancer. The elevated
secretion of CTSL by aggressively metastasizing tumor cells plays a key
role in metastatic spread of tumor cells through proteolytic degradation
of extracellular matrix and basement membrane components. In addition,
tumor secreted cytokines have been shown to increase osteoclastic
secretion of CTSL to promote bone resorption. Intervention strategies
targeting CTSL may therefore serve a dual purpose by inhibiting both
metastatic dissemination as well as bone resorption. The goal of present
studies was to evaluate the anti-metastatic and anti-bone resorptive
efficacy of CTSL inhibition using the small molecule CTSL inhibitor
3-bromophenyl-3-hydroxyphenyl-ketone thiosemicarbazone (KGP94).KGP94
treatment significantly impaired the metastatic phenotype of highly
metastatic prostate cancer PC-3ML cells. Treatment with 25M KGP94
decreased the migratory and invasive capacities of PC-3ML cells by 78 and
53% respectively. To validate the anti-metastatic efficacy of KGP94
in-vivo, luciferase labelled PC-3ML cells were injected into the left
ventricle of male nu/nu mice followed by daily treatment with 20mg/kg
KGP94. Metastatic progression was monitored by weekly bioluminescence
imaging using firefly luciferase reporter system. KGP94 treatment led to
a significant reduction in metastatic tumor burden (65% reduction) and a
reduction in metastatic incidence. Histological assessment of bones
further confirmed the reduction in metastatic burden upon KGP94
treatment. CTSL inhibition also led to a significant increase in overall
survival of tumor bearing mice (p=0.01). In vitro assessment of
anti-resorptive function of KGP94 was performed using osteoclastogenesis
and pit formation assays. KGP94 treatment of RAW264.7 osteoclast
precursor cells led to a significant decrease (72%) in osteoclast
formation as demonstrated by a decrease in the number of TRAP+
multinucleate cells. KGP94 also inhibited the bone resorptive activity of
osteoclasts as indicated by a significant reduction in the number of
resorptive pits formed by osteoclasts on bone slices.In conclusion, our
findings suggest that CTSL inhibition using small molecule KGP94 can
significantly impair metastatic dissemination of prostate cancer cells
and alleviate bone resorption.

