Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of aluminum exposure on epithelial and
mesenchymal cells


Introduction: Aluminium [Al(III)] is the third most abundant element as
well as the most abundant metal in the Earth's crust. The human
population is exposed to Al throughout daily life; in drinking water,
food, via application of antiperspirants, use of antacids and
vaccination. However, aluminum exposure has been linked to a variety of
pathological disorders like anemia, osteomalacia , hepatic disorder, and
neurological disorder. In addition, studies report that aluminum levels
are higher in tumors, including breast cancers than in surrounding normal
tissues. This suggests that aluminum accumulation may provide some
selective advantage to the tumor.Methods/Results:To determine how
aluminum affects cells that reside in mammary tissue, we studied the in
vitro effects of Al exposure on human mammary epithelial cells and
mesenchymal cells. Cells used in our study included hTERT-immortalized
human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs), the immortalized human mammary
epithelial cell line (MCF10A), hTERT-immortalized reduction mammary
fibroblasts (RMF/EG) and a dermal-derived human fibroblast cell line
(MSU1.1). Using the MTT assay we found that AlCl3 and AlOH3 salts inhibit
the growth of the mammary epithelial cells causing complete inhibition of
proliferation at doses around 1mM and decreased proliferation was
observed at doses as low as 12.8 uM. Surprisingly at these doses, Al
salts caused dose-dependent increase in proliferation the mesenchymal
cells. The proliferative effect of Al on mesenchymal cells was confirmed
using clonogenic assay. Flow cytometric evaluation of cell cycle using
PI/BrdU incorporation demonstrated that in MSU1.1 cells exposed to AlOH3
for 48 hrs, the percentage of cells in S phase of the cell cycle nearly
doubled as compared to untreated cells (P Introduction: Aluminium
[Al(III)] is the third most abundant element as well as the most abundant
metal in the Earth's crust. The human population is exposed to Al
throughout daily life; in drinking water, food, via application of
antiperspirants, use of antacids and vaccination. However, aluminum
exposure has been linked to a variety of pathological disorders like
anemia, osteomalacia , hepatic disorder, and neurological disorder. In
addition, studies report that aluminum levels are higher in tumors,
including breast cancers than in surrounding normal tissues. This
suggests that aluminum accumulation may provide some selective advantage
to the tumor.Methods/Results:To determine how aluminum affects cells that
reside in mammary tissue, we studied the in vitro effects of Al exposure
on human mammary epithelial cells and mesenchymal cells. Cells used in
our study included hTERT-immortalized human mammary epithelial cells
(HMECs), the immortalized human mammary epithelial cell line (MCF10A),
hTERT-immortalized reduction mammary fibroblasts (RMF/EG) and a
dermal-derived human fibroblast cell line (MSU1.1). Using the MTT assay
we found that AlCl3 and AlOH3 salts inhibit the growth of the mammary
epithelial cells causing complete inhibition of proliferation at doses
around 1mM and decreased proliferation was observed at doses as low as
12.8 uM. Surprisingly at these doses, Al salts caused dose-dependent
increase in proliferation the mesenchymal cells. The proliferative effect
of Al on mesenchymal cells was confirmed using clonogenic assay. Flow
cytometric evaluation of cell cycle using PI/BrdU incorporation
demonstrated that in MSU1.1 cells exposed to AlOH3 for 48 hrs, the
percentage of cells in S phase of the cell cycle nearly doubled as
compared to untreated cells (P <0.05). Similar results were seen with
AlCl3 treatment of MSU1.1 and AlOH3/AlCl3 treatment of RMF/EG
cells.Conclusions: These data indicate that while Al salts induce dose
dependent cytotoxicity in human epithelial cell lines, they induce
proliferation of mesenchymal cells. The tumor microenvironment, including
a proliferative stroma, is known to facilitate mammary carcinogenesis.
Our data suggest that Al accumulation could promote the development of a
permissive microenvironment. We are currently seeking to determine the
mechanism for the differential effect of Al in cells and whether this
effect influences transformation or carcinogenesis.

