Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting invasion and stemness in glioblastoma by thymosin beta
4 gene silencing: a new therapeutic target


Glioblastoma are incurable primary brain tumors with one of the worst
5-year survival rate among all cancers. Despite multimodality treatment
involving neurosurgical intervention, radiation and temozolomide
chemotherapy, the median overall survival is in the range of 15-16
months. Four large phase III trials investigating dose-dense temozolomide
(RTOG0525) or the addition of the integrin inhitibor cilengitide
(CENTRIC) or the addition of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
antibody bevacizumab (RTOG 0828, AVAglio) to the current standard
treatment failed to extend this range. Novel therapeutic targets are
urgently needed. Thymosin beta 4 (TB4) is a pleiotropic
actin-sequestering polypeptide that is involved in wound healing and
developmental processes. TB4 gene silencing promotes differentiation of
neural progenitor cells whereas TB4 overexpression initiates cortical
folding of developing brain hemispheres. Moreover, TB4 is involved in
migration invasion and epithelial to mesenchymal transition in other
cancer entities, e.g. colon cancer. In the present study, we investigated
the role of TB4 in malignant glioma.TB4 expression increased with the
grade of malignancy in gliomas and correlated with patient survival. In
vitro, TB4 gene silencing decreased migration, invasion, growth and
self-renewal, and promoted differentiation and the susceptibility to
undergo apoptotic cell death upon nutrient depletion in LNT-229, U87MG
and the glioma stem-cell line GS2, respectively. In vivo, survival of
nude mice bearing tumors derived from TB4-depleted glioma cells was
improved and the tumorigenicity of the GS2 glioma-initiating cell line
was diminished. The gene expression pattern in TB4-silenced glioma cells
was shifted from the mesenchymal towards the pro-neural gene signature.
The clustering of differentially regulated genes involved TGF-beta and
p53 signaling networks.Taken together, our data indicate that TB4 may be
a novel regulator of malignancy in glioblastoma and therefore a candidate
therapeutic target.

