Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of CXCR6-CXCL16 in prostate cancer progression and
chemotherapeutic efficacy


Despite recent advances in treatment and clinical management, prostate
cancer is still a leading cause of cancer related deaths among men,
primarily because etiopathogenesis of PCa is not well defined. In this
regard, chemokines and their corresponding receptors have been shown to
play major role in PCa progression, which are often associated with poor
therapeutic outcomes. Hence, the focus of this study is to determine the
potential role of CXCR6 and its natural ligand CXCL16 in PCa
pathogenesis, and potential impact of CXCR6-CXCL16 axis on efficacy of
docetaxel, which is currently offered in the clinics as standard care.We
investigated expression of CXCR6 and CXCL16 in clinical samples, prostate
cancer cell lines and normal prostatic epithelial cells. Expression of
CXCR6 and CXCL16 was significantly higher in PCa samples compared to
their respective controls, and expression of CXCR6/ CXCL16 was correlated
with tumor stage and grades. Similar to patient's samples, expression of
CXCR6/CXCL16 was significantly higher in PCa cell lines compared to
normal prostatic epithelial cells. Furthermore, levels of phospho -ERK1/2
and -NF-kB, known to be involved in cell growth and survival, were
significantly higher in PCa cells treated with CXCL16 compared to
untreated controls. In addition to these, role of CXCR6- CXCL16 on genes
responsible for cellular adhesion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
were examined. Interestingly, expression of surface E-cadherin and
catenin following CXCL16 treatment was significantly inhibited compared
to untreated cells, suggesting the involvement of CXCR6-CXCL16
interaction in PCa cell migration. Additionally, CXCR6 expressing PCa
cells expressed higher smooth muscle actin protein, another EMT marker
presumably induced by elevated TGF-, following CXCL16 stimulation.
Furthermore, expression of CXCR6, CXCL16 and MMP(s) were elevated in PCa
cell following docetaxel treatment in a time and dose dependent manner
compared to controls. This may explain the increased efficacy of
docetaxel when used in combination with anti-CXCR6 antibody as compared
to docetaxel alone. These findings suggest that CXCR6-CXCL16 axis plays a
crucial role in pathogenesis of PCa, and inhibition of this axis may have
significant impact on disease progression and therapeutics outcomes.

