Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor-1 (DDR1)
tyrosine kinase enhances cytotoxicity of anti-mesothelin immunotoxin


Discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) is an emerging anti-cancer target that
belongs to the family of tyrosine kinases that are activated by collagen,
the most abundant component of extracellular matrix (ECM). Collagen
mediated induction of DDR1 facilitates cell adhesion, migration,
proliferation and matrix remodeling. The collagen/DDR1 axis is also
thought to modulate tumor-stromal interaction and potentially can affect
tumor response to therapy. Mesothelin is a cell-surface tumor-associated
antigen over-expressed in several human cancers including mesothelioma,
ovarian, lung, breast, and pancreatic cancers with limited expression on
normal cells. RG7787 is a second-generation less immunogenic recombinant
immunotoxin (RIT) consisting of an Fv portion of an anti-mesothelin
antibody attached to a portion of Pseudomonas exotoxin A in which
immunogenic B cell epitopes were silenced. Activation of tyrosine kinase
mediated signaling in tumor cells has been shown to modulate the activity
of RITs. Therefore, we hypothesized that DDR1 regulates RIT action and
its inhibition might enhance the activity of RG7787. Knockdown of DDR1 by
siRNA or its inhibition with a novel and specific inhibitor, 7rh,
synergistically enhanced the cytotoxic activity of RG7787 in several
cancer cell lines. Investigation into the mechanism of action showed
increased inhibition of protein synthesis in cells treated with
combination of 7rh and RG7787. Furthermore, stimulation of DDR1 activity
by collagen treatment protected cancer cells from killing by RG7787. In
conclusion, we report that collagen protects cells from killing by RITs
through DDR1 and that lowering DDR1 protein or inhibiting DDR1 kinase
activity enhances the cytotoxic activity of RITs. Our data suggest that
the combination of 7rh and RG7787 represents a novel therapeutic strategy
to target mesothelin-expressing cancers.

