Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VCAM-1 enhances immune evasion in a murine model of metastatic
cervical cancer


Surface over-expression of Vascular Cell Adhesion Molecule-1 (VCAM-1) has
recently been identified as a mechanism used by metastatic breast cancer
cells to provide pro-survival advantages. It has been previously shown
that the metastatic and immune-resistant mouse cervical cancer cell line,
A17 has a significantly increased expression of VCAM-1 compared with the
primary parental tumor cell line, TC1-P0. Using this metastatic tumor
model, we first modulated the surface expression levels of VCAM-1 on A17
in vitro by using an shRNA knockdown approach. We then inoculated these
cells intra-venously (iv) and subcutaneously (sq) into C57BL/6 background
mice and athymic nude mice to interrogate how VCAM-1 expression affects
surrounding immune cell interactions within the tumor microenvironment.
To further characterize VCAM-1 dependent immune responses, we used
intravital 2-photon laser-scanning microscopy (2P-LPS) to dynamically
visualize immune-tumor cells interaction. We observed that VCAM-1
down-regulation reduces the primary tumor growth kinetics in C57BL/6 mice
but exhibited similar growth kinetics in nude mice, suggesting that
VCAM-1 levels are not responsible for the intrinsic primary tumor growth
differences in vivo. Moreover, VCAM-1 down-regulated cell lines showed
decreased lung metastasis in both immune-competent mice and athymic nude
mice. Furthermore, the metastatic lung parenchyma in mice injected with
the non-silencing shVCAM-1 control exhibited immune cell infiltrates with
a predominance of M2 polarized macrophages and an altered cytokine
production. This may be responsible for decreased susceptibility to
immune surveillance. Together, our results demonstrate that
tumor-associated VCAM-1 expression helps aggressive tumors circumvent
effective immune surveillance, and may represent a target for the
development of immune-mediated therapy in metastatic cervical cancer.

