Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of c-Myc oncogenic signaling by MK591, an inhibitor of
arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase


Background: Prostate cancer cells continuously generate 5(S)-HETE series
of metabolites from arachidonic acid via 5-lipoxygenase (5-Lox) activity,
and inhibition of 5-Lox blocks production of metabolites and triggers
apoptosis both in androgen-sensitive as well as androgen-independent
prostate cancer cells. This apoptosis is prevented by 5(S)-HETE and
5-oxoETE, but not by leukotrienes or metabolites of 12-Lox or 15-Lox,
which is consistent with the idea that the 5-HETE series of metabolites
are essential survival factors for prostate cancer cells. Thus, 5-Lox
emerges as a novel molecular target for prostate cancer therapy. However,
details of the downstream signaling mechanisms regulated by 5-Lox
metabolites in prostate cancer cells are yet to be fully characterized,
and the lack of suitable compounds with in vivo efficacy is hampering
proper translational development to target 5-Lox. We addressed this
problem by treating LNCaP human prostate cancer cells with MK591, a
specific, third-generation inhibitor of 5-Lox activity, and analyzing the
effects by gene-expression array, RT-PCR, and Western blot. Methods:
Cells were treated with MK591 for eight hours and gene expression was
analyzed by Illumina HT-12v4 whole genome gene-expression array.
Expression of c-Myc was confirmed by RT-PCR and Western blot. Apoptosis
was measured by annexin-V binding, PARP-cleavage, and detecting
degradation of chromatin-DNA to nucleosomes. Transcriptional activation
of c-Myc was analyzed by nuclear localization, DNA-binding,
luciferase-reporter assays and expression of c-Myc-target genes. Results:
We observed that MK591 strongly inhibits the expression of c-Myc oncogene
in prostate cancer cells, as revealed by the gene expression array.
Down-regulation of c-Myc by MK591 was confirmed by RT-PCR and Western
blot as well as by the reduction in nuclear-localization and DNA-binding
activities of c-Myc proteins. Treatment with MK591 dramatically decreased
the Myc-driven E-box-luciferase reporter activity in prostate cancer
cells which is effectively prevented by 5-oxoETE, a metabolic product of
5-Lox. Moreover, MK591 substantially reduced the expression of c-Myc
target genes (e.g., cyclin D1, CDK4, survivin, Aurora kinase, Gemin4 and
MCM10), and blocked the matrigel-invasion and soft-agar colony-formation
by prostate cancer cells. Interestingly, while MK591 dramatically
affected the Myc function in prostate cancer cells (where Myc is
over-activated), it did not inhibit the basal c-Myc functions in
non-cancer cells, such as human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF) which do not
expresses 5-Lox. Conclusion: Our findings indicate that expression and
oncogenic-function of c-Myc in prostate cancer cells are severely
down-regulated by the 5-Lox inhibitor, MK591, and suggest that MK591 may
be useful to treat advanced, aggressive prostate cancers which are
frequently associated with over-activation of the c-Myc oncogene.

