Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aflibercept is highly active in clinically relevant, patient
derived xenografts of colorectal cancer


Aflibercept (ziv-aflibercept in USA), a new fusion protein, targets
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, VEGF-B, and placental growth
factor (PlGF). Aflibercept + FOLFIRI is approved for treating metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) that is resistant to or has progressed following
an oxaliplatin containing regimen. We investigated the pharmacological
activity of aflibercept in CRC patient derived xenografts (PDX), most
metastases-derived, and characterized PDX molecular and phenotypic
properties. In 48 CRC PDX, Whole Exome Sequencing revealed: 85% APC, 79%
TP53, 51% KRAS, 3% NRAS, 25% PIK3CA, 11% PTEN and 8% BRAF mutants. There
was no significant association between angiogenic factors, tumor mutation
profiles, and response to aflibercept.In tumors, protein levels of human
(h) VEGF-A were significantly higher than mouse (m) VEGF-A, hPlGF, and
mPlGF (Chiron et al, ESMO, 2013). Affymetrix probes detected VEGF-A and
PIGF but not VEGF-B mRNA in most PDX. There was no significant
association between expression of angiogenic factors and response to
aflibercept. Histological sections of CRC tumors from PDX, xenografts
created from cell lines, and patients tumor specimens indicated that
stromal involvement in human tumors was recapitulated in PDX but not in
tumors from cell lines. PlGF expression was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry on colon cancer tissue arrays. A significant number
of colon cancer specimens were positive for PlGF, expressed in tumor
cells and stroma. Aflibercept resulted in anti-tumor activity in 47/48
CRC PDX models and complete tumor stasis in 31/48 models. Efficacy data
from 5 PDX models responsive to aflibercept and CRC standard of care
(SOC) drugs, all administered as monotherapies, are below. The robust
activity of aflibercept in CRC PDX models that are sensitive to SOC drugs
suggest that CRC patients would benefit from aflibercept treatment,
independently of mutational status or expression of angiogenic factors.


