Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency and prognostic value of PTEN loss in patients with upper
tract urothelial carcinoma treated with radical nephroureterectomy


ObjectiveTo analyze PTEN expression status and its association with
disease recurrence and survival outcomes in a large, multi-institutional
upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) cohort.Design, Setting,
ParticipantsRetrospective analysis of 611 patients with UTUC treated with
radical nephroureterectomy (RNU) between 1991 and 2008 at seven
institutions. Median follow-up was 23 months (interquartile range, 6-40).
Tissue microarrays andimmunohistochemical PTEN staining (monoclonal
antibody) was performed.InterventionsRNU for UTUC with or without
adjuvant chemotherapy.ResultsPTEN staining was absent in 45 (7.4%) of the
cases. Patients with PTEN loss had significantly advanced pathological
tumor stage and grade (pObjectiveTo analyze PTEN expression status and
its association with disease recurrence and survival outcomes in a large,
multi-institutional upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC)
cohort.Design, Setting, ParticipantsRetrospective analysis of 611
patients with UTUC treated with radical nephroureterectomy (RNU) between
1991 and 2008 at seven institutions. Median follow-up was 23 months
(interquartile range, 6-40). Tissue microarrays andimmunohistochemical
PTEN staining (monoclonal antibody) was performed.InterventionsRNU for
UTUC with or without adjuvant chemotherapy.ResultsPTEN staining was
absent in 45 (7.4%) of the cases. Patients with PTEN loss had
significantly advanced pathological tumor stage and grade (p<0.001),
higher rate of lymph node metastasis (pObjectiveTo analyze PTEN
expression status and its association with disease recurrence and
survival outcomes in a large, multi-institutional upper tract urothelial
carcinoma (UTUC) cohort.Design, Setting, ParticipantsRetrospective
analysis of 611 patients with UTUC treated with radical
nephroureterectomy (RNU) between 1991 and 2008 at seven institutions.
Median follow-up was 23 months (interquartile range, 6-40). Tissue
microarrays andimmunohistochemical PTEN staining (monoclonal antibody)
was performed.InterventionsRNU for UTUC with or without adjuvant
chemotherapy.ResultsPTEN staining was absent in 45 (7.4%) of the cases.
Patients with PTEN loss had significantly advanced pathological tumor
stage and grade (p<0.001), higher rate of lymph node metastasis (p<0.01),
and lymphovascular invasion (pObjectiveTo analyze PTEN expression status
and its association with disease recurrence and survival outcomes in a
large, multi-institutional upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC)
cohort.Design, Setting, ParticipantsRetrospective analysis of 611
patients with UTUC treated with radical nephroureterectomy (RNU) between
1991 and 2008 at seven institutions. Median follow-up was 23 months
(interquartile range, 6-40). Tissue microarrays andimmunohistochemical
PTEN staining (monoclonal antibody) was performed.InterventionsRNU for
UTUC with or without adjuvant chemotherapy.ResultsPTEN staining was
absent in 45 (7.4%) of the cases. Patients with PTEN loss had
significantly advanced pathological tumor stage and grade (p<0.001),
higher rate of lymph node metastasis (p<0.01), and lymphovascular
invasion (p<0.001) compared to patients with PTEN expression. PTEN loss
was associated with disease recurrence, cancer-specific, and overall
mortality in univariable Cox regression analyses. However, in
multivariable Cox regression analyses that adjusted for the effect of
standard clinicopathologic features, PTEN loss was notassociated any more
with disease recurrence or cancer-specific mortality, but with overall
mortality.ConclusionsIn patients undergoing RNU for UTUC, loss of PTEN
protein expression is relatively uncommon, but when present associated
with features of biologically aggressive disease such as higher grade and
stage as well as lymph node metastasis. Loss of PTEN expression was
associated with disease recurrence and cancer-specific survival after RNU
for UTUC in univariable, but not in multivariable, analysis. PTEN loss
seems to promote worse outcomes in the relatively small group of
patients.Table 3. Multivariable Cox regression analyses predicting
disease recurrence, cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality in
611 patients treated with radical nephroureterectomy for upper urinary
tract urothelial cancer.Multivariable Cox regression analyses predicting
disease recurrence, cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality in
611 patients treated with radical nephroureterectomy for upper urinary
tract urothelial cancer.


