Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMGB1 regulates autophagy and apoptosis to promote chemotherapy
resistance in multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma is the second most frequently diagnosed hematologic
malignancy in the United States after non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Unfortunately, multiple myeloma remains incurable, and virtually all
patients eventually relapse with disease that is typically more resistant
to therapy than in prior lines of treatment, for which the underlying
molecular mechanisms remain unclear. In this study, we showed that
high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), the best characterized
damage-associated molecular pattern, in the development of chemotherapy
resistance in multiple myeloma. To examine its potential role of
chemotherapy resistance in myeloma, we detected protein expression of
HMGB1 treated with anticancer chemotherapy agent doxorubicin and observed
that HMGB1 was upregulated by different concentrations of doxorubicin in
myeloma cells. Chemosensitivity assay was performed with RPMI 8226 and
U266 cells with knockdown/overexpression of HMGB1 and treated with
doxorubicin, and cells were detected for their viability by WST-1 assay
after 72 hr. Consistently, shRNA interference-mediated knockdown of HMGB1
cells exhibited significant sensitized to doxorubicin treatment compared
to non-targeting shRNA cells, and HMGB1-overexpressing cells
significantly resistance to doxorubicin. Furthermore, studies in
xenograft models showed that shRNA of HMGB1 also sensitized the
chemosensitivity of multiple myeloma cells in vivo. At the molecular
level, mechanistic investigation showed that shRNA of HMGB1 decreased
autophagy, which is an intracellular self-defense mechanism to drug
resistance, by inhibition of the autophagic marker microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3-II and increasing of sequestosome 1 (p62) and
autophagosome formation. Finally, we found that HMGB1 regulated autophagy
and apoptosis by binding to p53 and Beclin1, and p53 is a negative
regulator of the HMGB1/Beclin1 complex. Taken together, these data
support the hypothesis that HMGB1 modulates chemotherapy resistance in
myeloma through effects on the pathway of autophagy and apoptosis, as
well as a target for strategies to aim at laying the foundation for
further clinical studies, and overcome chemoresistance in multiple
myeloma.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

