Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Notch and HIF enhances the antitumor effect of
radiation in Notch expressing lung cancer


Background: Notch pathway regulates cell-fate determination in
multi-cellular organisms and aberrant activation of Notch pathway has
been reported in tumorigenesis of many cancers. We previously reported
that Notch3 and its downstream effector, HEY1, were up-regulated by
radiation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that g secretase inhibitor (GSI), when combined with
radiation therapy, significantly suppressed the growth of lung cancer
cells compared with either GSI or radiation alone. The proposed mechanism
involves GSI suppressing radiation-induced Notch activation and the
resultant radioresistance. However, little is known about the mechanism
of Notch up-regulation induced by radiation. Since the expression of
Notch was reported to be activated via HIF under hypoxia, we, in this
study, hypothesized that HIF would be involved in radiation-induced Notch
activation in NSCLC and thus HIF inhibitor (YC-1) would have an
anti-tumor effect when combined with radiation therapy as is the case
with GSI.Materials and Methods: Two Notch-expressing lung cancer cell
lines (H460 and HCC2429) were used. We first examined the changes in
expressions of HIF pathway and Notch family after radiation under hypoxia
using Western blotting (WB) and real time RT-PCR.Notch expression was
evaluated after HIF-1 suppression by siRNA targeting HIF-1. Next, in
vitro we investigated an antitumor effect of YC-1, using a MTT
proliferation assay and a clonogenic assay, when combined with radiation.
And the combined antitumor effect of GSI and YC-1 with radiation was
examined using the Fa-CI plot of isobologram analysis. Finally, we
utilized a xenograft model and resected some tumors on day 15 for
molecular analysis.Results: Under hypoxia, the expression of HIF-1 was
up-regulated when the cells were incubated for 6 h without radiation.
Radiation up-regulated the expression of Notch3 and VEGF at 24 h compared
with control. Specific suppression of HIF-1 by siRNA down-regulated
Notch3 and Hey1 activation associated with radiation. In vitro, IC50 of
YC-1 and colony formation were decreased only when radiation treatment
was concurrently applied under hypoxia compared with sequential
treatment. Moreover, GSI and YC-1 had a synergistic antitumor effect
under hypoxia without or with radiation. In vivo, combination of GSI and
YC-1 showed the greatest radiosensitivity and reduced radiation-induced
Notch activation in molecular analysis, compared with single
treatment.Conclusions: Radiation-induced up-regulation of Notch pathway
and HIF-1 might provide therapeutic targets for more effective radiation
therapy in NSCLC.

