Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recapitulating the microenvironment in vitro for comparative study
of factors affecting tumor growth and vascularization


Introduction: Tumor growth is dramatically affected by the
microenvironment, including supporting cells such as the stroma and
vasculature, mechanical factors, such as interstitial flow and
extracellular matrix and aspects of the tumor mass itself, including
shape. However, current tumor growth models, including xenograft models,
2D and/or simplistic 3D cultures, are unable to address these
interactions in a high throughput human-derived system. We have developed
a novel microfluidic platform that combines human derived perfused
microvessels, stroma, and interstitial flow with 3D culture. This
platform was used to quantitatively compare the role of these
microenvironmental factors on tumor growth.Methods: A microfluidic device
was fabricated consisting of two supply channels on either side of a
central tissue compartment. The inner stromal compartment consists of
normal human fibroblasts (NHLFs) and GFP-labeled human colorectal
adenocarcinoma tumor cells, SW620, seeded in a fibrin matrix. To simulate
a vasculogenic-like process, human cord blood endothelial colony forming
cells endothelial cells (ECFC-ECs) were distributed throughout the
stromal channel with the fibroblasts and tumor cells.Tumor growth rate
and area was compared across day, interstitial flow rates and tumor shape
(fractal dimension, perimeter to area) with ANOVA.Results: Cell viability
within the device was maintained under interstitial flow conditions for a
period of 21 days. Within one week of culture, microvessel formation and
significant tumor growth into spheroids (n=636) were observed. On
average, tumor growth rate was 26% 62% per day with the highest growth
rates observed on the first days. By day 7, many tumor masses had died
off, with 2-3 large, fast growing tumors remaining per chamber. Highest
tumor growth rates and areas were observed in tumor masses with a
characteristic morphology of high perimeter to area and lower
cohesion.Interstitial flow rates ranging from essentially static to
supraphysiologic were generated. Differences in tumor growth rates were
not statistically significant across chambers with different mean flow
rates.To demonstrate intraluminal flow within the vascular network,
fluorescently labeled dextran (40, 70, and 150 kDa) was introduced into
the microfluidic lines. Dextran was retained in the vessel network, and
showed tumor cells residing in the intraluminal space of the formed
vasculature. By day 14, the network eroded, as the tumor masses overgrew
and encompassed more than 60% of the chamber volume.Discussion: We have
developed a novel 3D microfluidic system of the tumor microenvironment
that features perfused capillaries and controlled interstitial flow.
Tumor growth was affected by tumor characteristic shape in this model
though interstitial flow appeared to play a lesser role. Vascular
development was observed and its interaction with tumor growth will be
analyzed in future work.

