Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CSF-1R signaling drives mesothelioma stemness and chemoresistance


Clinical management of Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM) is very
challenging because of the uncommon resistance of the tumor to
chemotherapy. We started from the observation that 7/7 mesothelioma cell
lines tested expressed both the Colony Stimulating Factor Receptor-1 and
its -ligands CSF-1 and IL-34, a signaling module mainly characterized in
hematopoietic cell subpopulations. Pemetrexed and cisplatin treatment did
not affect the number of mesothelioma CSF1R-expressing cells.
Additionally, interference with CSF1R expression or function
significantly abrogated the resistance of these cells to pemetrexed,
suggesting the involvement of CSF-1R signaling in mediating
chemoresistance of mesothelioma. This prompted us to isolate and
characterize the CSF-1Rpos cells and we found that the purified cells
expressed a complex repertoire of pluripotency markers, EMT factors and
chemoresistance genes. The functions of the CSF-1R expressing MPM cells
relied on the autocrine production of CSF-1 and IL-34, whose
downregulation affected the viability of the purified cells. We
identified AKT, NFkB and STAT3 activation as distinct features of the
CSF-1Rpos cells. We showed that all three pathways contributed to the
survival of the CSF1Rpos cells, with AKT exerting the most relevant
effects. The forced activation of CSF-1R in untransformed mesothelial
cells was sufficient to confer clonogenicity and resistance to
pemetrexed, typical feature of transformed mesothelial cells.
Furthermore, this induced a gene expression profile very similar to that
observed in the FACS sorted CSF-1Rpos cells, suggesting a causal
relationship between CSF-1R activation and cell transformation. Active
AKT signaling contributed to increased levels of nuclear -catenin in the
CSF-1R expressing cells. Inhibition of AKT reduced the transcriptional
activity of -catenin dependent reporters and sensitized the CSF-1Rpos
cells to pemetrexed-induced senescence, thereby reversing the resistance
of the CSF1Rpos cells to pemetrexed. This correlated with downregulation
of c-MYC, a functional CSF-1R target, and upregulation of p21. Finally,
we recapitulated the main findings in primary mesothelioma cultures,
which exhibited long-term surviving, chemoresistant CSF-1Rpos cells of
mesothelial nature and sensitive to CSF-1R inhibition. This work expands
what is known on the non-macrophage functions of CSF-1R and its role in
solid tumors, suggests that CSF-1R signaling may have a critical
pathogenic role in malignant pleural mesothelioma and therefore may
represent a promising target for therapeutic intervention.

