Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC/MARCKS pathway is a novel therapeutic target associated with
breast cancer malignancy potential and paclitaxel resistance


Increasing evidence had suggested important roles of protein kinase C
(PKC)-mediated phosphorylation of myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase
substrate (MARCKS) in modulating various cellular processes, including
cancer cell growth and metastasis. However, there is a lack of
information regarding to the roles of MARCKS and its pSer 159/163
phosphorylated product in breast cancer cells and tissues. To tackle this
concern, we recently initiated both immunohistochemical and western blot
analyses on a series of clinical specimens and several breast cancer cell
lines. We have observed a significant elevation of phospho-MARCKS
associated with advanced-stage breast cancer tissues as compared with
benign ones, particularly in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) tissues
and cell lines. Knockdown of MARCKS expression resulted in suppressions
of lamellipodia/filopodia formation and migration/invasion as well as
down-regulation of Src activity in these TNBC cell lines. Of note,
MARCKS-silenced TNBC cells grew much more slowly and more sensitive to
paclitaxel than the control and parental cells. Treatment with paclitaxel
was shown to induce MARCKS phosphorylation in a dose-dependent manner,
which may be related to an enhanced paclitaxel resistance in some of TNBC
cells. However, PKC inhibitors were able to abrogate paclitaxel-induced
MARCKS phosphorylation. Consistent with this potential, treatments of
TNBC cells with a MARCKS N-terminus sequence peptide, namely MANS, to
down regulate PKC/MARCKS pathway not only attenuated the associated
aggressive phenotype but also synergistically enhanced paclitaxel-induced
cytotoxicity in vitro and in vivo. These results demonstrate an
association of PKC-mediated MARCKS phosphorylation with breast cancer
malignancy potential and MARCKS phosphorylation as a predictor of
paclitaxel resistance in TNBC cells. It is suggestive that an inhibition
of PKC/MARCKS pathway may serve as an alternative therapeutic strategy
for enhancing efficacy of chemotherapy.

