Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiopoietin 1/2 inhibition impairs tumor growth in an orthotopic
model of renal cell carcinoma


Background: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the most common form
of renal cell carcinoma, is characterized VEGF driven tumor
vascularization. However, in patients treated with anti-VEGF therapies
inevitably tumor progression occurs, likely driven by up-regulation of
alternative proangiogenic pathways including angiopoietins and c-MET. We
hypothesized that angiopoietin inhibition has anti-tumor effect on RCC
and may affect the development of resistance to anti-VEGF therapies. In
the current study we utilized the dual angiopoietin inhibitor AMG 386 in
murine models of RCC, and assessed the preclinical impact of this
strategy. Methods: Seven week old female Balb/c mice were injected with
250,000 RENCA cells (luciferase expressing), one week later these mice
were randomized, using bioluminescence imaging into two treatment groups:
vehicle or Amgen 386 (5.6mg/kg/day, twice a week, subQ injection). Body
weight measurements, tumor growth rate, and end point tumor weight
measurements were used to evaluate possible side effects and the
progression of RENCA tumors. Four weeks of treatment culminated in
collection of tumor tissues for immunohistochemistry analysis of Ki67 and
CD31. In addition we have ongoing studies utilizing patient derived
xenografts (PDX) of ccRCC developed in our lab. Results: In the RENCA
model AMG 386 induced a significant decrease of tumor weight by 44.0
percent (p = 0.0123). In addition, histological analysis of tumor
sections revealed a high proportion of necrosis and decreased blood
vessel density. Studies are ongoing with sunitinib sensitive PDXs and
matched sunitinib resistant PDXs treated with AMG 386 in combination with
a selective c-MET inhibitor. Results from these models will be available
at the time of the meeting. Conclusions: Our preliminary results suggest
that AMG 386 as a single agent is inhibiting both vascularization and
tumor growth in an orthotopic renal cell carcinoma model. Ongoing studies
with AMG 386 in combination with a selective c-MET inhibitor in sunitinib
sensitive and resistant PDX models will provide guidance for the optimal
clinical development of angiopoietin inhibitors in patients with ccRCC.

