Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 mutant regulates a network of cellular anoikis through
activation of AKT and suppression of BMF


p53 is the most frequently mutated tumor suppressor gene in human
cancers. Unlike other tumor-suppressor genes, p53 mutations mainly occur
as missense mutations within the DNA-binding domain, leading to the
expression of full-length mutant p53 protein. Mutant p53 proteins not
only lose their tumor suppressor function, but may also gain new
oncogenic function and promote tumorigenesis through transactivation of
new target genes. By using an RNA interference (RNAi) approach, we show
that silencing of endogenous p53 R273H contact mutant in MDA-MB-468 cells
induced massive apoptosis while no apoptosis was observed in the
silencing of the p53 R175H structural mutant in SKBR3 cells. Further
analysis shows that the apoptotic effects of mutant p53 knock-down
involved activation of caspase-9 and mitochondria depolarisation,
suggesting a role for mutant p53 in suppressing the intrinsic apoptotic
pathway. Indeed, a BCL-2 family member, BCL-2 modifying factor (BMF), was
reproducibly up-regulated following knock-down of mutant p53 in
MDA-MB-468 cells while no significant changes was observed in other BCL2
family members. Furthermore, we show that p53 R273H contact mutant, but
not p53 R175H conformation mutant, suppressed anoikis by down-regulation
of BMF expression. Anoikis is a form of apoptosis induced by cell
detachment and is a major mechanism to prevent metastasis. Further
analyses using microarray gene profiling and connectivity map analysis
show that silencing of mutant p53 in MDA-MB-468 cells generates gene
expression signatures characteristic of PI3K inhibitors, suggesting that
apoptotic effects of mutant p53 knock-down involved dephosphorylation of
AKT, a direct substrate of PI3K. Ectopic expression of the activated form
of AKT in MDA-MB-468 completely abrogated the apoptotic effects of mutant
p53 knock-down. In summary, our results demonstrate that R273H mutant p53
promotes anoikis resistance in breast cancer cells that express it
through suppression of BMF expression by the constitutively activated AKT
pathway.

