Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mutated ARID5B protein found in endometrial cancer has a
deleterious function with longer half-life


The ARID5B gene encodes a member of ARID transcription factors containing
a unique DNA binding domain, ARID, which binds to AT-rich regions.
Recently, point mutations of ARID5B, including nonsense, missense, and
frame-shift mutations, were found in endometrial cancers. This finding
strongly suggests that the ARID5B gene is a novel tumor suppressor
candidate gene in this disease. However, detailed functions of
wild-type/mutated ARID5B have not been examined. To explore the
importance of ARID5B in development of endometrial cancer, the property
of ARID5B was characterized. Interestingly, half of the point mutations
reported previously were nonsense/ frame-shift mutations, generating
premature termination codons (PTCs). Generally, genes with PTCs generate
unstable mRNA, which are detected and degraded by the nonsense mediated
mRNA decay (NMD) unless the PTCs are located in the last exon or within
50 nucleotide from the last exon-intron boundary. Surprisingly, all the
PTCs found in endometrial cancer are located in the last exon or within
50 nucleotide upstream of the last exon-intron of the ARID5B gene,
suggesting that these mutated mRNA are stable to generate truncated
ARID5B proteins. We also found that the wild-type ARID5B protein has PEST
sequences, which make proteins unstable through the ubiquitin-proteasome
system. In virtue of the PTCs, the truncated ARID5B proteins lack these
PEST sequences, but still have the ARID domain. Our study showed that the
truncated ARID5B protein had longer half-life than that of wild-type
ARID5B. Furthermore, we showed that the C-terminus of ARID5B had a
repressive property, which was confirmed by a reporter gene assay with
transient transfection. The C-terminus was deleted in the truncated
ARID5B. The data suggest that the wild-type ARID5B could suppress the
expression of down-stream target genes, but the truncated ARID5B could
not. Taken together, the truncated ARID5B may accumulate in cells due to
its longer half-life and inhibit repressive function of the wild-type
ARID5B in a dominant-negative fashion. We also performed colony formation
assays using an endometrial cancer cell line, Ishikawa. Expression of
wild-type ARID5B was strongly suppressed in colonies resistant to G418,
comparing with expression of GFP transfected into the cells as a control.
In summary, we found that the truncated ARID5B is a long half-life
protein without its transcriptional property, which may inhibit the
transcriptional property of wild-type ARID5B. Our data suggest that
ARID5B plays an important role as a transcriptional repressor in
development of endometrial cancer and the mutated ARID5B may inhibit the
normal function of wild-type ARID5B in the cancer cells.

