Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Muc1/Cin85 complex is a new molecular target for control of cancer
invasion and metastasis


MUC1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein abnormally expressed in all stages
of human adenocarcinomas as well as sites of chronic inflammation. The
extracellular domain of MUC1 contains a variable number of tandem repeats
(VNTR) region that is extensively O-glycosylated in normal epithelia and
underglycosylated in tumor cells. Lack of sugars on the VNTR increases
the accessibility of the peptide backbone to more efficient or completely
new protein-protein interactions that can profoundly change intracellular
signaling in tumors compared to normal cells. We recently identified
CIN85 (Cbl-interacting protein 85 KDa), as a new protein that associates
with MUC1 in human and mouse cancer cell lines. Immunohistochemistry and
confocal immunofluorescence on breast and colon human tissue microarray
(TMA) composed of cancer samples and their adjacent normal tissues
revealed that hypoglycosylated MUC1 and CIN85 are both over-expressed in
early as well as advanced clinical stages of breast and colon cancer and
co-localize on invadopodia-like structures implicated in cell invasion.
When tested in vivo in a tumor metastasis model of B16 melanoma, mice
injected with CIN85-depleted melanoma cells exhibited few or no lung
metastasis and overexpression of MUC1 recovered the shCIN85-reduced
metastatic process. MUC1-CIN85 complex may represent a promising target
for invasion inhibition and an effective alternative or complementary
therapy for metastatic cancer. To that end, we are generating novel MUC1
analogs and testing their anti-metastatic activity in vitro and in vivo.
CIN85 contains three SH3 domains that recognize a consensus sequence
PXXXP that corresponds to the PDTRP sequences found in the VNTR of MUC1
and the PVTRP sequences adjacent to the VNTR region. Molecular dynamics
simulations predict that CIN85 would bind MUC1 as a dimer. To test this,
we synthesized a MUC1 peptide agonist capable of inducing CIN85
dimerization and enhancing the binding between MUC1 and CIN85. Upon
addition of the peptide, the interaction between MUC1 and CIN85 was two
times higher than in its absence.Based on this peptide sequence, we
designed several drug compounds that can mimic MUC1 binding site for
CIN85. Preliminary results revealed that some of them are able to
modulate the interaction between CIN85 and MUC1. Interestingly, they also
regulate MUC1 phosphorylation, essential step for MUC1-associatated
signaling. Based on these preliminary results, we hypothesize that some
of these drug compounds will inhibit tumor metastasis in in vivo, which
we are currently testing.

