Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An age-related 99-gene signature from glioblastoma implicates
differences in survival related to RAS activation


Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor
with universally poor prognosis despite treatment with surgery, radiation
and chemotherapy. One of the most significant prognostic factors is the
patient's age at onset of disease, with younger patients demonstrating
longer survival despite similar therapies. The aim of this work is to
examine genomic differences that are tied to the age of onset that could
explain the differences in outcomes.Methods: We used the gene expression
profiles from 559 GBM patients (pts) included in the Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) to build a gene expression model of the expression of 12185 genes
to predict patient age using elasticnet with 500 bootstraps. This model
was used to predict the age of patients in a testing set of 419 pts with
gliomas included in Repository for Brain Neoplasia Data (REMBRANDT) (99
grade II, 71 grade III and 125 grade IV and 124 with no grade).
Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) and survival analysis were
performed to measure the performance of the model in predicting age,
gene-set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to reveal network topology
perturbations, Cox proportional hazards were used to predict survival of
the different predicted classes.Results: Using a FDR cutoff of p=0.005,
the bootstrapped elasticnet discovered 99 genes that were highly
correlated with age in GBM patients that predicts age in the testing set
of patients with gliomas with an area under the ROC curve of 0.97. GSEA
motifs within these genes related to RAS activation in multiple cell
lines, as well as genes related to immune modulation and increased CpG
methylation. Survival analysis of the REMBRANDT pts showed that the
cohort with an older gene signature had worse survival (median 27 months
versus 15 months, log-rank pBackground: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most
common primary brain tumor with universally poor prognosis despite
treatment with surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. One of the most
significant prognostic factors is the patient's age at onset of disease,
with younger patients demonstrating longer survival despite similar
therapies. The aim of this work is to examine genomic differences that
are tied to the age of onset that could explain the differences in
outcomes.Methods: We used the gene expression profiles from 559 GBM
patients (pts) included in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to build a gene
expression model of the expression of 12185 genes to predict patient age
using elasticnet with 500 bootstraps. This model was used to predict the
age of patients in a testing set of 419 pts with gliomas included in
Repository for Brain Neoplasia Data (REMBRANDT) (99 grade II, 71 grade
III and 125 grade IV and 124 with no grade). Receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) and survival analysis were performed to measure the
performance of the model in predicting age, gene-set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) was used to reveal network topology perturbations, Cox
proportional hazards were used to predict survival of the different
predicted classes.Results: Using a FDR cutoff of p=0.005, the
bootstrapped elasticnet discovered 99 genes that were highly correlated
with age in GBM patients that predicts age in the testing set of patients
with gliomas with an area under the ROC curve of 0.97. GSEA motifs within
these genes related to RAS activation in multiple cell lines, as well as
genes related to immune modulation and increased CpG methylation.
Survival analysis of the REMBRANDT pts showed that the cohort with an
older gene signature had worse survival (median 27 months versus 15
months, log-rank p<0.00005). When applied to pts in REMBRANDT for whom
age was not recorded (n=36), the model predicted classes also had
significantly different survival (median 6 versus 10 months, log-rank
p=0.001).Conclusions: We have developed a gene expression model related
to age of onset of GBM, to investigate the differences inherent in the
biology that may lead to better prognosis in younger patients. Of the 99
genes that are strongly predictive of age in an external validation set,
many were related to RAS activation in cell lines, immune modulation and
CpG methylation. RAS perturbations have been previously shown to induce
gliomas in mice, and this study shows a relationship between RAS gene
network activation and age that may play a role in the different survival
outcomes between different ages. Future work will include the use of RAS
targeted agents to elucidate their role in the management of gliomas for
select pts.

