Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSP90 as a therapeutic target in colorectal cancer


Purpose/Objectives: Activation of PI3K /Akt/ NF-B and MAPK signaling
pathway contributes to colorectal cancer cell growth, survival and
resistance to therapy. HSP90 is required for PI3K/Akt and MAPK stability,
folding and trafficking. Ganetespib is a potent functional inhibitor of
HSP90 currently under evaluation in clinical trials. We tested the
hypothesis that HSP90 functional inhibition by ganetespib can inhibit
PI3K/Akt/ NF-B and MAPK signaling pathways in colorectal cell
lines.Methods: Two colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines were used, HCT-116
and HT-29. Cells were either untreated (control) or treated with
ganetespib at 50nM for 24 hours. Western blot and RT-PCR analyses were
carried out to determine the effect of ganetespib on protein molecules
involved in cell survival and proliferation. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) was performed in CRC cells to evaluate the effects of
ganetespib on NF-B activity. A subcutaneous xenograft mouse model was
used to evaluate the in vivo effects of ganetespib.Results: Treatment of
HCT-116 and HT-29 CRC cell lines with ganetespib inhibited survival
signaling (PI3K/Akt) and proliferative signaling (MAPK) at the
transcriptional and translational level. As validation, HSP90 knockdown
similarly inhibited PI3K/Akt and MAPK protein and mRNA levels in both
cell lines. Functional inhibition of HSP90 resulted in inhibition of
PI3K/Akt and MAPK transcription. Functional inhibition or down regulation
of HSP90 was associated with inhibition of NF-B trafficking
(downregulation of NF-B in nucleus). Ganetespib sensitized colon cancer
cell lines to the effects of oxaliplatin and 5FU. Similar effects were
also observed in tumors from animals treated with ganetespib. Conclusion:
In this study, we present in vitro and animal data supporting the
targeting of HSP90 as a method to inhibit the PI3K/Akt/ NF-B and MAPK
signaling pathways in colorectal cancer. We demonstrate that inhibition
of HSP90 downregulates PI3K/Akt/ NF-B and MAPK leading to a decrease in
colon cancer cell survival and proliferation, as well as sensitization to
chemotherapy. Combining HSP90 inhibitors with chemotherapy is a rational
approach for future drug development in colorectal cancer.

