Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Debio 1143, an oral antagonist of the inhibitor of apoptosis
proteins, synergistically enhances the effects of multiple standard of
care agents in human lung cancer models


Background: Drug resistance is a major problem in cancer therapy that may
be addressed by the combination of drugs simultaneously targeting
multiple critical nodes of the signalling networks controlling growth and
survival of cancer cells. The members of the Inhibitor of apoptosis
protein (IAP) family are frequently overexpressed in most cancer types
contributing to tumour cell survival and resistance to cancer therapy.
The oral monovalent IAP inhibitor Debio 1143/AT-406 is currently in early
clinical development. The aim of the study was to evaluate the activity
of Debio 1143 as a single agent and in drug combinations in in vitro and
in vivo lung cancer models of different histotypes.Materials and Methods:
Drug sensitivity was assessed in clonogenic assays on 3-D cultures of
patient-derived cancer xenografts of different lung histotypes. In vitro
high-throughput combination screening (HTS) of 6 human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines was used to identify synergistic drug
combinations for Debio 1143. Synergy was assessed using an AUC-based
curve shift analysis method and selected synergistic combinations were
further studied in tumour xenograft mouse models.Results: As a single
agent Debio 1143 showed differential anti-proliferative activity in vitro
in a majority of patient-derived cancer xenografts of small cell and
squamous histology, whereas adenocarcinoma-derived samples were less
responsive. However, HTS on 6 lung adenocarcinoma cell lines revealed
synergy of Debio 1143 with several standard-of-care compounds. Synergy of
the combination of Debio 1143 with docetaxel was further confirmed in
vivo in mouse xenografts. Interestingly, while in vitro A549 cells were
insensitive to Debio 1143 alone, a marked in vivo anti-tumour activity
was observed on A549 xenografts.Conclusion: The IAP inhibitor Debio 1143
has single agent activity across 3D cultures of patient-derived
xenografts of different lung cancer histotypes, as well as anti-tumour
activity in NSCLC tumour xenograft mouse models. These findings provide a
rationale for the combination of the IAP inhibitor Debio 1143 with
standard-of-care compounds in different lung cancer histotypes and are
the basis for ongoing clinical trials in several cancer types.

