Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome & exome analysis of early colon cancers reveals new targets


Introduction: Advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) remains lethal and
difficult to treat with over 140,000 new cases a year in the United
States. One contributing factor that has emerged is the rapid development
of cancers in small, sessile adenomas(polyps) (less than 1cm), which
might be overlooked.Results: Using whole genome and whole exome sequence
(WGS) analyses of four pairs of colorectal adenoma (early CRC) tissue
samples along with their normal counterparts, we observe dramatic genomic
instability in two of the samples, suggesting that these two adenomas
could be on the brink of overt CRC. We proceeded to analyze a further 20
samples through RNA sequence and/or immunohistochemical analysis. The two
polyps are associated with hyper mutated profile of multiple genes
including Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CEACAM6 in one of the
samples. Analyses of the expression levels of CEA and TGF- signaling
pathway members in 20 early adenomas and normal colon tissues demonstrate
a marked increase in CEA expression in 25% of adenoma samples linked to a
concomitant loss of TGF- signaling. We proceeded to mechanistic studies
examining CEA and it role in inactivating the tumor suppressive arm of
transforming growth factor- (TGF-) signaling, providing crucial new
information for CEA in promoting aggressive CRC. We found that CEA
interacts directly with the transforming growth factor- (TGF-) receptor 1
(TBR1) with inhibition of downstream TGF- tumor suppressor signaling
through its B3 domain. Moreover, we previously found that deletion of
Smad3/4 adaptor 2SP results in loss of TGF- signaling, with dramatic and
spontaneous formation of adenomas as well as CRC. Ectopic expression of
CEA also induces CRC metastases, potentially indirectly through
activation of STAT3 and stimulating production of IL-6, IL-10 and others,
in addition to inactivating TGF- tumor suppressor signaling. Conclusions:
Our data suggest that enhanced CEA levels and oncogenic mutations in the
colon adenomas can be used as prognostic markers for early detection of
aggressive CRC and the B3 domain of CEA can be targeted by monoclonal
antibody/peptide inhibitors/small molecule inhibitors targeting CEA and
CRC cell proliferation.

