Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HoxD locus: Its contribution to the osteogenic phenotype and
malignancy of Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma (ES), an osteogenic malignancy that mainly affects children
and young adults, is characterized by early metastasis to lung and bone.
Microarray analysis revealed genes of the posterior HoxD locus to be
clearly over-expressed in primary ES. Especially, genes such as HOXD10,
HOXD11 and HOXD13 normally involved in bone formation and ossification
pattern of bones are significantly over-expressed in ES. The expression
of HOXD10, HOXD11 or HOXD13 seems not to be influenced via ES
pathognomonic ews/ets translocations, since RNA interference of EWS-FLI1
or its over-expression in mesenchymal stem cells did not influence
posterior HOXD expression. However, RNA knock down of the dickkopf 2
homolog DKK2, a canonical WNT/beta-catenin agonist and critical mediator
of osteolytic tumor growth in ES (Hauer et al., 2013) resulted in a
significant suppression of HOXD11 and HOXD13 expression. Subsequently,
RNA interference of individual HoxD genes demonstrated posterior HOXD
genes to suppress neuronal differentiation potential of ES. Furthermore,
HOXD10, HOXD11 and HOXD13 were found to be critical for chondrogenic,
however not for osteogenic differentiation, but promote the expression of
bone-associated genes such as RUNX2. HOXD11 and HOXD13 further promote in
vitro proliferation and contact independent growth of ES. Similarly, in
vitro invasiveness of ES lines was dependent on HOXD10, HOXD11 as well as
HOXD13 and seemed mediated via Matrix Metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1), since
down-regulation of individual HoxD genes likewise resulted in a
suppression of MMP1 expression. In line with these observations, knock
down of HOXD11 or HOXD13 significantly suppressed metastasis in a
xeno-transplant model in immune deficient Rag2-/-gammaC-/- mice. These
data overall provide evidence that posterior HOXD genes are critical
mediators of the differentiation phenotype of ES concurrently promoting
their metastasis potential.Reference:Hauer K, Julia Calzada-Wack J,
Steiger K, Grunewald TG, Baumhoer D, Plehm S, Buch T, Prazeres da Costa
O, Esposito I, Burdach S, Richter GHS (2013). DKK2 mediates osteolysis,
invasiveness and metastatic spread in Ewing sarcoma. Cancer Res. 73(2):
967-77.

