Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nifurtimox enhances the therapeutic efficacy of radiation by
inducing reactive oxygen species and related pathways: Pre-clinical study
in medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in
children, accounting for about 20% of pediatric CNS tumors. Multimodality
treatments including surgery, radiotherapy (XRT) and chemotherapy have
greatly improved disease outcome but survivors often suffer from
deleterious effects of aggressive treatment with XRT. The aim of this
study is to use novel strategies to enhance the response of XRT in a
pre-clinical model for MB. XRT is known to cause DNA damage and cell
death by inducing reactive oxygen species (ROS). Induction of ROS causes
perturbation in antioxidant defense system thereby causing cell damage
and death. Therefore, induction of ROS may serve as a promising strategy
in cancer therapy. Nifurtimox (Nfx), a nitrofuran compound used to treat
the parasitic infection Chagas disease, is known to induce ROS in
pre-clinical models for neuroblastoma (NB) and MB. It is currently in
clinical trials for treating NB and MB in children. In this study, we
investigated the effects of Nfx in augmenting the efficacy of XRT in MB
cell lines. DAOY and D283 cells were treated with varying dose of Nfx
(5-70 g/ml) or XRT (2-10 Gy) and cell viability was assessed using
CellTiter-Glo for up to 5 days. The effect of combination therapy on cell
viability, apoptosis, ROS levels and catalase activity was evaluated
using optimized dose of Nfx and XRT. Results revealed that combination
treatment significantly inhibited MB cell growth when compared to the
effect of either Nfx or XRT alone. This was accompanied by the activation
of apoptotic cell death as determined by increased annexin V staining and
caspase 3/7 activity. An increase in ROS was also observed following
combination treatment with Nfx and XRT which correlated with cell growth
inhibition. Interestingly, catalase activity was unaltered following the
treatment with single or double agents suggesting a contribution of
impaired antioxidant system in causing MB cell growth inhibition. To
further delineate the underlying mechanisms and to identify other
candidates modulated by this combination therapy, we undertook molecular
profiling approach using Affimetrix gene expression arrays (Human Gene
2.0 ST Array). We examined differentially expressed genes and affiliated
pathways, and biological processes underlying tumor cell responses to Nfx
and XRT. Our results identified genes that are statistically enriched for
biological functions related to tumorigenesis, including cancer cell
death and survival, cell cycle, and other functions relating to cancer
disease. Several transcription factors and their downstream targets were
also found to be enriched including the NRF2-mediated oxidative stress
response pathway that responds to various stimuli including ROS. In
conclusion, this pre-clinical study demonstrates that Nfx has the
potential to enhance the therapeutic efficacy of radiation in MB cell
lines.

