Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small cell lung cancer cells express the late stage gBK tumor
antigen: a possible immunotarget for the terminal disease


Big Potassium (BK) ion channels have several splice variants. One splice
variant initially described within human glioma cells is called the
glioma BK channel (gBK). This isoform consists of 33 amino acids inserted
into the intracellular region of the BK ion channel. Using a gBK-specific
antibody, we detected gBK within 3 human small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
lines. Patch clamping revealed that functional membrane channels were
found on the SCLC cells. Prolonged exposure to BK channel activators
caused the SCLC cells to swell within 20 minutes and resulted in their
cytotoxicity within 5 hours. Transfection of BK-negative HEK cells with
gBK produced functional gBK channels. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis using
primers specific for gBK, but not with a lung-specific marker, Sox11,
confirmed that advanced, late-stage human SCLC tissues strongly expressed
gBK mRNA. Normal human lung tissue and early, lower stage SCLC resected
tissues very weakly expressed this transcript. Immunofluorescence using
the gBK antibodies confirmed that SCLC cells taken at the time of autopsy
intensely displayed this protein. gBK may represent a late-stage marker
for SCLC. HLA-A*0201 restricted human CTL were generated in vitro by
one-way mixed lymphocyte reactions or mixed lymphocyte dendritic cell
reactions, the latter using gBK peptide pulsed dendritic cells. The
exposure of SCLC cells to interferon- (IFN-) increased the expression of
HLA; these treated cells were killed by the CTL better than non-IFN-
treated cells even though the IFN- treated SCLC cells displayed
diminished gBK protein expression. Prolonged incubation with recombinant
IFN- slowed the in vitro growth and migration of the SCLC cells,
suggesting it might inhibit tumor growth in vivo. Immunotherapy targeting
gBK might possibly impede advancement to terminal state of SCLC.

