Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor acquires an oncogenic role in the AI resistance
mechanism in breast cancer


[Introduction]Aromatase inhibitors (AI) are the common treatment for
postmenopausal estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. However,
some patients acquire resistance to AI. To investigate the mechanism of
resistance, we have established several breast cancer cell lines as
AI-resistant models. Recently, we have reported on AMD-EDR cells
(androgen metabolite-dependent and estrogen-depletion-resistant cells)
derived from MCF-7, in which ER activity depends on one of the androgen
metabolites. In this study, another AI-resistant mechanism was shown by
T-47D-derived AI-resistant cells, indicating the character of the
AI-resistant models differ with their parental cells.[Methods]T-47D was
cultured under estrogen-depleted and androgen-supplemented conditions for
more than 3 months, simulating the AI treatment, which resulted in two
stable variant cell lines. To examine the response of variant cell lines
to estrogen and androgen, cell proliferation assay and luciferase
reporter assay were performed. The mRNA and protein levels were measured
by real-time PCR and western blotting. To identify the elements promoting
the AI-resistance mechanism in the variant cell lines, the gene
expression of variant cell line was compared with that of T-47D by
microarray analysis. Immunohistchemical staining for AR and PSA was
performed on 20 pairs of primary and recurrent tissue samples from
AI-resistant breast cancer.[Results]The variant cell lines had neither
growth response to estrogen nor expression of ER. On the other hand,
androgen markedly induced the proliferation of these cell lines, and this
effect was inhibited by the androgen receptor (AR) antagonist,
bicalutamide. Increased expression of AR and androgen-responsive genes in
the variant cell lines indicated that the AR-dependent growth pathway was
enhanced. Moreover, L-dopa decarboxylase (DDC), an AR coactivator, was
extremely induced, suggesting it is an enhancer of AR activity in the
variant cell lines. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that all
primary tumors did not express PSA, while two recurrent tumors did
express PSA, suggesting that AR transcriptional activity is enhanced in
some AI-resistant breast cancers.[Conclusion]During the AI treatment
simulation these variant cell lines transformed from ER-dependent to
AR-dependent, and overexpression of AR and DDC possibly enhanced the
AR-mediated proliferative pathway.PSA-expression in the AI-resistance
recurrent tumors suggests that AR-mediated pathway possibly plays a role
in aromatase inhibitor-resistance mechanism. The AI-resistance mechanism
in T-47D-derived variant cell lines was different from that in
MCF-7-derived AMR-EDR cells. The fact that the character of the
AI-resistant models differed with their parental cells supports the
hypothesis that the intristic character of individual primary tumors
contributes to diversification of AI-resistance mechanisms.

