Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of the roles of prostaglandin E2 receptors in a rodent
model of chemically induced esophageal carcinogenesis


Esophageal carcinogenesis is a multistage process characterized by
morphological changes from normal esophagus to basal cell hyperplasia,
dysplasia, carcinoma in situ and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Our
laboratory has used a rodent model of N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine
(NMBA)-induced esophageal SCC to investigate molecular carcinogenesis and
identify putative chemopreventive agents. In our previous studies, we
found that the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and the production of
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in rat esophageal epithelium were elevated in
papillomatous lesions relative to precancerous and normal tissues. PGE2
exerts its cellular effect by binding to its cognate receptors. There are
four subtypes of PGE2 receptors, EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4, which are
involved in carcinogenesis depending on the cell or tissue types. The
overall objective of the current study was to assess the roles of PGE2
receptors in NMBA-induced rat esophageal tumorigenesis. F344 rats were
injected subcutaneously with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week
for five weeks. One week after NMBA treatment, animals were randomized
into five experimental groups and fed 300 ppm celcecoxib plus 50 ppm
S,S'-1,4-phenylenebis(1,2-ethanediyl)bisisothiourea (PBIT) starting from
week 6, 9, 12 , or 15, respectively, or 5% freeze-dried black raspberries
(BRB) starting from week 6. Esophagi were collected at 29 weeks. Results
of real-time PCR, western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry
demonstrated a correlation between the upregulation of EP1, EP2, EP3 and
EP4 and neoplastic progression in the rat esophagus. The expression of
the PGE2 receptors in preneoplastic tissues and papillomas was
significantly elevated when compared to normal tissues. Moreover, we
observed that celecoxib + PBIT and 5% BRB significantly reduced EP2
expression. Our data suggest, therefore, that the production of PGE2
receptors by the esophageal epithelium is associated with the development
of NMBA-induced esophageal tumorigenesis in rats, and EP2 antagonist may
have chemopreventive potential in esophageal cancer. Research efforts are
needed to elucidate the function of PGE2 receptors and related oncogenic
pathways in esophageal SCC. (Supported by NIH/NCI R01 CA131073-01A1).

