Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL13 as a mediator of oncogenic PKC in prostate cancer


Protein kinase C epsilon (PKC), a member of the PKC family of phorbol
ester/diacylglycerol receptors, has emerged as an oncogenic kinase and
plays important role in cell survival, mitogenesis and invasion. PKC is
up-regulated in most epithelial cancers, including prostate cancer. We
recently showed that transgenic PKC overexpression in the mouse prostate
under the control of probasin (PB) promoter leads to hyperplasia and
prostatic intraepithelial neoplastic lesions but is insufficient to drive
neoplastic changes. Strikingly, when we intercrossed the
prostate-specific PKC transgenic mice with mice haploinsufficient for
Pten, a common genetic alteration in human prostate cancer, the resulting
compound mutant mice (PB-PKC;Pten+/- mice) developed fully invasive
adenocarcinoma (unpublished observation). In the present study, to
explore the mechanistic aspects of the observed cooperativity between PKC
overexpression and Pten deficiency, we stably overexpressed PKC in mouse
prostate epithelial lines that are either heterozygous (P8) or homozygous
(CaP8) for Pten deletion. PKC overexpression led to significant
enhancement in cell proliferation as well as enhanced the levels of
phospho-Akt, phospho-Erk and phospho-mTOR; these effects are more
pronounced in CaP8 cells. Moreover, migration, invasion, clonogenic and
soft agar colony formation assays revealed a striking synergism between
PKC overexpression and Pten loss. Furthermore, analysis of global gene
expression by microarray revealed significant changes in gene related to
EMT, adhesion, metabolism, and invasiveness following PKC overexpression,
Pten loss or both. In particular, a chemokine CXCL13 was found to be
majorly up-regulated in CaP8-PKC cells. Measurement of CXCL13 mRNA by
qPCR or CXCL13 release to the conditioned medium (CM) by ELISA showed
increased levels in PKC overexpressing or Pten depleted cells, and these
effects were synergistically enhanced in CaP8-PKC cells. Remarkably, CM
from CaP8-PKC cells led to significant induction in growth and motility
of P8 cells. Importantly, CXCL13 RNAi depletion reduced the proliferative
and migratory capacity of CaP8-PKC cells, thereby establishing the
potential relevance of CXCL13 in the phenotypic effects of PKC
overexpression and Pten loss. Concurrently, the growth and motile
activity of P8 cells were enhanced in response to exogenously added
CXCL13. Overall, our results argue for the role of CXCL13 in mediating
effects of oncogenic PKC in prostate cancer.

