Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel combination approach using platinum drugs and mitochondrial
division inhibitor 1 (mdivi-1) overcomes platinum resistance by
synergistically inducing mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization
(MOMP) and apoptosis independent of Drp1


Platinum based anticancer agents, including cisplatin, are among the most
effective and widely used anticancer drugs. However, inherent and
acquired resistance to these drugs in tumors lead to treatment failure.
We found a class of thioquinazolinone derivatives, including the
mitochondrial division inhibitor-1 (mdivi-1), that overcome both the
inherent and acquired resistance to cisplatin in tumor cell lines and
also in primary ovarian tumors isolated from cisplatin refractory
patients. The combination of cisplatin and mdivi-1 produces synergistic
effect in inducing rapid apoptosis. Using Drp1 (a mitochondrial fission
protein and the reported target of mdivi-1) knockout MEF cells we
demonstrated that the combination of cisplatin and mdivi-1 overcomes
cisplatin resistance in a Drp1-independent manner. Mdivi-1 causes
replication defects and its combination with cisplatin triggers
synergistic increases of replication stress and DNA damage. Comparing the
treatment with cisplatin and mdivi-1 alone, the combination of the two
agents enhances mitochondrial apoptotic signaling by specifically
upregulating the expression of a pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein Noxa,
which promotes Bax/Bak-mediated mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization (MOMP). Intriguingly, the combination of cisplatin and
mdivi-1 also causes mitochondrial swelling that triggers a
Bax/Bak-independent MOMP. Thus, the combination of cisplatin and mdivi-1
activates two distinct mechanisms that converge on mitochondria
contributing to the enhancement of MOMP. This novel combination
represents a potential effective strategy in overcoming platinum drug
resistance by combining cisplatin with compounds that together are able
to trigger the coinitiation of Bax/Bak-dependent and-independent
mitochondrial apoptotic signaling. (Work was supported by P30CA047904,
UPCI and PA Dept of Health CURE program)

