Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel HGF-MET paracrine signaling pathway promotes growth and
resistance to chemotherapy in lung cancer


Lung cancer is a leading cause of deaths from cancer among men and women
worldwide with an estimated 1.5 million deaths each year. Available
molecularly targeted therapies benefit a limited number of patients and
even in these patients acquired resistance is a major impediment to
effective therapeutic response. To address the need for additional
therapeutic targets, we used a unique approach to identify and target
tumor-stroma paracrine crosstalk pathways in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).To explore paracrine crosstalk in NSCLC, we analyzed
transcriptomes of specific stromal and epithelial compartments that were
sorted from Kras driven mouse model of NSCLC. Transcriptome analysis and
computational modeling of multi-cellular network identified potential
tumor-stroma crosstalk signaling pathways. We have selected the
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-MET tyrosine kinase receptor signaling
pathway because both HGF and MET are associated with poor survival in
many cancer types including lung cancer. Notably, we identified
reprogrammed intratumoral macrophages as unique source of HGF, while the
expression of MET receptor was confined to tumor epithelial compartment.
Importantly, we have observed elevated HGF in chemoresistant tumors both
in mouse and human. Previous studies have implicated MET receptor
amplification or mutations as the main mechanism of acquired resistance
to EGFR TKIs, but little is known about the contribution of HGF
ligand-dependent activation of MET signaling in NSCLC growth and
resistance to chemotherapeutic regimens that are widely used. We have
used a combination of culture experiments and in vivo genetic approaches
to show that macrophage-derived HGF interacts with the MET receptor on
tumor epithelial cells in a paracrine fashion, to activate downstream
signaling pathways that promote tumor progression and mediate resistance
to standard chemotherapies. Our investigations on this relatively
unexplored HGF-MET paracrine interaction as a key mechanism of resistance
to standard-of-care chemotherapeutic regimens-and not just EGFR targeted
therapies-have the potential to benefit the NSCLC population as whole
rather than a small subset of patients.

