Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of antitumor effect of platinum complexes by PXR
antagonist


The goal of this study was to evaluate the enhancing ability of PXR
antagonists for the antitumor effect of platinum complex. Cell lines used
in this study were human hepatoma cell line HepG2, human ovarian cancer
cell line 2008 and human colon cancer cell line HCT116. Changes in mRNA
expression were assessed by real-time RT-PCR, and the ability of
apoptosis induction was assessed as caspase-3 activity. Cytotoxicity of
platinum complexes was assessed by SRB assay, and IC75 and IC90 values of
them were determined. They did not induce apoptosis at IC75 but did it
markedly at IC90. Previously, we reported that though apoptosis in HepG2
was induced by IC90 dose of CDDP, addition of a PXR agonist, rifampicin,
from 24-hr before treatment and during treatment with CDDP was almost
suppressed. Moreover, we found that apoptosis in 2008 and HCT116 induced
by IC90 dose of CDDP or oxaliplatin was suppressed by rifampicin. That
suggests a nuclear receptor PXR affects on the cytotoxicity of platinum
complexes for cancer cells other than HepG2. Ketoconazole (KTZ) and
phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC) were selected as PXR antagonists that
were added with platinum complex. Both drugs at 30 M induced cytostatic
cell growth inhibition in HepG2, 2008 and HCT116 but did not affect on
caspase-3 activity compared with control in those cells. When these PXR
antagonists at 30 M were added to cancer cell lines from 24-hr before
treatment and during treatment with CDDP at IC75, caspase-3 activity was
significantly increased compared with that in CDDP alone. Also, when
cells were exposed to CDDP and a PXR antagonist without PXR antagonist
pretreatment, caspase-3 activity was increased but the level was reduced
compared with that in the combination with pretreatment. Similarly,
oxaliplatin in combination with KTZ or PEITC markedly induced apoptosis
in HCT116. In HepG2, KTZ reduced the level of MRP2 mRNA. That suggests
that pretreatment with KTZ might increase the intracellular platinum
content and enhance the cytotoxicity of platinum complex. We concluded
that PXR antagonist can be an agent enhancing the antitumor activity of
platinum complex, and one of the mechanism is to suppress the expression
of the platinum efflux transporter.

