Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCS3-mediated regulation of inflammatory cytokines in
triple-negative breast cancer


We demonstrated that knock-down of tumor suppressors p53 and PTEN in
mammary epithelial MCF10A cells (called MCF10A-p53-PTEN-) results in
generation of aggressive tumors. Furthermore MCF10A-p53-PTEN- cells also
display an increased EMT phenotype as well as expansion of cancer stem
cell (CSC) population. Utilizing Affymetrix gene expression analyses, we
confirmed that malignant MCF10Ap53-PTEN- cells displayed a gene
expression pattern which closely resembled that of the basal/claudin
molecular subtype with the TN. This subtype is previously characterized
by the expression of EMT and stem cell genes.The Inflammatory cytokines
IL6 and TGF- have been found to regulate stem cells and EMT. Consistent
with these data, we found that MCF10A-p53-PTEN- cells secreted
significantly higher levels of IL6 (>1000 fold) and TGF- (>200 fold)
compared to parental or single gene deleted cells. Furthermore combined
deletion of p53 and PTEN compared to single gene knockdown resulted in
transformation of MCF10A cells generating aggressive metastatic tumors in
NOD/SCID mice.IL6 is a key regulator of inflammatory responses and
orchestrates these physiological functions by controlling the SOCS3
mediated Stat3/NF-B pathway. Consistent with these reports, we
demonstrated that SOCS3 is abundantly expressed in MCF10A cells where it
negatively regulates the IL6 feedback loop. Unexpectedly, we found that
SOCS3 protein was undetectable in MCF10A-p53-PTEN- cells.
Basal/claudin-low breast cancer cell lines that display an activated IL6
feedback loop also had low SOCS3 protein levels. Furthermore, we found a
similar discordance between SOCS3 protein and mRNA levels in primary
basal/claudin-low breast cancer samples as demonstrated by
immunochemistry utilizing a primary breast cancer tissue array. Together
these findings suggest that loss of SOCS3 protein expression allows for
maintenance of the IL6 mediated inflammatory feedback loop in
aggressive/metastatic TN breast cancers. We found that MCF10A-p53-PTEN-
cells displayed increased proteasome activity as evidenced by SOCS3
protein accumulation upon proteasome inhibition. Proteolytic degradation
of SOCS3 protein in turn is controlled by constitutive activation of the
IL6 mediated Stat3/NF-B pathway.We demonstrate that enforced expression
of SOCS3 or IL6 pathway inhibition interfering with this loop through
IL6R blockade repress the CSC population, reducing the tumor growth and
metastasis in mouse xenografts. These studies provide a strong rationale
for development of IL6 pathway-targeting agents for the treatment of
TNBC, an aggressive disease that currently lacks molecularly targeted
therapeutics.

