Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TPL2 kinase regulates the inflammatory milieu of the myeloma niche


Early-stage myeloma tumor cells are critically dependent on paracrine
cytokine support originating from their bone marrow microenvironment
whereas advanced-stage myeloma tumor cells may elaborate autocrine
cytokine production mechanisms and/or cell-autonomous mutations in
critical downstream signaling pathways (e.g., NFB pathway). However, the
molecular mechanisms underpinning the paracrine network in myeloma are
unclear. The pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1 has emerged as a major link
between inflammation and cancer and has been validated as a therapeutic
target in high-risk monoclonal gammopathy, the precursor to myeloma, as
well as early-stage myeloma. To determine the source of IL-1 production
in early-stage myeloma we analyzed paired purified cell fractions
obtained from each of 5 patients at diagnosis: CD138+ tumor cells, CD14+
bone marrow-resident monocyte/macrophages as well as bone marrow-derived
stromal/mesenchymal cells (BM-MSC). We found that in all cases,
monocytes/macrophages were the predominant IL-1 synthesizer cell type in
the myeloma microenvironment. Cytokine production by activated
macrophages is controlled by the MAP3 kinase, TPL2 (Cot, MAP3K8). We have
previously detected constitutive activation of TPL2-regulated signaling
pathways in human myeloma-associated macrophages but its precise
functional consequences have been unclear. To dissect the relevant
mechanisms, we ablated Tpl2 in the genetically-engineered myeloma in vivo
model, V*MYC. V*MYC animals activate MYC sporadically in B lymphocytes
participating in germinal center reactions and develop a disease
analogous to human multiple myeloma with production of paraprotein
(monoclonal immunoglobulin), plasma cell infiltration of the bone marrow
as well as end-organ damage (myeloma kidney, osteolytic lesions).
V*MYC+/Tpl2-null animals developed myeloma with a significantly prolonged
latency and the disease burden was lower at all timepoints tested
compared to controls. Analysis of monocytic cells from myeloma lesions
showed that loss of Tpl2 did not result in macrophage repolarization to
an unopposed M1 (tumoricidal/cytotoxic) phenotype. Instead, Tpl2-null
myeloma-associated monocytes/macrophages exhibited severe defects in
production of inflammatory cytokines, predominantly IL-1, but also IL-6.
Tpl2 loss did not have discernible impacts on tumor cell-autonomous
growth and survival. Our results suggest that monocytes/macrophages and
TPL2 kinase activity play a central role in orchestrating the
inflammatory milieu of the myeloma niche. Disruption of the myeloma
cytokine network through pharmacologic TPL2 kinase inhibition could
provide novel therapeutic opportunity by interfering with the co-ordinate
regulation of key pro-myeloma inflammatory cytokines through a targeted
approach.

