Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperpolarized 13C-pyruvate MRS quantitatively monitor the
therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant metformin combined RT in brain
metastasis from triple negative breast cancer


IntroductionThe hyperpolarized 13C-pyruvate is a robust imaging biomarker
to evaluate the metabolic status of cancer to monitor the anti-cancer
therapeutic effect and to predict the prognosis as earliest as possible
by 10,000 fold increase of MRS sensitivity. According to the clinical
epidemiological research, metformin reduces cancer incidence or mortality
in type II diabetes patients. In this study, we investigated the
anti-cancer metabolic effect of metformin as an adjuvant for the
radiation therapy to treat brain metastasis from triple negative breast
cancer in nude mouse model by measuring the metabolic flux through the
hyperpolarized 13C-pyruvate MRS.MethodsSix weeks old BALB/C nude mice
were stereotactically implanted 2105 MDA-MB-231-luciferase breast cancer
cells in the striatum of brain. After 1 week from tumor implantation,
animals were randomly divided into 4 groups: vehicle (distilled water),
oral metformin alone (MET), radiation treatment (RT), and radiation
combined with adjuvant oral metformin treatment (METRT). Mice were
treated with 300 mg/kg of oral metformin for 5 days in a week from week 1
until when the animals die. MRI and 13C MRS was performed at week 2 and
week 3, before and after treatment. Brain tumors were irradiated at week
2 with 3Gy for 5 consecutive days. MRI and MRS was performed at 9.4T
Bruker MRI scanner using 20mm surface dual tuned 1H-13C coil. 75mmole of
hyperpolarized [1-13C] pyruvate was injected via tail vein in all mice.
Metabolic flux was calculated as lactate/pyruvate ratio. The progression
and the response to treatment was also monitored by bioluminescence
imaging. Paraffin sections were stained with H&E for histological
evaluation.ResultsThere was no difference in tumor growth and metabolic
flux rate between vehicle and MET alone groups. Vehicle group showed 260%
increase in tumor mass, whereas RT group showed only 39% increase in
tumor volume. 13C MRS showed 60% decrease in lactate/pyruvate flux ratio
in RT group, whereas vehicle group showed 60% increase in metabolic flux
ratio. Interestingly, the tumor volume was significantly regressed and
13C-lactate flux was significantly decreased in METRT group after
treatment. Bioluminescence imaging showed time-dependent increasing flux
in vehicle group, but RT and METRT groups showed decreased photon flux
activity. In comparison of METRT with RT alone group, bioluminescence
activity was significantly decreased in METRT group. H&E staining of
histological sections showed significant tumor necrosis and decreased
cellularity in METRT group.ConclusionHyperpolarized 13C-pyruvate MRS
informs the adjuvant therapeutic effect of metformin and RT in brain
metastasis from triple negative breast cancer.

