Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B-cell lymphoma-derived exosomes are reservoirs of inhibitors of
apoptosis


B-cells, along with other normal and cancerous cells, secrete 50-150 nm
vesicles called exosomes. Exosomes carry proteins, mRNA, and miRNA that
can be functional upon cellular uptake and are often specific to cell of
origin, offering potential as disease biomarkers. Our lab has identified
within exosomes from solid tumor cells a cancer-specific protein,
Survivin, which is a member of the Inhibitors of Apoptosis (IAP) family.
Whether Survivin and other IAP family members such as XIAP, cIAP1 or
cIAP2 are also expressed in exosomes from hematopoietic malignancies is
yet to be determined. In this study, we aim to investigate the exosomes
released from B-cell lymphoma cells and determine the IAP content under
basal and sublethal stress conditions. Three human non EBV-transformed
B-cell lymphoma lines developed at Wayne State University were used.
WSU-FSCCL (follicular small cleaved cell), WSU-DLCL-2 (diffuse large
cell), and WSU-WM (Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia) represent different
levels of aggressiveness. Cells were cultured for 24 or 48 hours before
exosome isolation from the conditioned media using either
ultracentrifugation on a sucrose cushion or ExoQuick (System
Biosciences). Sublethal levels of UV irradiation were determined for each
cell line by analyzing DNA content by propidium iodide staining with a
FACSCalibur. Protein quantity of exosomes was measured using a BCA assay,
and protein content was studied using Western blotting. Corresponding
gene expression was identified using RT-PCR. Here we report IAP protein
and mRNA (except XIAP) within exosomes from basal cells. We are currently
probing exosomes from stressed cells for comparison. We hypothesize that
the IAP exosomal profile may change under stressed conditions. The
specificity and variability in exosomal content offers capabilities not
only as disease biomarkers, but also in the immunomodulating activity of
exosomes which have shown roles in both stimulating and inhibiting the
immune system, We have found evidence that exosomal Survivin plays an
immune role in skewing Th1/Th2 populations and decreasing cytotoxic
function. Changes in exosome content between basal and stressed cells may
have roles in the immunomodulation of the tumor microenvironment which
facilitates the evasion of lymphoma cells to immune destruction, as well
as possible prognostic benefit as to whether treatments are being
effective or detrimental.

