Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: M1 macrophages suppress tumorigenesis via accumulated p53 and
upregulated STAT1 in lung cancer


PurposeMacrophages involved in innate immunity and possess cytotoxicity
via NO, ROS and pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF- and IFN-. But
long-term effects of M1 macrophages on cancer cells, especially their
tumoricidal activity, remain unclear. In our previous study, conditioned
medium (CM) from M1 macrophages can induce A549 apoptosis and senescence,
but detail mechanism is unexplored.Materials & MethodsLung cancer cell
lines, A549 and H460, are cells with wild-type p53, but H1299 is
p53-null. Cytokine and cDNA microarray were used to evaluate the content
of M1 macrophages and their effects on A549 cell. Flow cytometry was
assessed cell apoptosis; real-time PCR and Western blot were assessed the
expression of identified genes and proteins. Clinical statistical
analysis for predicting survival of lung cancer patients was applied by a
published clinical microarray dataset.ResultsAccording to our previous
results of cDNA microarray, several significantly differential genes were
the down-stream of p53, the important initiator for apoptosis. After M1
CM treatment, A549 and H460 cells went apoptosis and p53 was abundantly
accumulated. But cell death was not observed in H1299 cells, unless
exogenous wt-p53 was expressed and M1 CM treated. Another transcription
factor STAT1 was also up-expressed at translational and transcriptional
levels after M1 CM stimulation. STAT1 may interact and assist with p53 to
cause cell death. IFN- which is a well known cytokine for STAT1
activation highly expresses in M1 macrophages, but antibody
neutralization can not reverse cell apoptosis. M1 macrophages from human
PBMCs also had tumoricidal activity for A549. Moreover, the M1/M2 gene
signature from A549 cDNA microarray can predict the patients'
survival.Conclusion Accumulated data show that p53 and STAT1 are the main
tumoricidal regulators induced by M1 macrophages in long-term culture and
that is IFNs independent signaling pathway. Those data imply that M1
macrophage plays an important role in the immune surveillance for cancer
progression. That may be a potential immunol target therapy.

