Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient relevant preclinical in vivo models using image-guided
small animal irradiation for drug discovery


BACKGROUND: Radiotherapy is a primary, adjuvant or neoadjuvant treatment
for a number of different cancers such as glioblastoma, breast, lung and
prostate. Image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) is widely used to treat cancer
patients providing more accurate treatment plans and reduced side
effects. However in the preclinical setting the use of IGRT is less
common with traditional irradiation studies utilising whole body
irradiation with lead shielding attempting to focus the radiation to
specific area on the animal or simple single beam techniques. The
development of the image-guided small animal radiation research platform
(SARRP) allows the treatment of animal models of cancer more accurately
and importantly, with planned protocols similar to those utilised in the
clinic. In addition the high precision beam geometry allows the platform
to be used in vitro in multi-well assays providing a more high-throughput
system for screening.METHODS: We have established multiple cancer models
which incorporate bioluminescence to track primary orthotopic and
metastatic lesions in real-time using the Spectrum CT imaging system.
Tumor growth was monitored longitudinally through quantification of the
bioluminescent signal. Bioluminescence from established tumor was
correlated to CT and co-registered with the integrated CT on the SARRP
platform to allow estimation of tumor dimensions and position in order to
deliver a more accurate dose of irradiation specifically to tumors whilst
sparing the surrounding normal tissue. In addition we have established
Caucasian non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) models which are admixed with human stroma and evaluated SARRP in
these. Tumor specific protocols and dose calculation for irradiation were
designed to deliver appropriate irradiation dose to immuno-deficient mice
bearing xenografted tumor either alone or in combination with targeted
agent or chemotherapeutic.RESULTS: Mice treated with SARRP tolerated
irradiation doses in a range of different models either alone or in
combination. Validation of different protocols will be reported as well
as intrinsic resistant profiles for different models and outcome of any
combination treatments to re-sensitize resistant cancer to
radiotherapy.CONCLUSIONS: The SARRP platform allows the use of
irradiation alone or in combination with anti-cancer agents in small
animals with reduced side effects and improved clinical outcome allowing
these novel preclinical models to be used effectively for drug discovery
programmes to ultimately improve efficacy and treatment options for
cancer patients using radiotherapy.

