Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of A-366, a novel small molecule inhibitor that uncovers
an unappreciated role for G9a/GLP in the epigenetics of leukemia


Understanding the roles of epigenetic alterations in cancer development
and maintenance holds great promise for cancer prevention, detection, and
therapy. Cancer can be considered as a pathogenic state where cellular
differentiation is suppressed (i.e. stem cell-like) and aberrant
epigenetic patterning is commonly observed in tumors. Histone
methyltransferases play a key role in epigenetics by modifying key lysine
and arginine residues on histones and thereby influencing biological
processes. Previous studies have suggested that the histone lysine
methyltransferase G9a (EHMT2) is required to perpetuate malignant
phenotypes through over-expression in a variety of cancer types. These
reports have shown that pharmacologic inhibition or genetic ablation of
G9a leads to retardation of tumor cell growth and cellular invasion in
vitro as well as inhibition of metastasis in vivo. To further elucidate
the enzymatic role of G9a in cancer, we describe herein the discovery of
a novel histone methyltransferase inhibitor, A-366, that selectively
inhibits G9a and the closely related GLP (EHMT1). A-366 is a peptide
competitive inhibitor of G9a/GLP with in vitro enzymatic IC50 of 3 nM and
cellular activity of 100 nM and > 100-fold selectivity over other
methyltransferases and other non-epigenetic targets. A-366 has
significantly less cytotoxic effects on the growth of solid tumor cell
lines compared to other known G9a/GLP small molecule inhibitors despite
roughly equivalent cellular activity on methylation of H3K9me2. However,
the excellent selectivity profile of A-366 has aided in the discovery of
an important role for G9a/GLP in lineage maintenance of a subset of
leukemias. Treatment of various leukemia cell lines in vitro resulted in
marked differentiation and morphological changes of these tumors in the
absence of cytotoxicity resulting in cytostasis. Furthermore, treament of
MV4;11 flank xenografts with A-366 resulted in growth inhibition in vivo
consistent with the profile of H3K9me2 reduction observed. In summary,
A-366 is a novel and highly selective peptide-competitive inhibitor of
G9a/GLP that has enabled the discovery of a role for G9a/GLP enzymatic
activity in the epigenetic maintenance of a subset of leukemia cells.

