Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heregulin induces transformation of mammary epithelial cells via
HER3 activation


Heregulin (HRG)s are high-affinity combinatorial ligands for the HER
family of tyrosine kinase receptors. HRG induces heterodimerization and
cross-talk between members of the HER tyrosine kinase receptor family.
HRG interaction with HER3 induces heterodimerization between HER3 and
other HER receptors, including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
and HER2, resulting in cross-talk-induced tyrosine phosphorylation.
Several studies have revealed that HRG is expressed in about 40% of
invasive breast carcinomas, many of which are triple negative breast
carcinomas. We have previously demonstrated that HRG expression induces
tumorigenesis and metastasis of MCF-7 cells. We tested the effect of HRG
on non-committed MCF10A cells. MCF-10A cell line is an immortalized,
non-transformed epithelial cell line derived from human fibrocystic
mammary tissue. These cells lack the ability to form tumors in nude mice
and the ability to grow in anchorage-independent assays. We found that
forced expression of HRG in MCF10A induced cellular transformation, while
the control MCF10A/Vector cells did not growth. MCF10A/HRG cells express
constitutive phosphorylation of HER3 and induction of the signaling
cascade. HER3 phosphorylation occurs as a result of HRG induction of HER3
heterodimerization with EGFR in an autocrine manner. Lapatinib, a dual
tyrosine kinase inhibitor which interrupts the HER2 and EGFR pathways,
blocked HER3 phosphorylation and the resulted signaling in MCF10A/HRG
cells and prevented their anchorage-independent growth demonstrating that
HER3 phosphorylation is responsible, at least in part, for the
transformation of MCF10A/HRG cells. This study provides an alternate
targeting prospective for breast carcinomas that express HER3 and HRG by
targeting the autocrine-loop (HRG/HER3) and thus preventing HRG from
binding to HER3, disrupting the possible receptor heterodimerization, and
leading to blockage of the proliferative signals and promoting inhibition
of growth.

