Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined effects of olaparib and cytotoxic agents to triple
negative breast cancer cells


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by
high proliferation and poor prognosis compared to other types of breast
cancer. Treatment for TNBC needs to be improved because TNBC cells have
no estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptor, and approach for cure of
TNBC is limited. TNBC patients with BRCA mutation have sensitivity to
olaparib, a PARP inhibitor, inhibiting DNA repair. Therefore, treatment
based on olaparib may be more effective for TNBC with BRCA mutation. In
this study, we examined antitumor effects of olaparib to TNBC cells and
combined effects with cytotoxic agents that could potentiate the
antitumor effect of olaparib.Methods: Sensitivity of olaparib to TNBC
cell lines was examined by cell growth inhibition assay using CCK-8 kit
and the combined antitumor effect with cytotoxic agents was evaluated by
combination index. Intracellular poly (ADP-ribosyl) ation in MDA-MB-436
(MM436) cells was assessed by western blotting. Olaparib (50 mg/kg) and
CPT-11 (15 and 30 mg/kg) were administered to Balb/c nude mice inoculated
MM436 cells subcutaneously. The drug concentrations in plasma and tissues
were measured by LC-MS/MS system (QTRAP5500, AB SCIEX).Results:
Inhibitory effect of cell growth by olaparib was 20-fold higher at a
maximum in MM436 cells with BRCA mutation compared to other TNBC cell
lines. Combination index of olaparib with CPT-11 in MM436 cells was
lowest. In addition, CPT-11 caused Poly (ADP-ribosyl) ation higher than
other cytotoxic agents in MM436 cells. In animal model, tumor growth was
more inhibited by co-administration of olaparib and CPT-11 than olaparib
or CPT-11 alone. Plasma concentration of these drugs and active
metabolite SN-38 in any time period tended to be higher in
co-administered animals than single-administered animals. In addition,
Tumor tissue concentration of SN-38 at 2 hours after administration was
higher in a group of combined administration than that of single
administration.Conclusion: The mechanisms of combined effect of olaparib
and CPT-11 was that exposure of CPT-11 to TNBC cells with BRCA mutation
caused PARP activation by its cytocidal action and synthetic lethality of
olaparib worked more effectively. Furthermore, drug-drug interaction
between olaparib and CPT-11 caused inhibiting activity of transporter
function such as P-gp or BCRP and tumor tissue exposure levels increased.
Therefore, the alteration of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
contributes to the effect of combined treatment. The present results
supported that olaparib treatment for TNBC with BRCA mutation had a
potential of clinical benefit in combination with CPT-11.

