Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of the natural (6S) isomer of 5-formyltetrahydrofolate
on the activities of pralatrexate and methotrexate in vitro


Introduction: Pralatrexate, the 10-propargyl-10-deaza analog of
aminopterin, is a much superior substrate for the reduced folate carrier
and folylpolyglutamate synthetase than methotrexate (MTX) resulting in
the rapid build-up and retention of high levels of the polyglutamate
derivatives of this agent within cells. In HeLa cells in vitro, the
growth inhibitory effect of a 6h exposure to pralatrexate is two orders
of magnitude greater than that of MTX. Yet the drug can be administered
weekly at similar doses than MTX, consistent with a high level of
selectivity. Nonetheless, mucosites can result in dosage reductions. This
has led to the application of rescue regimens with the natural isomer of
5-formyltetrahydrofolate, (6S)5-formylTHF.Purpose: To investigate the
impact of (6S)5-formylTHF on the antitumor activity of pralatrexate in
HeLa cells in vitro, simulating the exposures to this folate as occurs in
the clinical setting. These properties were compared to those of
MTX.Experimental design: HeLa cells were grown with 25 nM (6S)5-formylTHF
as the folate growth source. Experiments evaluated the impact of a 24h
exposure to different concentration of (6S)5-formylTHF varying intervals
prior to, or after, a 6h exposure to antifolate. The impact on the
accumulation of [3H](6S)5-formylTHF and [3H]antifolate was also
assessed.Results: A 24h interval between antifolate, followed by
(6S)5-formylTHF, was sufficient to sustain the full activities of the
antifolates up to a (6S)5-formylTHF level of 4 M. A 72h interval was
required between (6S)5-formylTHF, followed by the antifolate, to sustain
full antifolate activities. HeLa cells were then exposed to 4 M
(6S)5-formylTHF for 24h weekly X 4; a concentration of the folate in
excess of what is achieved in rescue regimens. This had no significant
effect on the pralatrexate IC50; however, the MTX IC50 increased
2.5-fold. The four cycles of exposure to 4 M [3H](6S)5-formylTHF resulted
in a 16% increase in the tritiated intracellular folate level (P=0.02) as
compared to cells growing continuously in 25 nM [3H](6S)5-formylTHF.There
was no significant decrease in total intracellular pralatrexate; there
was a 15% decrease in total intracellular MTX (P=0.004).Conclusions:
Exposure of HeLa cells to (6S)5-formylTHF either before or after
pralatrexate or MTX, simulating the sequence of administration in rescue
regimens, and at concentrations in excess of what is achieved clinically,
had no effect on pralatrexate activity but decreased the activity of MTX.
This cumulative effect was associated with a small increase in the
intracellular (6S)5-formylTHF level and a small decrease in total
intracellular MTX. The data suggests that standard rescue regimens should
have little or no impact on the antitumor activity of pralatrexate.

