Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DDX3X-specific effector T cells in small cell lung cancer patients
reflect disease stage


[Background] Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) possesses high tendency to
disseminate. However, SCLC patients with paraneoplastic syndrome mediated
by immunity against onconeural antigens remain in limited-stage disease
(LD) without distant metastases. We previously demonstrated that
effector-dominant CD4+ T cell balance was observed only in LD-SCLC but
not in extended-stage disease (ED)-SCLC. CD4+ T cell balance in
peripheral blood of SCLC patients reflected disease stage and
recurrence.Accumulating evidence suggests that most solid malignancies
consist of heterogeneous tumor cells and that a relatively small
subpopulation, which shares biological features with stem cells, is
responsible for distant metastases and recurrence. We previously reported
that DEAD/H (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp/His) box polypeptide 3, X-linked (DDX3X) is
an immunogenic protein preferentially expressed in CD133+ murine melanoma
cells exhibiting biological CSC features and that DDX3X-primed CD4+ T
cells mediated potent antitumor therapeutic efficacy. We found that DDX3X
is strongly expressed in small cell lung cancer (SCLC).[Objectives] In
the current study, we examine that DDX3X-specific effector T cells exist
in SCLC patients.[Patients and Methods] The present study comprised 20
consecutive SCLC patients, 5 long-term survivors, and 10 healthy
volunteers from a single institution (Niigata University Medical and
Dental Hospital). Specimens were collected after obtaining written
informed consent approved by the Niigata University Ethical
Committee.[Results] Six of 12 LD-SCLC patients possessed DDX3X-responsive
effector T cells. CD62Llow CD4+ effector T cells obtained from peripheral
blood of 5 LD-SCLC secreted significantly more IFN upon DDX3X antigen
stimulation in the presence of CD11c+ autologous dendritic cells.
CD62Llow CD8+ effector T cells from one LD-SCLC patient responded to
DDX3X. In contrast, effector T cells obtained from ED-SCLC patients or
healthy volunteers never responded to DDX3X.[Conclusion] DDX3X is likely
one of major antigens that is expressed in SCLC and is recognized by T
cell immune system. Antitumor immunotherapy to induce effector-dominant
CD4+ T-cell immunity on DDX3X antigen may be a promising therapy to
eliminate SCLC cells that mediate distant metastases.

