Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periodic fasting mimicking diet started late in life reduces and
delays carcinogenesis


Nutrition can have profound effects on aging and age-related pathologies
including cancer. As such, studies of fasting (the complete withdrawal of
food) and dietary restriction (DR, generally described as a 20- 40%
reduction in calories) have greatly contributed to the understanding of
the relationship between nutrients, cellular aging, cancerogenesis and
cancer cell survival. Our findings in yeast indicated that starvation
decreases age-dependent mutations whereas our mouse xenograft tumor
models indicate that fasting alone can be as effective as chemotherapy
drugs in delaying the progression of certain tumor types, in part through
the reduction of extracellular glucose and IGF-1 concentration/signaling.
Here, we developed a fasting mimicking/enhancing diet (FMD) and tested
its effects on cancerogenesis. In a cohort of female C57Bl6 mice,
bi-monthly 4 day FMD feeding cycles followed by normal food intake,
significantly improved survival in mice without causing excessive weight
loss. Mice in the FMD cohort had a significantly reduced lifelong cancer
incidence rate. Lymphoma was the most common cause of morbidity/mortality
and affected 67% in the ad lib fed control group but only 40% of the FMD
fed mice. In both cohorts lymphomas contributed to the great majority of
all neoplasms found. Neoplasms were found in animals in the ad lib fed
cohort starting 5 months after onset of our study, whereas no tumors
occurred in the first 8 months in the FMD cohort. Furthermore, the FMD
caused a shift from the presence of tumors in multiple organs (3) to
tumors being either absent or present in 2 or less sites, thus indicating
a potential shift to the development of benign tumors in the FMD group.
In summary, the periodic FMD cycles had a significant impact on the
development of cancer while allowing the preservation of lean body mass
and animal weight until old age and extending longevity.

