Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downstream effects of rigosertib (ON 01910.Na) in cancer cells
involves impairment of protein translation via eIF2 and eIF4


Purpose: Rigosertib, a novel synthetic styryl benzyl sulfone, is
cytotoxic against a variety of human tumor cell lines in vitro and in
vivo. Significantly, rigosertib is currently being tested in a randomized
phase III clinical trial in patients with higher risk myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) who have failed treatment with hypomethylating agents.
Previous studies have shown that rigosertib interacts with both the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and polo-like kinase (PLK1) pathways.
Because these pathways can affect several cellular functions, we used a
combination of unbiased global proteomics and interactomics approaches to
assemble a rigosertib target profile. Here, we confirm and elaborate the
pathways modulated by rigosertib.Experimental Design: Stable isotope
labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based proteomics was used
to identify the differentially expressed proteins in HeLa cells with and
without 8 hours of treatment with 10 M rigosertib. In addition,
rigosertib protein interaction (interactomics) studies were performed to
validate the proteomics observations.Results: Using a combination of
SILAC and subcellular fractionation we were able to quantify more than
1500 proteins, among which 125 were significantly altered by rigosertib
treatment. Quantified proteins were selected and clustered by biological
function. We performed pathway and network analysis using Ingenuity
Systems computational pathway analysis. The pathways that were identified
at statistically significant levels (p Purpose: Rigosertib, a novel
synthetic styryl benzyl sulfone, is cytotoxic against a variety of human
tumor cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Significantly, rigosertib is
currently being tested in a randomized phase III clinical trial in
patients with higher risk myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) who have failed
treatment with hypomethylating agents. Previous studies have shown that
rigosertib interacts with both the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and
polo-like kinase (PLK1) pathways. Because these pathways can affect
several cellular functions, we used a combination of unbiased global
proteomics and interactomics approaches to assemble a rigosertib target
profile. Here, we confirm and elaborate the pathways modulated by
rigosertib.Experimental Design: Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in
cell culture (SILAC)-based proteomics was used to identify the
differentially expressed proteins in HeLa cells with and without 8 hours
of treatment with 10 M rigosertib. In addition, rigosertib protein
interaction (interactomics) studies were performed to validate the
proteomics observations.Results: Using a combination of SILAC and
subcellular fractionation we were able to quantify more than 1500
proteins, among which 125 were significantly altered by rigosertib
treatment. Quantified proteins were selected and clustered by biological
function. We performed pathway and network analysis using Ingenuity
Systems computational pathway analysis. The pathways that were identified
at statistically significant levels (p < 0.05) were eukaryotic initiation
factor (eIF2) signaling, eIF4 signaling and nuclear erythroid factor 2
(Nrf2)-mediated oxidative stress response. In total, 19 proteins were
down-regulated and 2 proteins were up-regulated in the eIF2 signaling
pathway, suggesting that rigosertib represses protein translation in
tumor cells. These observations have been noted in other experimental
systems using different experimental approaches. To validate these
findings and to determine extent of interaction of these proteins with
rigosertib, we used drug affinity pull-down followed by liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to confirm
that rigosertib interacts with eIF2 and eIF4 via Raf and p70S6K,
respectively.Conclusions: Collectively, these results demonstrate that a
terminal effect of rigosertib in cancer cells is the inhibition of
protein translation mediated by eIF2 and eIF4.

