Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes in convalescent
saliva samples from patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Purpose: Silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) plays an important
role in head and neck carcinogenesis. Methylation of CpG islands in the
promoter regions of genes acts as a significant mechanism of epigenetic
gene silencing. In this study, we assessed the feasibility of epigenetic
alterations in TSGs in post-treatment DNA shed from the oral mucosa as a
prognostic marker for persistent/recurrent head and neck cancer. A panel
of four genes (KIF1A, EDNRB, p16, DCC) was evaluated in this
study.Experimental Design: Hypermethylation of the promoter regions was
investigated by bisulfite modification and quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (Q-MSP) which provides more objective and rapid
estimation of gene methylation status. Fresh tumor samples and pre- and
post-treatment salivary rinses were collected from 83 patients with
HNSCC. Post-treatment saliva samples were collected once in every 3
months. In addition, 46 normal saliva and 16 normal mucosal samples from
healthy individuals were obtained. Then we evaluated the correlation of
the results with the clinical parameters.Results: KIF1A, EDNRB, p16 and
DCC genes were methylated in 94%, 95%, 37% and 84% of primary HNSCC
tissues, respectively and were only methylated in 2%, 6.8%, 5% and 10% of
the salivary rinses from normal subjects. In addition, KIF1A, EDNRB, p16
and DCC were methylated in 35%, 69%, 8.4% and 38.6% of pre-treatment
salivary rinses from HNSCC patients, respectively. We evaluated whether
methylation levels of these genes in the post treatment saliva may
predict the recurrence/prognosis or the chance of cure after treatment.
Our data indicate that these genes may be potential biomarkers for HNSCC
detection and follow up. Sixteen of 83 patients had recurrent tumors and
KIF1A+EDNRB+p16+DCC methylation was observed in 37.5% of the patients in
this group. The three gene panel (KIF1A, EDNRB and DCC) was also observed
in 37.5% of the recurrent group and 46% of the overall patients,
respectively.Conclusion: Methylation of the KIF1A, EDNRB and DCC gene
promoters is a frequent event in HNSCC and these genes are not methylated
in normal salivary rinses, demonstrating potential that they may act as
biomarkers in detection strategies. Patients with presence of methylation
in surveillance salivary rinses are at significant risk for recurrence.
Quantitative measurement of salivary methylated DNA may have promise for
surveillance and early detection of recurrence.

