Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the therapeutic potential of IR and IGF-1R/IR
(co-)targeting in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy. Despite high
response rates to platinum based therapies most patients relapse with
resistant disease. For these patients novel therapeutic strategies are
needed. Hyper-activation of the insulin-like growth factor receptor
(IGF-1R) has been implicated in the development, progression and platinum
resistance of ovarian cancer. However, targeting the IGF-1R has shown
limited clinical benefit. The insulin receptor (IR), highly homologous to
the IGF-1R, confers resistance to IGF-1R targeted therapies. Furthermore,
in ovarian cancer alternative splicing results in the expression of IR-A
& IR-B isoforms, while in normal adult tissues IR-B is the predominant
isoform. Therefore targeting the IR or IR-A may be of clinical
importance. In this study we determined the therapeutic potential of IR
targeting in ovarian cancer.First, the expression levels of the IR
isoforms, IGF-1R and stimulatory ligands IGF-I & II were determined in a
panel of ovarian cancers and ovarian cancer cell lines of different
histological subtype (endometrioid, clear cell, serous) using RT-PCR. IR
isoforms and IGF-1R were expressed in 96% (43/44) and 78% (35/44) of the
ovarian cancers compared to 89% (8/9) and 100% (9/9) of the ovarian
cancer cell lines. IGF-I and IGF-II were expressed in all the ovarian
cancers compared to 11% (1/9) and 0% (0/9) of the ovarian cancer cell
lines, indicating the presence of an autocrine loop. In addition, all
cell lines showed membrane receptor expression and functional downstream
signaling upon IGF-I, IGF-II & insulin, via PI3K as determined by western
blot and flow cytometry. Subsequently, we investigated which splicing
factors may be involved in the IR alternative splicing. Expression of
splicing factors (hnRNPA1A, hnRNA2B1, CELF1, SRSF1, hnRNPH, hnRNPF) were
determined by qRT-PCR. However, expression levels did not correlate with
IR isoform levels, indicating a more complex regulation of IR splicing.
Finally, we determined the effect of IR, IGF-1R and IR/IGF-1R
(co-)targeting by S961 (1000nM), MAB391 (20g) and OSI906 (10M),
respectively on ovarian cancer cell survival by MTT and clonogenic
assays. IR inhibition by S961 resulted in a decrease in cell viability up
to 40% in 7/9 ovarian cancer cell lines. Preliminary data showed similar
results upon IGF-1R/IR inhibition with OSI906. IGF-1R inhibition by
MAB391 did not affect cell viability. Furthermore a reduction in
clonogenic capacity (75%) by OSI906 is observed in 2/3 ovarian cancer
cell lines tested.In conclusion, in ovarian cancer functional IR and
IGF-1R signaling as well as the presence of a possible autocrine loop may
contribute to ovarian cancer pathogenesis and progression. Targeting IR
signaling with the IR-antagonist S961 and co-targeting IR/IGF-1R
signaling by OSI906 reduced ovarian cancer cell viability, indicating its
therapeutic potential in ovarian cancer.Funded by the Dutch Cancer
Foundation: Grant RUG 2011-5231

