Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivity of cell lines to Fatty Acid Synthase inhibitors
depends on the lipid content in the cellular environment


Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN) catalyzes the final step in palmitate (PA)
synthesis, using acetyl-CoA, malonyl-CoA and NADPH. Most normal tissues
express low levels of FASN and rely on uptake of fatty acids (FA) from
the diet. It has been proposed that FASN overexpressing tumors including
prostate and breast tumors depend on de novo FA synthesis, which is
advantageous to tumors by providing lipids for membrane synthesis and
increased growth factor receptor expression/signaling in lipid rafts.
Overexpression of FASN leads to a higher amount of saturated lipids in
membranes which can lead to resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Lastly,
NADPH consumption during PA synthesis keeps the redox balance in check.
All of the above imply that FASN represents a potential therapeutic
target for the treatment of multiple cancer types.At this AACR we report
two novel chemical series (posters Connolly et al., Lu et al.).
JNJ-53793220 and JNJ-54302833 potently and selectively (Fatty Acid
Synthase (FASN) catalyzes the final step in palmitate (PA) synthesis,
using acetyl-CoA, malonyl-CoA and NADPH. Most normal tissues express low
levels of FASN and rely on uptake of fatty acids (FA) from the diet. It
has been proposed that FASN overexpressing tumors including prostate and
breast tumors depend on de novo FA synthesis, which is advantageous to
tumors by providing lipids for membrane synthesis and increased growth
factor receptor expression/signaling in lipid rafts. Overexpression of
FASN leads to a higher amount of saturated lipids in membranes which can
lead to resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Lastly, NADPH consumption
during PA synthesis keeps the redox balance in check. All of the above
imply that FASN represents a potential therapeutic target for the
treatment of multiple cancer types.At this AACR we report two novel
chemical series (posters Connolly et al., Lu et al.). JNJ-53793220 and
JNJ-54302833 potently and selectively (< 100nM) inhibit the FASN enzyme
and proliferative activity in cells in lipid reduced medium (LRM). Using
these, we investigated the underlying hypothesis that tumor cells do not
utilize circulating FA and are dependent on de novo synthesis of FA.In a
lipid reduced environment many cell lines, particularly of prostate,
breast, ovarian or heme origin, proved to be sensitive to JNJ-53793220.
However co-administration of PA dose-dependently reversed the
anti-proliferative effects. Also androgen driven proliferation of LNCaP
cells was potently blocked by JNJ-53793220 (EC50 30 nM), and decreased
PSA levels. Both effects were partially rescued by the addition of PA.
While the rescue of tumor cells by PA confirmed the on-target activity of
the compounds, it also suggested that cancer cells are capable of using
external FA. To extend these findings, we screened more than 400 cell
lines in lipid containing medium (LCM) for their sensitivity to
JNJ-53793220. In LCM sensitivity to FASN inhibition was lower than in LRM
conditions. In most, but not all, cases the addition of PA reverted the
antiproliferative effects of JNJ-53793220, although target engagement was
not reduced in LCM conditions. The EC50 of 14C-acetate incorporation in
lipids of 30 nM corresponded well with enzymatic and anti-proliferative
effects in LRM (27 and 13 nM respectively). Furthermore, growth of
pre-established LNCaP xenografts in vivo was not blocked significantly by
JNJ-53793220, even though malonyl-CoA levels were increased as expected
upon FASN inhibition in the tumor. While circulating lipids in vivo are
likely culprits for the lack of efficacy, other factors may play a role
as well. In a 3D culture model (poster Vidic et al.) the growth of LNCaP
and PC346c spheroids was blocked by JNJ-54302833 (1M), but growth of
PC346c spheroids co-cultured with cancer associated fibroblasts was not
inhibited. Taken together our data suggest that the outcome of FASN
inhibition is influenced by the tumor environment.

