Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring cancer stem cells heterogeneity via single cell
multiplex gene expression analysis


A considerable body of evidence indicates that many cancers are
hierarchically organized and driven by cancer stem cells (CSCs) that have
the ability to self-renew and to generate heterogeneous populations of
tumor bulk. Preclinical studies have also demonstrated that CSCs mediate
tumor metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. As
a result of substantial studies to identify CSCs markers and related
pathways, agents developed to target CSCs are in early stage clinical
trials. Given the clinical importance of CSCs, there is an urgency to
develop the methodology to assay these cells. In this study, we explored
CSCs heterogeneity at the single cell level using C1 and BioMark HD
technologies. Cancer stem cells from MCF7 and SUM159 breast cancer cell
lines were sorted by MoFlo XDP based CSCs marker including CD44, CD24 and
ALDH1 immunophenotyping. Sorted cells were then separately loaded onto
the C1 chip and studied by C1 instrument that isolates up to 96 single
cells and performs lysis, RNA release, reverse transcription, and finally
cDNA preamplification of up to 96 gene transcripts for each single cell.
We selected the 96 genes based on important genetic pathways, EMT and
CSCs markers, and also genes identified in the expression array data to
be differentially expressed in CD44+/CD24- and or ALDH+ primary breast
tumor samples. Following C1 preamplification, we analyzed the mRNA
expression levels of 96 genes on each of the isolated single cells by
BioMark HD instrument which generates nearly 10,000 qPCR data points in a
single run using a 96x96 chip. Results showed that more than one
population exist with significant differences in mRNA expression levels
of certain genes such as CAPRIN2, TM4SF1, NECAB3, PPL, TSPAN6, STAP2,
FAM46C, TCEA3, TPSB2 and FCN1, as well as IL6, GATA3, KI67, PCNA, EZH2,
and MET in seemingly homogenous populations of ALDH+ and
ALDH-(CD44+/CD24- in MCF7 cells) CSCs. In addition, a distinct pattern of
gene expression for sorted luminal MCF7 in comparison to basal SUM159
cells was observed for epithelial versus mesenchymal markers such as
CDH1, CDH2, KRT7, KRT19, EpCAM, and Vimentin genes. We have recently
reported that breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) exist in inter-convertible
EMT/MET states characterized by distinct genes and biomarker expression.
Using this methodology of single cell analysis, we found that these CSC
populations still display significant heterogeneity in mRNA expression.
This technique of single cell multiplex gene expression analysis, along
with a microfluidic method for a label-free cell sorting is currently
under optimization to be used for isolation and molecular
characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from blood samples of
breast cancer patients as a means of liquid biopsy. Altogether, results
of this and similar studies on single CSCs have considerable clinical
implications in cancer diagnosis and prognosis, as well as in the
successful targeted therapy of cancer stem cells.

