Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioinformatic analyses approaches for personalized oncogenomics


The Personalized Oncogenomics initiative at the British Columbia Cancer
Agency aims to identify tumor-specific therapeutic targets in cancer
patients with late stage disease who have failed standard therapy.
Comprehensive profiling of individual patients' tumor(s) at the DNA and
RNA level allows for characterization of altered pathways and hence
identification of therapeutics designed to specifically target them.Data
for each individual study included whole genome and transcriptome
sequence of the fresh biopsy and whole genome sequence of patient's
blood. When tissues were available, transcriptome of a matched normal
sample and genome of the commonly formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
primary tumor were also sequenced. All sequencing experiments were
performed on Illumina machines. Genomic data was examined, depending on
the case, for germline and/or somatic mutations. These included single
nucleotide variants, small insertions and deletions and copy number
variations. All sequence data were assembled de novo in order to identify
rearrangements causing gene fusions; transcriptome data also revealed
allelic expression of variants and provided a profile for the entire
transcribed genome. Differential abundance estimation was run against a
rich repository of publicly available data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
project and transcriptome datasets available in-house. The variants and
pathways were then mapped to drug databases as well as clinical trial
records. This was followed by an extensive literature search for evidence
of drug combinations, drug-drug interactions and efficacy of a drug for a
particular cancer type, especially those not recognized as the approved
disease group for the drug under consideration.The project has sequenced
50 patients; the average length of time between acquiring the biopsy and
delivering a report to clinical oncologists was 37 days. Bioinformatic
analysis of the sequence data led to identification of informative or
actionable targets in up to 80% of cases. The findings were not
restricted to target identification but also led to change of diagnosis,
treatment and characterization of tumor evolution. De novo assembly of
the data in a non-small cell lung cancer patient led to the
identification of the well-characterized EML4-ALK oncogenic fusion which
had been missed through the use of clinically approved fluorescence in
situ hybridization test. Analysis of two separate malignant masses in
another patient revealed two divergent and unique tumors. Two different
therapeutic were prescribed in order to target these; this led to the
disappearance of both tumors and disease stabilization for 7
months.Through the design of an efficient and automated bioinformatics
pipeline, individual patient's tumor specimen(s) were profiled in a
clinically relevant time frame. This in turn enabled the delivery of
targeted therapies and disease stabilization in patients who had no
remaining standard therapeutic options.

