Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of MMR gene exonic rearrangements in suspected
Lynch syndrome tumors without loss of MMR expression


Lynch syndrome (LS), also called Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal
Cancer, the most well studied form of familial CRC, is responsible for
about 3% of all CRC cases. LS-associated CRC often exhibits one or more
of the following features namely early age of onset, occurrence of
synchronous/metachronous tumors, presence of more than one affected
family member and tumors predominantly localized to the proximal/right
colon with specific clinico-pathological features such as a mucinous
histology, poor differentiation and immune infiltration. LS is primarily
a disease of defective MisMatch Repair (MMR) and is caused by germline
mutational inactivation of any one of four major MMR genes viz. MLH1,
MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. A hallmark of LS-associated tumors is presence of
microsatellite instability (MSI), a term used to describe frequent
occurrence of expanded/contracted microsatellites that arise during DNA
replication and are not corrected due to defective MMR. MLH1 and MSH2
account for a majority (up to 90%) of LS cases while MSH6 and PMS2 are
involved in a minor proportion. Mutational inactivation of an MMR gene
almost always results in loss of corresponding protein expression in the
tumor, which can be easily detected by immunohistochemistry. In the first
comprehensive study from India, we analyzed MSI and determined expression
status of the four MMR genes in forty eight suspected LS-associated
colorectal tumor samples. Though a majority (85.4%) exhibited MSI, only
58% exhibited loss of MMR expression, a significantly low proportion
compared to reports from other populations. PCR-DNA sequencing and
Multiple Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification based mutation and exonic
deletion/duplication screening respectively, revealed MMR gene lesions in
81% of samples exhibiting loss of corresponding MMR protein expression,
including thirteen mutations and four exonic rearrangements. Seven novel
mutations (four in MLH1 and three in MSH2) were identified. Surprisingly,
MMR gene lesions were also detected in a significant proportion (78%) of
tumor samples not exhibiting MMR expression loss. Interestingly, samples
with and without MMR expression exhibited significant differences with
respect to mucinous histology and instability exhibited by specific
microsatellites. In addition, MMR negative samples mainly harbored MMR
gene in-del or point mutations while MMR positive samples predominantly
harbored MMR gene exonic rearrangements. The study has therefore revealed
for the first time a significant proportion of suspected LS tumors not
exhibiting loss of MMR expression despite harboring MMR gene
rearrangements. More importantly, our results indicate significant
differences in the biology of LS-associated colorectal tumors occurring
due to missense/in-del mutations in MMR genes causing loss of expression
and those that occur due to MMR gene exonic rearrangements not resulting
in loss of expression.

