Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ERRalpha in ovarian cancer


Objective. The estrogen receptor-related receptor-alpha (ERR, encoded by
ESRRA) has emerged as a key transcriptional regulator of mitochondrial
function and has been implicated as a prognostic marker in many cancers,
including epithelial ovarian cancer. ERR has shown promise as a
therapeutic target in breast cancer where ERR transcriptional activity
regulates growth of breast cancer cells. This study aims to evaluate
whether ERR expression in ovarian cancer correlates with patient
outcomes, determine the effect of inhibiting ERR transcriptional activity
on ovarian cancer cell growth, and identify molecular signaling pathways
regulated by ERR in ovarian cancer cells.Methods. Affymetrix U133A gene
expression microarray analysis from frozen tumor specimens of serous
epithelial ovarian cancer was used to compare ESRRA transcripts levels in
patients with short-term (7 years). ESRRA transcript levels were also
measured in normal ovarian surface and fallopian tube epithelial tissues.
Protein expression levels were assessed in ovarian cancer cell lines and
patient tumor samples. Overall survival was estimated using the
Kaplan-Meier Method. The effect of ERR inhibition on proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth was determined after treatment with the ERR
antagonist, XCT790. The activity of 49 different phospho-receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) was analyzed after down-regulation of ERR with
shRNA.Results. ESRRA expression was significantly higher in cancer
tissues verses normal ovarian surface and fallopian tube epithelial
tissues. Expression was also higher in patients with short-term versus
long-term survival. Inhibition of ERR with XCT790 led to a >50% reduction
in proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. The induced knockdown
of ERR decreased the phosphorylation of RTKs, including HER2, suggesting
that important growth promoting pathways are downstream of
ERR.Conclusions. In this study we determined that higher expression of
ESRRA correlates with worse survival in ovarian cancer patients. However,
inhibition of ERR results in decreased growth potential. This effect may
be manifest through the regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase activity.
Thus, ERR may be an important therapeutic target for the treatment of
ovarian cancer and warrants future studies to determine the role of ERR
regulated signaling networks in ovarian oncogenesis.

