Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human antibodies specific for oxidized macrophage migration
inhibitory factor (oxMIF) synergize with chemotherapeutic agents in
animal models of cancer


Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a proinflammatory
cytokine with pleiotropic biologic effects and is pathologically
associated with several types of cancer. oxMIF is an immunological and
conformational distinct isoform of MIF that can be mimicked in vitro by
mild oxidation of recombinant MIF. Fully human monoclonal antibodies that
specifically target oxMIF were shown to inhibit downstream signaling
pathways associated with tumor proliferation and progression in vitro and
in vivo. We assessed the potential of anti-oxMIF antibodies combined with
standard chemotherapeutic agents on the proliferation of cancer cell
lines in vitro and in vivo in xenograft models. In vitro, anti-oxMIF
sensitization of the prostate cancer cell lines PC3 or LnCAP
significantly reduced the half maximal effective concentration (EC50) of
mitoxantrone by 30% and 40%, respectively. In the ovarian cancer cell
lines A2780, EC50 of cisplatin was reduced by 70% after sensitization
with anti-oxMIF. In vivo, mice bearing pancreatic cancer xenografts
(COLO357, BxPC3 or MiaPaCa2) treated with anti-oxMIF in combination with
gemcitabine had a strong survival advantage compared with mice treated
with either monotherapy. This effect was accompanied by a decrease of
tumor volumes up to 70% and an increase in the expression of caspase 3 in
mice bearing COLO357 xenografts. In addition, combining gemcitabine with
anti-oxMIF treatment normalized blood vessel density inside the tumors,
decreased their permeability by 25%, and decreased tumor VEGF levels by
40%, whereas gemcitabine alone had the opposite effect. In mice bearing
the ovarian human cancer cell line A2780 xenografts, combining anti-oxMIF
antibodies with cisplatin led to a 45% reduction of tumor weights.
Anti-oxMIF specific antibodies decreased proliferation, angiogenesis and
inflammation inside tumor xenografts, but were not cytotoxic (no
antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity or complement-dependent
cytotoxicity). These experiments demonstrated synergistic effects between
anti-oxMIF antibodies and cytotoxic chemotherapy. Combination treatments
were superior to the corresponding monotherapies and led to a stronger
inhibition of tumor growth and angiogenesis. A phase 1 clinical study of
a novel human antibody that selectively targets oxMIF is currently
ongoing in patients with solid malignancies (ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier: NCT01765790).

