Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PIK3CAH1047R mutation can initiate tumorigenesis in the colon


Background: Our understanding of how mutations within the intestinal
epithelium result in tumor development and progression is continuously
evolving. We have previously described the FC PIK3ca* murine colon cancer
model which expresses a constitutively activated phosphoinositide-3
kinase (PI3K) in the intestinal epithelium. The expression of this
dominantly active form of PI3K resulted in invasive mucinous
adenocarcinomas in the proximal colon through a non-canonical mechanism.
We sought to determine if the hotspot PIK3CA H1047R mutation, commonly
found in human colorectal cancers, can also induce intestinal
tumorigenesis.Methods: Female FVB mice carrying a conditional PIK3CA
H1047R mutation (PIK3CAH1047R) were crossed to B6 males carrying
atransgene in which the fatty acid binding protein promoter is fused to
Cre recombinase (FC). (FVB x B6)F1 FC PIK3CAH1047R progeny express this
constitutively active form of PI3K in epithelial cells of the distal
small bowel and colon. 22 F1 FC PIK3CAH1047R mice were examined. Necropsy
was performed at approximately 200 days of age or once moribund.Results:
50% of FC PIK3CAH1047R mice develop invasive adenocarcinomas within the
colon. These cancers are highly mucinous and often penetrate through the
serosal layer of the colon. These lesions can be found throughout the
colon, but are more common proximally. No tumors were identified within
the small intestine. These cancers can have associated invasion into the
regional lymphatics and metastases to the mesentery. Interestingly these
cancers have a minimal luminal component compared to the amount of
submucosal extension. Precursor lesions are able to be identified and are
not polypoid. These cancers demonstrate activation of the AKT signaling
pathway, but do not demonstrate nuclear localization of
-catenin.Conclusion: This is the first report of the hotspot PIK3CA
H1047R mutation leading to intestinal tumorigenesis through a
non-canonical mechanism, resulting in flat mucinous invasive
adenocarcinomas.

