Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Wnt signal transcription factor TCF-4 directly regulates
Bcl-xL expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells


Background: The T-cell factor (TCF)-4 is a key transcriptional protein
activated by Wnt/-catenin signaling. Previously we identified 14 TCF-4
isoforms derived from human HCC cell lines. The TCF-4J and K pair have
been characterized based on the presence (K) or absence (J) of a SxxSS
motif. Furthermore, we demonstrated that TCF-4J conferred high
tumorigenic potential to HCC cells in contrast to TCF-4K (PLoS ONE 2012).
However, the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL was much expressed in
TCF-4K-overexpressing HCC cells than the level in TCF-4J-overexpressing
cells, suggesting that the SxxSS was involved in Bcl-xL expression.
Indeed, Wnt/-catenin signaling needs to control cell apoptosis during
embryogenesis and carcinogenesis, possible direct interaction between the
TCF-4 isoforms and the bcl-xL promoter region was suggested. Thus, the
AIM of this study was to assess the protein-DNA interaction and its
functional consequences by using ChIP assay and luciferase-reporter
assay, respectively.Methods: The human HCC cell lines HAK-1A and HAK-1B
were used. HAK-1B was an aggressive sister cell line derived from HAK-1A.
TCF-4K mutants (269A, 272A, and 273A) were prepared with conversion of
serine (S) in the SxxSS motif to alanine (A) by site-directed
mutagenesis. HAK-1A-derived stable clones overexpressing TCF-4J (J
cells), K (K cells), and K-mutants (269A, 272A, and 273A cells,
respectively) were established. Western blot analysis and real-time PCR
were employed to evaluate protein and mRNA expression levels,
respectively. ChIP assay was performed by using SimpleChIP assay kit
(Cell Signaling Technology). Two primer pairs for bcl-xL promoter region
(BCL2L1(-)01Kb and BCL2L1(-)02Kb) were obtained from QIAGEN. The promoter
assay was done by using LightSwitch Luciferase Assay System (SWITCHGEAR
GENOMICS).Results: Robust expression of Bcl-xL protein was found in
HAK-1B cells, in contrast to its low expression in HAK-1A cells.
Consistently, the mRNA level in HAK-1B was 2-fold of that in HAK-1A. In
ChIP assay, clear binding of TCF-4 with bcl-xL promoter regions was
confirmed, encouraging us to compare the binding affinity in J cells, K
cells, 269 cells, and control cells. As a result, significant TCF-4-DNA
interaction was found in K cells, and, of note, the interaction was
abolished in 269A cells. In the promoter assay, K cells showed the
highest luciferase activity.Conclusions: The findings suggest that TCF-4
directly regulates the Bcl-xL expression. We suggest that phosphorylation
at serine 269 in the TCF-4K isoform is critical to fine-tune
anti-apoptotic potential through increasing the Bcl-xL expression in HCC.

