Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid and ultra-sensitive single-cell transcript profiling with
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR): Application to cell cycle analysis


The recognition that tumors and other apparently homogeneous cell
populations are often heterogeneous and display stochastic expression of
their genes, has motivated the development of methods to profile gene
expression in single cells. Among these, RNA-Seq is the most powerful for
broad-scale profiling and discovery of genes and pathways influencing
biological processes and states of interest. However, given the extent of
sample manipulation required to prepare each RNA-Seq library and the
trade-off between sensitivity and sample throughput it is important to
validate discovery findings by orthogonal digital methods with comparable
or greater sensitivity and accuracy. Droplet Digital PCR is such a method
that can rapidly and cost-effectively replicate (or challenge) RNA-Seq
results with minimal sample processing when defined targets are to be
verified (Chen et al, 2012). Furthermore, ddPCR is performed in 96-well
plates and is well-suited to high throughput studies of focused sets of
genes in large numbers of single cells (e.g. hundreds in a day).Here we
present a simple and robust workflow for profiling multiplexed,
transcript targets in flow-sorted, Jurkat single-cells using Taqman 5
probe hydrolysis assays. We demonstrate that Bio-Rad's QX100 & QX200
Droplet Digital PCR systems provide absolute counts of transcripts from
>100,000 copies to The recognition that tumors and other apparently
homogeneous cell populations are often heterogeneous and display
stochastic expression of their genes, has motivated the development of
methods to profile gene expression in single cells. Among these, RNA-Seq
is the most powerful for broad-scale profiling and discovery of genes and
pathways influencing biological processes and states of interest.
However, given the extent of sample manipulation required to prepare each
RNA-Seq library and the trade-off between sensitivity and sample
throughput it is important to validate discovery findings by orthogonal
digital methods with comparable or greater sensitivity and accuracy.
Droplet Digital PCR is such a method that can rapidly and
cost-effectively replicate (or challenge) RNA-Seq results with minimal
sample processing when defined targets are to be verified (Chen et al,
2012). Furthermore, ddPCR is performed in 96-well plates and is
well-suited to high throughput studies of focused sets of genes in large
numbers of single cells (e.g. hundreds in a day).Here we present a simple
and robust workflow for profiling multiplexed, transcript targets in
flow-sorted, Jurkat single-cells using Taqman 5 probe hydrolysis assays.
We demonstrate that Bio-Rad's QX100 & QX200 Droplet Digital PCR systems
provide absolute counts of transcripts from >100,000 copies to <10 copies
per cell, using unpurified and unamplified cDNA synthesized in 30 in the
original wells used for flow-sorting. The results are highly reproducible
and the method is currently being used to explore the contribution of the
cell-cycle to expression differences among single-cell populations.More
than 30 cell-cycle genes have been evaluated by ddPCR in exponentially
growing Jurkat cells. Several genes, including CCNB1, CDK1 and DNM2, show
an unusually broad range of transcript levels (over 2 logs), suggestive
of their known phase-specific cell-cycle roles. Jurkat cells have been
FACS sorted for either G0/G1 (G1) or G2/M (G2) single-cells using
DyeCycle Orange to stain for DNA content, and are being assessed for
phase-specific expression profiles. Preliminary results indicate that G2
single-cells are enriched for higher CCNB1 and CDK1 transcript levels as
expected from their role in promoting early events in mitosis; however,
even G2 cells still show expression levels spanning 2 logs, suggesting
cell-cycle phase heterogeneity and/or bursty transcription within the
sorted G2 population. While the average mRNA level of even the
house-keeping gene, GAPDH, is several-fold higher in G2 cells as compared
to G1 cells, transcripts for CCNB1 and CDK1 average 6-fold higher in G2
than in G1.In this work, we demonstrate both the analytical performance
and the biological utility of droplet digital PCR for single-cell
analysis. This same workflow could be used for fingerprinting and study
of sub-populations in tumors.

