Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of osteosarcoma cancer stem cells using an imaging
system for proteasome activity


Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignant bone tumor in the
pediatric and adolescent age groups, comprising almost 60% of all bone
sarcomas. Radioresistant cancers, including osteosarcoma, typically
exhibit a considerable potential for recurrence and development of
metastases following radiotherapy. Recurrence and metastatic potential
can be due to a specific radioresistant subpopulation of cells with
stem-like characteristics, cancer stem cells (often abbreviated CSCs)
which maintain the capacity to regenerate entire tumors. Targeting of the
CSCs in osteosarcoma is a promising avenue to explore to develop new
therapies for this devastating cancer. CSC-enriched cancer cell
populations exhibit the capacities for self-renewal, multilineage
differentiation, tumorigenicity, chemo- and radioresistance. Also, CSCs
usually are quiescent with low protein turnover, reduced metabolism, and
a down-regulation of proteasome activity. The ubiquitin-proteasome system
is the major non-lysosomal system for degradation of intracellular
proteins. Recently, cancer cells with low proteasome activity have been
identified as CSCs in breast cancer, glioma, and pancreatic cancer with a
fluorescence marker system for level of proteasome activity.We stably
infected two osteosarcoma cell lines, MG-63 and U2-OS, with an expression
vector for a fusion protein between the green fluorescent protein,
ZsGreen, and the C-terminal degron of murine ornithine decarboxylase to
monitor 26S proteasome activity in living cells. We purified osteosarcoma
cells with low proteasome activity by fluorescence activated cell sorting
and verified whether these ZsGreen cells have CSC-like properties or not.
ZsGreen cells showed enhanced sphere formation capacities, and underwent
asymmetric divisions into ZsGreen cells and non-ZsGreen cells, showing
self renewal and multipotency, while non-ZsGreen cells underwent only
symmetric divisions into non-ZsGreen cells. We also performed clonogenic
survival assays that showed ZsGreen cells were more radioresistant than
non-ZsGreen cells.We conclude that established osteosarcoma cell lines
are heterogeneous with regard to their intrinsic proteasome activity and
that they contain osteosarcoma stem cells-enriched subpopulations that
can be identified by low proteasome activity.

