Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Healthcare resource utilization (HRU) in treated mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL) patients


Background: MCL, a subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, has an aggressive
clinical course & poor prognosis. Few studies have described treatment
patterns & HRU in treated MCL patients (pts).Methods: U.S. healthcare
claims data (Truven Health) was used to identify adult pts with a new
episode of MCL therapy (tx) (defined as no MCL tx claim in prior 12
months) occurring within 90 days of an MCL diagnosis, & 12 months
enrollment before & after the first MCL tx claim (index date). Pts with
claims for pregnancy or non-MCL txs were excluded. The identification
period was from 2007 - 2011. MCL txs included bendamustine, bortezomib,
busulfan, carboplatin, carmustine, cisplatin, cladribine,
cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, doxorubicin, etoposide, fludarabine,
ifosfamide, melphalan, MESNA, methotrexate, mitoxantrone, lenalidomide,
pentostatin, procarbazine, rituximab, temsirolimus, vincristine, or
combinations. Demographics, MCL treatment patterns & HRU were summarized
using descriptive statistics. HRU patterns during the 12 months before &
after initiating MCL tx were analyzed.Results: This analysis identified
381 pts. Mean age was 65 (SD 12) years; 73% were male. Prior to 2010,
more than 70% of initial txs consisted of one of the following regimens:
1) cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-rituximab-vincristine, 2) rituximab
monotherapy, 3) vincristine monotherapy or 4)
cyclophosphamide-rituximab-vincristine. After 2010, more than 70% of
initial txs consisted of 1)
cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-rituximab-vincristine, 2)
bendamustine-rituximab, & 3) rituximab monotherapy. MCL tx claims were
reported for a mean of 4.0 (SD 2.0) months per pt in the 12 months
following the index date. The table reports HRU in the 12 months before &
after initial MCL tx.Conclusions: This observational study of 381 treated
MCL pts reported significant HRU in the 12 months following initiation of
MCL tx. These results provide an indicator of MCL disease burden &
provide stakeholders an estimate of HRU upon which standardized costs may
be imputed.


