Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systematic approach to evaluate and select preclinical study
workflow software applications for oncology


The use of software applications to automate the workflow specific to
preclinical oncology trials can significantly improve labor efficiency,
data quality & security while preserving both methodology and results in
a searchable database in perpetuity. The typically daunting and complex
selection process can be simplified, facilitated and expedited by
applying a systematic approach derived from those developed and used by
oncology departments in some large pharmaceutical companies. Criteria
common across these companies have been identified and combined into a
single codified evaluation method. The first step is to identify and
define a detailed set of system requirements based on the needs for each
user level: technicians, scientists, statisticians, analytical labs,
management and other stakeholders involved with animal studies. Some
requirements are specific to specific animal models and must be
considered for inclusion. Requirements may include functions such as
staff intercommunications, protocol development, ACUC restrictions, tumor
induction methods, treatments, group composition, tasks, measurements,
schedules, analysis, graphing and reporting methods, etc. Each
requirement is then assigned a weight based on its relative importance to
the users. Frequency of use is also taken into consideration when
developing a requirement weight. Software applications under
consideration are evaluated by scoring the extent to which each
requirement is met. To determine the top applications for in-house
evaluation on actual studies, a preliminary evaluation of Requirement
Scores may be performed by referencing user manuals. Requirement Scores
are multiplied by their predetermined weight to derive a Net Requirement
Score (NRS). NRSs are summed to achieve a Total Score. The applications
selected with the highest NRS are usually evaluated in the lab on actual
studies. Requirements are then scored by a small team of users in regular
lab use. The Total Score is used to identify which software best meets
the needs of the research organization as a whole. The implementation of
a systematic approach to evaluate software for animal study workflow
automation can save time and help ensure the objective selection of the
best system available for a lab.

