Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analgesic effects of capsazepine on a mouse model of bone cancer
pain


Breast cancer has the highest incidence rate in women, accounting for
more than 22% of all cancers and possessing a strong disposition to
metastasize to bone. Discovered in 70% of advanced breast cancer patients
and over 90% prevalence in patients who die from breast cancer, the
affinity of this disease to metastasize bone has become overwhelming.
These skeletal metastases become a significant cause of morbidity and
mortality in patients with the primary symptom being pain. Pain is a
major concern in determining a patient's quality of life and there have
been many attempts to understand and control bone pain with little
success.Capsazepine was identified during a high throughput screen to be
a potent inhibitor of breast cancer cell-mediated glutamate release, a
neurotransmitter with known associations in both neural communication and
pain. This drug also has antagonistic effects on transient receptor
potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV-1) receptors which act as key players in
both heat and vanilloid-induced nociception. Studies have shown that
glutamate plays a role in bone cancer pain, with an excess in free
glutamate able to cause pain either directly through excitotoxic pathways
or indirectly though the dysregulation of osteoclasts and osteoblasts,
causing bone dysregulation. TRPV-1 receptors have also has been
implicated in the mechanisms of bone cancer pain, as osteoclasts release
protons during bone remodeling which can elicit a TRPV-1-related
nociceptive response from neurons in the surrounding periosteum. These
findings suggest that Capsazepine may provide a powerful multi-pronged
approach to treating cancer pain.A model of breast cancer-induced bone
pain has been established using human MDA-MB-231 breast adenocarcinoma
cells injected into the femurs of BALB/c nude mice. Behavioural tests are
then preformed using the dynamic plantar aesthesiometer (DPA) and the
dynamic weight bearing (DWB) devices on the affected limb for both
movement-evoked and spontaneous pain-related behaviours.Using
Capsazepine, delivered intraperitoneally via mini-osmotic drug pumps
(5kg/mg and 10kg/mg), we demonstrate a dose-dependent attenuation of pain
behaviours in vivo. While confirming tumour presence using
immunohistochemistry (IHC) we show that TRPV-1 and glutamate play an
important role in the onset and severity of bone cancer pain. The use of
Capsazepine was able to attenuate these pain-related behaviours without
the side effects of common analgesics.(This work is supported by the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR))

