Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressive effects of tristetraprolin expression in
metastatic breast cancer


The purpose of this study is to define mechanisms by which the
mRNA-destabilizing factor tristetraprolin (TTP) impacts tumorigenic
phenotypes in an aggressive model of metastatic breast cancer. Widespread
suppression of TTP levels in human tumors and cancer cell lines relative
to non-transformed tissues suggests that TTP may function as a tumor
suppressor in diverse neoplastic contexts, and low TTP expression is a
negative prognostic indicator in breast cancer. TTP is a tandem zinc
finger protein that binds to AU-rich elements (AREs) and targets their
associated mRNAs for degradation. AREs are potent cis-acting determinants
of cytoplasmic mRNA turnover in mammalian cells, and are essential for
limiting cellular production of many clinically important gene products
including regulators of inflammation, cell proliferation, and
apoptosis.Surveys of patient-derived samples showed that TTP expression
is diminished in many neoplastic tissues, particularly those from
aggressive cancers. In this study, we show that restoration of TTP levels
attenuates several tumorigenic phenotypes in the cultured metastatic
breast cancer line MDA-MB-231, consistent with a tumor suppressor role
for TTP. Notably, TTP-expressing cell lines replicate approximately 70%
slower than non-transfected controls. Inhibition of cell proliferation
did not result from apoptosis but rather by a delay at the G1/S
checkpoint. TTP expression also significantly reduced the formation of
cultured mammospheres based on both sphere-forming efficiency frequency
and extreme limiting dilution analyses, indicating that this protein
reduces stemness and non-adherent growth potential. Cell motility was
also suppressed by TTP, demonstrated using wound healing assays.To
identify potential mechanisms linking TTP to diminution of tumorigenic
phenotypes, we surveyed the expression of genes encoding selected
pro-tumorigenic factors, including several known to encode TTP-targeted
mRNAs. Expression of cyclins D1 and E as well as the angiogenic factor
VEGF were significantly reduced in TTP-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells,
however, this was not mediated by accelerated mRNA decay. Interestingly,
we observed that the mRNA-destabilizing function of TTP is abrogated by
the constitutively active ERK signaling pathway in this cell model,
indicating that the mRNA-destabilizing activity of TTP may be dispensable
for at least a subset of its tumor suppressive properties. Based on
subsequent analyses of TTP effects on the expression of selected
transcription factors at both the mRNA and protein levels, we have
developed a working model whereby TTP may suppress diverse tumorigenic
phenotypes in this metastatic cancer cell model by repressing the
function of a strongly pro-oncogenic transcriptional regulatory circuit,
even in the absence of its canonical mRNA-destabilizing activity.

