Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for hdac6 and er- association in a subset of clear cell
renal cell carcinoma


Introduction: Histone deacetylases are overexpressed in several tumors
including prostate, breast and clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
Our group has previously reported that class II HDACs, HDAC4 and HDAC6
regulate HIF- stability in ccRCC cell lines. Interestingly, HDAC6
overexpression in ER- positive breast cancer has been shown to correlate
with overall and cancer specific survival in response to tamoxifen
treatment. In addition, HDAC6 increases cell motility by deacetylating
-tubulin, and HDAC6 interaction with ER- on the cell membrane increases
its deacetylating activity. The objective of our study was to assess
whether HDAC6 associates with ER- in a subset of ccRCC and whether this
association can be targeted therapeutically. Methods: Radical nephrectomy
tumor samples (n=14) with matched adjacent non tumor tissues were
collected and analyzed for HDAC6 expression by Western blot analysis.
HDAC6 expression was also assessed in C2, C2VHL and 786-O ccRCC cell
lines by Western blot and immunofluorescence analysis. HDAC6 and ER-
colocalization was examined by immunoprecipitation and
immunofluorescence. HDAC 6 was overexpressed in cell lines and
investigated for cell motility by scratch assay. Cell lines were also
treated with hydroxy tamoxifen in short term (4 hours) and long term (24,
48 and 72 hours) culture experiments for evaluation of effects on
acetylated -tubulin and cell proliferation, respectively. Results:
Analysis of matched patient tumor samples revealed that a subset of ccRCC
had higher HDAC6 expression as compared to the adjacent non tumor tissue.
HDAC6 and ER- examined in ccRCC tumors (n=44) by immunofluorescence
showed overexpression in 10% of tumor samples. Immunoprecipitation of
HDAC 6 in ccRCC cell lines showed that ER- is present in the same complex
as HDAC 6 as confirmed also by fluorescence microscopy. HDAC6
overexpression in ccRCC cell lines increased cell motility, although
overexpression did not affect cell proliferation. Cells treated for short
term experiments with hydroxy tamoxifen showed an increase in acetylated
-tubulin when examined by immunofluorescence. Upon long term hydroxy
tamoxifen treatment in regular DMEM medium with serum, ccRCC cell
proliferation was affected at high concentrations (10-20M), similar to
MCF 7 cells treated under similar conditions. Conclusions: HDAC 6 and ER-
are overexpressed in a subset of ccRCC. HDAC6 overexpression affects cell
motility but not proliferation. HDAC6 and ER- are present in the same
immunocomplex and this association may be targeted with therapeutic
interventions. Ongoing studies are testing concomitant, either genetic or
pharmacological, inhibition of both HDAC6 and ER- in ccRCC and will
provide the rationale for novel targeted therapies for a selected group
of patients with ccRCC.

