Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of non-coding RNA in regulation of stemness and
differentiation via notch signaling pathway in glioblastoma


Multiple distinct subpopulations of cancer cells within tumors may derive
from a limited source of cancer cells, called cancer stem cells (CSCs),
which may have plasticity and respond to signals from their
microenvironment. Recent studies demonstrated the fundamental roles of
long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) in various biological processes. Here, we
investigated the roles of lncRNA in glioma stem cells (GSCs)
differentiation. Whole-genome RNA sequencing revealed that 180 and 171
lncRNAs were commonly upregulated and downregulated with a greater than
2-fold difference in GSC differentiation, respectively. Among those,
linc-A was consistently downregulated during GSC differentiation. Linc-A,
of which expression is regulated by the Notch signaling pathway,
physically interacted with polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and
conferred a recruitment of PRC2 and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3) in its target loci. An RNA pull-down assay revealed that
linc-A specifically bound to a number of neuronal
differentiation-associated genes in GSC. These target genes were
consistently silenced in GSCs. Inhibition of linc-A using antisense
oligonucleotide reduced the H3K27me3 level and increased expression of
its target genes, resulted in loss of stemness and induction of GSC
differentiation into neuronal lineage. Intriguingly, in silico analysis
revealed that linc-A shared a sequence of microRNA-response element (MRE)
with mRNAs of stemness markers, such as MYC, SOX2, and NANOG. Indeed,
downregulation of linc-A increased the miR-X expression together with
repression of its target genes, MYC, SOX2, and NANOG, being consistent
with an RNA sponge mechanism, in which lncRNAs contain complementary
binding sites (MRE) to a miRNA of interest and prevent these mRNAs from
degradation. Our data indicated that linc-A plays consistent roles in
modulation of stemness properties in GSC in response to Notch-epigenetic
regulatory pathway.

