Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ras and EF-hand domain containing as a novel tissue biomarker and
a therapeutic target for lung cancer


Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related death in the world
and its incidence has been increasing. The number of patients responding
well to current standard therapies is still small, therefore further
development of new agents targeting cancer-specific molecules with no or
minimum risk of adverse effect is urgently awaited. To screen molecules,
particularly oncoantigens which could be useful for the development of
diagnostic biomarkers and new drugs, we have established an effective
screening strategy as follows; i) To identify up-regulated genes in 120
lung cancers by genome-wide screening using the cDNA microarray
representing 27,648 genes and pure populations of tumor cells taken from
cancer tissues by laser microdissection, ii) To verify the candidate
genes for their very low or absent expression in normal tissues by
northern-blot analyses, iii) To validate the clinicopathological
significance of their expression with tissue microarray containing
hundreds of archived lung cancers, iv) To verify whether the target genes
are essential for the growth or survival of cancer cells by RNAi and cell
growth assays. As a result of this process, we identified 40 druggable
oncoproteins. We further identified the Ras and EF-hand domain containing
(RASEF), which contains a Rab GTPase domain and is considered as a member
of Rab GTPase protein family. Immunohistochemical staining using tumor
tissue microarrays consisting of 341 archived non-small cell lung cancers
revealed the association of strong RASEF positivity with poor prognosis
(P = 0.0034 by multivariate analysis). Reduction in RASEF expression by
siRNA suppressed lung cancer cell proliferation, while induction of RASEF
conferred growth-promoting activity of mammalian cells. RASEF could bind
to extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 and appeared to
enhance the ERK1/2 signaling. In addition, inhibition of interaction
between RASEF and ERK1/2 using cell-permeable peptide that corresponded
to the ERK1/2-interacting site of RASEF protein, suppressed growth of
lung cancer cells. RASEF may play important roles in lung carcinogenesis,
and could be useful as a prognostic biomarker and a target for the
development of new molecular therapies.

