Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Meiosis activating sterols counteract KRas-driven epithelial
carcinogenesis via an LXR-dependent mechanism


Sterols are structural components of lipid membranes which can exert
potent biological activities by regulating cell surface receptor
trafficking and stability. Arrest of the sterol pathway at the level of
SC4MOL (sterol C4-methyl oxydase-like) or NSDHL (NADPH-dependent steroid
dehydrogenase-like) specifically antagonizes signaling and trafficking of
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (Sukhanova, 2013). SC4MOL and
NSDHL catalyze two sequential steps of oxidative decarboxylation of the
C4-methyl groups of meiosis activating sterols (MAS). The protein binding
MAS has not been identified. We investigated whether the anti-EGFR
activities of MAS metabolites are mediated via their interaction with the
Liver X Receptor (LXR) so that LXR and its transcriptional targets induce
subsequent deregulation of intracellular cholesterol homeostasis.In
EGFR-positive carcinoma cell, inhibition of SC4MOL or NSDHL induces
upregulation of two canonical LXR targets: the ATP-binding cassette
transporter A1 and G1 (ABCA1 and ABCG1). In keeping with the LXR
activation, expression of low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) is
markedly reduced in SC4MOL or NSDHL-deficient cells. These effects were
completely reversible with inactivation of LXR alpha, or via inactivation
of an upstream enzyme, CYP51A1, which eliminated MAS. Inactivation of
SC4MOL and NSDHL sterol pathway enzymes and upregulation of cholesterol
efflux via ABCA1 depleted cholesterol from cellular membranes as
evidenced by marked increase of nuclear form of SREBP2. Direct
manipulation of SREBP, LXR or LDLR produced concordant synergistic
effects with anti-EGFR drugs in carcinoma cell lines suggesting novel
combinatorial strategies to treat EGFR-positive carcinomas.In in vivo
experiments, SC4MOL or NSDHL-depleted A431 carcinoma xenografts showed
exquisite sensitivity to cetuximab. This phenotype was associated with
upregulation of LXR target ABCA1 and loss of LDLR. Conditional
inactivation of a floxed Nsdhl allele via K14-Cre transgene triggered
ABCA1 expression in the skin, arrested keratinocytes proliferation and
caused lethality in newborn male pups. The anti-proliferative effect of
NSDHL deficiency was tested in vivo against KRAS-driven tumors. Skin
tumors induced by KRAS in transgenic LSL-KRasG12D mice are
EGFR-dependent. Tamoxifen-inducible Tg(K5-CreERTam) mice were crossed
with LSL-KRasG12D;NsdhlloxP/loxP and tumors induced by oral tamoxifen
administration. Both, NsdhlloxP/Y (NSDHL-null) males carrying only the
floxed allele and NsdhlloxP/+ heterozygous mosaic females formed skin
tumors at similar rate. However, the growth of tumors in NSDHL-null males
was completely abrogated. In sum, specific sterol metabolites play a
fundamental role in regulating activity of oncogenic EGFR. Inhibition of
SC4MOL or NSDHL is a highly effective strategy to counteract oncogenic
signaling in carcinomas with activated EGFR-KRAS axis.

