Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of DDB2 enhances the tumorigenicity of ovarian cancer cells
through expanding cancer stem-like cell population


Ovarian cancer is an extremely aggressive disease associated with a high
percentage of recurrence and chemotherapy resistance. DNA damage binding
protein 2 (DDB2) is a 48-kDa protein originally identified as a component
of the damage-specific DNA-binding heterodimeric complex DDB. Besides the
known ability of DDB2 protein to bind ultraviolet (UV)-damaged DNA and
serving as the initial damage recognition factor during nucleotide
excision repair (NER), DDB2 was also reported to be involved in the
promotion of apoptosis to reduce cisplatin resistance of ovarian cancer
cells, control of cell migration, invasiveness and breast tumor
progression, as well as suppression of metastasis of colon cancer through
a transcriptional regulatory mechanism. Here we show that DDB2 is
downregulated in human ovarian serous adenocarcinomas. DDB2
overexpression in human ovarian cancer cell line CP70 suppressed its
capability to recapitulate tumors in athymic nude mice, as well as the
growth of these cells cultured in semisolid media. Flow cytometry
analyses indicate that DDB2 overexpression in CP70 cells reduced the
abundance of ALDH+ cells, which are believed to be cancer stem-like cells
(CSCs) in ovarian cancer. In contrast, downregulation of DDB2 in ovarian
cancer cell line A2780 increased the percentage of ALDH+ cells. In
addition, we analyzed the expression level of DDB2 in the putative CSCs
isolated from various ovarian cancer cell lines, and demonstrated that
DDB2 expression is downregulated in all tested CSCs in comparison with
their parental bulk tumor cells. Overexpression of DDB2 in the ovarian
CSCs reduced the expression of CSC marker Nanog, as well as inhibited the
self-renewal of these CSCs. In addition, overexpression of DDB2 in CSCs
isolated from ovarian cancer cell line SKOV-3 also decreased the
tumorigenicity of these cells in NOD/SCID mice. Further analysis of
publicly available gene expression array datasets revealed that low DDB2
expression correlates with poor outcomes among ovarian cancer patients,
suggesting that loss of DDB2 may promote ovarian tumor relapse through
expanding CSC population. Given that the DDB2 protein level is
downregulated in ovarian tumor cells, targeting DDB2 expression could be
a promising strategy to eradicate CSCs, and helps to halt ovarian cancer
relapse. (Supported by NIH R01 grant CA151248 to QEW)

