Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch signaling is regulated by vacuolar ATPase in triple negative
breast cancer


Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) constitutes 15 % of all diagnosed
breast cancers. It is more common among African American and younger
women. TNBC cells do not express Estrogen, Progesterone and Her2
receptors. As a result, patients have limited treatment options. To
effectively treat TNBC, it is important to identify and target specific
signaling pathways that contribute to TNBC tumorigenesis.Notch signaling
is an evolutionarily conserved juxtacrine pathway that is important in
normal mammary development and has been shown to play a role in TNBC
progression. Although there has been considerable research on role of
Notch in TNBC, little is known about its regulation. Identifying novel
molecules that can regulate Notch can lead to the development of
effective combinatorial treatments.The Vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) has
been shown to regulate Notch Signaling in Drosophila. V-ATPase is an ATP
driven proton pump, which is responsible for maintaining pH. Tumor cells
increase expression of V-ATPase, which aids in cancer proliferation and
metastasis.Here, we report that the a2 isoform of V-ATPase regulates
Notch Signaling in breast cancer. Among isoforms a1, a2, a3 and a4,
breast cancer cell lines robustly expressed a2 V-ATPase on their surface.
a2 V-ATPase is present towards the leading edge of cells and is higher in
TNBC cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468) as compared to normal chemically
transformed cell line (184A1) and hormonal positive cell line (MCF7).
Expression of Notch ligands, receptors and target genes was also higher
in TNBC cell lines as compared to Non-TNBC cell lines. siRNA mediated
knockdown of a2 V-ATPase resulted in an increase of Notch Signaling in
the Triple Negative MDA-MB-231 cell line. To understand the molecular
mechanism behind this regulation, we used Bafilomycin to inhibit V-ATPase
activity. Following V-ATPase inhibition, the expression of Jagged1, a
Notch ligand was increased. Our results suggest that Vacuolar ATPase can
regulate Notch Signaling by affecting ligand internalization through
endocytosis. We further assessed the effect of V-ATPase and Notch
signaling inhibitors on cell proliferation of the breast cancer cell
lines (184A1, MCF7, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468). Combined inhibition of
V-ATPase and Notch signaling caused significant cell death in all cell
lines tested. Together our results identify a2 V-ATPase as a novel
regulator of Notch signaling in Breast Cancer and that targeting both
V-ATPase and Notch Signaling can be beneficial for Triple Negative Breast
Cancer.

