Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of germline and somatic variants in renal
clear cell carcinoma


Each year in the United States, there are approximately 54,000 new cases
of kidney and upper urinary tract cancers and 13,000 deaths. Renal clear
cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer comprising
more than 75% of cases. It is known that certain genetic syndromes
strongly increase risk for renal cell carcinoma including Von Hippel
Lindau disease (VHL) that is caused by germline mutations in the VHL
tumor suppressor gene. However, there are a large number of cases with
familial RCC that are not explained by germline VHL mutations. Publically
available data generated through large scale genomic sequencing projects
such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) provides new opportunities for
identifying both known and novel germline cancer susceptibility variants.
Moreover, the availability of matched tumor and normal genomic sequencing
data from cancer patients (including RCCC) through TCGA allows for
integrated analyses of germline and somatic interactions. Toward this
end, we analyzed the TCGA exome sequencing data from 499 RCC cases. We
employed GATK, VarScan, and Pindel tools to identify germline single
nucleotide variants and indels and identified 10,492 candidate germline
rare truncation variants (X truncation variants were in cancer genes).
All the truncation candidates in commonly mutated cancer driver genes
were manually reviewed, resulting in a total of 119 high confidence
germline truncation variants in cancer genes. To date, we have identified
one nonsense mutation in the VHL gene. In addition, there was one
nonsense mutation and a frame-shift deletion in WRN and a nonsense and a
splice-site mutation in BAP1, a recently identified RCC predisposition
gene. Moreover, we also identified 6,079 candidate missense variants in
known cancer driver genes, among a total of 179,066 rare missense
variants. Future directions for this project will be to use the burden
analysis to determine genes with significant enrichment for deleterious
variants. We will also examine loss of heterozygosity patterns to
evaluate germline somatic interactions.

