Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNPs in UDP-glucuronosyltransferase1A4 (UGT1A4) and multidrug
resistant protein (MRP) and their influence on anastrozole metabolism and
disposition


Anastrozole is an aromatase inhibitor (AI) used as adjuvant therapy for
breast cancer. Anastrozole belongs to the non-steroidal
triazole-derivative group of AIsand is predominantly metabolized by Phase
I oxidation followed by other Phase II reactions, including
glucuronidation. Anastrozole is also subject to direct glucuronidation
catalyzed by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase1A4 (UGT1A4). We have
demonstrated a significant association between expression levels of the
drug transporter genes MRP2 and MRP3 and anastrozole glucuronidation. We
hypothesized that genetic variability in UGT1A4 and MRPs could influence
anastrozole metabolism and disposition.Using normal human liver samples
obtained from the Cooperative Human Tissue Network, we analyzed the
correlation of UGT1A4, MRP2 and MRP3 mRNA and protein expression levels
with anastrozole glucuronidation. UGT1A4 and MRP2 mRNA and protein
expression levels were significantly correlated with anastrozole
gucuronidation (pAnastrozole is an aromatase inhibitor (AI) used as
adjuvant therapy for breast cancer. Anastrozole belongs to the
non-steroidal triazole-derivative group of AIsand is predominantly
metabolized by Phase I oxidation followed by other Phase II reactions,
including glucuronidation. Anastrozole is also subject to direct
glucuronidation catalyzed by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase1A4 (UGT1A4). We
have demonstrated a significant association between expression levels of
the drug transporter genes MRP2 and MRP3 and anastrozole glucuronidation.
We hypothesized that genetic variability in UGT1A4 and MRPs could
influence anastrozole metabolism and disposition.Using normal human liver
samples obtained from the Cooperative Human Tissue Network, we analyzed
the correlation of UGT1A4, MRP2 and MRP3 mRNA and protein expression
levels with anastrozole glucuronidation. UGT1A4 and MRP2 mRNA and protein
expression levels were significantly correlated with anastrozole
gucuronidation (p<0.05). Further, we examined the correlation of UGT1A4
and MRP2 SNPs with anastrozole glucuronidation. We observed a significant
correlation (pA, -217T>G, -219C>T) and MRP2 SNPs (3563T>A, 4430C>T and
-24C>T) with anastrozole glucuronidation (Table 1).These data indicate
that UGT1A4 and MRP2 SNPs could interact to influence anastrozole
metabolism and disposition. Pharmacogenetic studies are needed to
elucidate the role of UGT1A4 and MRP2 SNPs in the inter-individual
variability in anastrozole metabolism and disposition, as well as the
overall efficacy of anastrozole treatment.Table 1


