Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRAF2 regulates Rab5-dependent endocytic trafficking of EGFR in
neuroblastoma


Receptor tyrosine kinases, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), mediate extracellular signaling that activates downstream cell
proliferation, differentiation, and migration. Through ligand
stimulation, clathrin-mediated endocytosis regulates the EGFR signal
transduction pathway. Prenylated Rab acceptor 1 domain family, membrane 2
(PRAF2) is a novel 19-kDa protein with a prenylated Rab acceptor 1 (PRA1)
motif and four transmembrane-spanning domains. Similar to PRAF1 and
PRAF3, PRAF2 belongs to the PRAF family of vesicle transport-associated
proteins. Our lab identified PRAF2 as a candidate prognostic marker of
neuroblastic tumors. Using RNA interference, we showed that PRAF2 plays
an essential role in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis and metastasis. In the
present study, we examined the function of PRAF2 in EGFR endocytic
trafficking. We generated stable PRAF2-knockdown (SK-shPRAF2) and
PRAF2-overexpressing (SK-PRAF2) neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cell lines and
stimulated both cell lines with EGF (10 ng/ml) for various time periods
in order to determine the role of PRAF2 in EGFR endocytic trafficking. As
judged by immunofluorescence microscopy, we detected larger Rab5-positive
punctuate structures in PRAF2-overexpressing SK-PRAF2 cells compared to
PRAF2-knockdown SK-shPRAF2 cells or control cells, after 15 min EGF
stimulation. After EGF treatment, PRAF2 clearly colocalized with
Rab5-positive punctae in SK-PRAF2 cells, suggesting that PRAF2 interacts
with Rab5, a critical regulator for receptor endocytosis and early
endosome fusion. Moreover, using a receptor internalization assay, we
observed a delay in the internalization of EGFR in EGF-treated SK-shPRAF2
cells, in contrast to SK-PRAF2 and control cells. This is in support of
our immunofluorescence microscopy results in which Rab5-postive punctae
distribution is observed mostly along the membrane of the EGF-treated
SK-shPRAF2 cells. Notably, the level of phosphorylation of Akt (Ser473)
transiently elevated in EGF-treated SK-PRAF2 cells after 15 min and
diminished thereafter, suggesting that overexpression of PRAF2
accelerates the EGFR internalization and degradation. Based on our
findings, we propose that PRAF2 affects EGFR endocytosis by regulating
early endosome trafficking and Akt activation in neuroblastoma.

