Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic combination of Trabectedin and Olaparib in breast
cancer tumor cell lines


Trabectedin (Yondelis, ET-743) is a marine-derived antitumor agent that
is currently used for the treatment of sarcoma and, in combination with
pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin, of platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer
patients. After binding to the DNA minor groove, trabectedin induces a
potent transcription inhibition on tumor cells and tumor-associated
macrophages. The resolution of functional DNA adducts generated by the
drug is known to occur through the coordinated action of multiple DNA
repair pathways, including homologous recombination (HR), a process that
gives rise to double-strand breaks (DSBs). Trabectedin treatment at
nanomolar concentrations does indeed produce a high proportion of
DSB-positive tumor cells with abundant -H2AX foci and an S-phase
delay/arrest by activation of the DNA replication checkpoints. We had
previously shown the synergism (CI Trabectedin (Yondelis, ET-743) is a
marine-derived antitumor agent that is currently used for the treatment
of sarcoma and, in combination with pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin, of
platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer patients. After binding to the DNA
minor groove, trabectedin induces a potent transcription inhibition on
tumor cells and tumor-associated macrophages. The resolution of
functional DNA adducts generated by the drug is known to occur through
the coordinated action of multiple DNA repair pathways, including
homologous recombination (HR), a process that gives rise to double-strand
breaks (DSBs). Trabectedin treatment at nanomolar concentrations does
indeed produce a high proportion of DSB-positive tumor cells with
abundant -H2AX foci and an S-phase delay/arrest by activation of the DNA
replication checkpoints. We had previously shown the synergism (CI < 1)
of the combination of Trabectedin with Olaparib (AZD-2281) in the breast
cancer cell lines HCC-1937, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-436. In this
work we have investigated the mechanism of this synergistic effect at the
molecular level. While the treatment with either compound alone (0.05 nM
Trabectedin or 5 M Olaparib for 72 hours) induced only a mild
antiproliferative effect, the combination of both compounds at the
mentioned concentrations induced strong apoptosis in all the breast
cancer cell lines. Exposure to 0.5 and 2.5 nM Trabectedin for 72 hours
induced a clear accumulation of -H2AX foci. Exposure to Olaparib alone
induced only a mild DNA damage at 72 hours with all the concentrations
tested. Olaparib induced a clear inhibition of PARylation at
concentrations from 1-2.5 M of the compound. The combination of both
drugs, keeping Olaparib at 5 M and varying the concentrations of
Trabectedin from 0.05 to 2.5 nM, demonstrated a synergistic effect on the
accumulation of histone H2AX phosphorylation, as analyzed both by western
blotting and immunofluorescence microscopy. When comparing all these
results, it was clearly seen that, although Trabectedin or Olaparib
generated a considerable amount of DSBs, the combination of both drugs
induced a higher proportion of DNA damage that remained at very high
levels even after 72 hours of treatment. Thus, the observed synergistic
effect seems to be the result of higher accumulation of DSBs after the
administration of the combination of Trabectedin with Olaparib.

