Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-suppressive microRNA-29a inhibits cancer cell migration and
invasion via targeting HSP47 in cervical squamous cell carcinoma


BACKGROUNDS: Cervical cancer is the second most common cause of cancer
death in women worldwide, and approximately 500,000 new cases of cervical
cancer are diagnosed each year, with 280,000 deaths. Cervical squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most frequent type of cervical cancer and the
most important risk factor for cervical-SCC is persistent human papilloma
virus (HPV) infection. However, the molecular mechanisms of cervical SCC
initiation, development, and metastasis have not yet been fully
elucidated. Our recent studies of microRNA (miRNA) expression signatures
have indicated that miRNA-29a (miR-29a) was significantly downregulated
in several types of human cancers, suggesting that miR-29a may be a
putative tumor-suppressive miRNA in human cancers. The aim of this study
was to investigate the functional significance of miR-29a in cervical
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and to identify novel miR-29a-regulated
cancer pathways and target genes involved in cervical SCC oncogenesis and
metastasis.METHODS: The expression levels of miR-29a were validated using
real-time RT-PCR using cervical SCC clinical specimens and cell lines
(CaSKi, HeLa, ME180, and YUMOTO). Cell proliferation, migration and
invasion assays were performed to investigate the functional significance
of miR-29a and its target gene, heat-shock protein 47 (HSP47) in cell
lines. Cells were transfected with mature miR-29a or si-HSP47 by reverse
transfection methods. Genome-wide gene expression data and in silico
analysis were used to identify the molecular pathways and putative
targets regulated by miR-29a. The luciferase reporter assay was applied
to identify the actual binding site of miR-29a in target gene. The
expression of HSP47 was investigated by immunohistochemistry.RESULTS:
Restoration of miR-29a in cervical cancer cell lines revealed that this
miRNA significantly inhibited cancer cell migration and invasion. Gene
expression data and in silico analysis demonstrated that HSP47 was a
potential target of miR-29a regulation. Luciferase reporter assays showed
that miR-29a directly regulated HSP47. Moreover, silencing of the HSP47
gene significantly inhibited cell migration and invasion in cancer cells,
and the expression of HSP47 was upregulated in cancer tissues and
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), as demonstrated by
immunostaining.CONCLUSIONS: Downregulation of miR-29a was a frequent
event in cervical SCC, and miR-29a acted as a tumor suppressor by
directly targeting HSP47. Recognition of tumor-suppressive
miRNA-regulated molecular targets provides new insights into the
potential mechanisms of cervical SCC oncogenesis and metastasis and
suggests novel therapeutic strategies for treatment of this disease.

