Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug set enrichment analysis : A computational approach to
identify functional drug sets


Most drug-testing approaches published so far focus on identifying a
single drug that shows favorable response and is associated with a known
cancer biomarker such as the drug Imatinib in BCR-ABL gene fusion
positive cells. We developed and applied drug set enrichment analysis
(DSEA) to find enriched patterns or statistically significant
similarities (overlaps) between the drug responses of a test sample
against a cohort of 182 previously screened cancer samples. The samples
studied included established (ATCC) cancer cell lines, drug-resistant
cancer cell models, ex-vivo patient cancer cells in primary cultures,
including conditionally reprogrammed cancer cells from patients. DSEA is
adopting Gene Set Enrichment Analysis statistics commonly used for gene
expression analysis to high throughput drug testing data. Our drug
screening (Pemovska et al., Cancer Discovery, 2013) was done with a panel
of 306 established (FDA-approved) and emerging targeted cancer drugs such
as tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (e.g. EGFR, PDGFR, BRAF, MET), S/T-type
inhibitors, (e.g. MEK, Plk1, Akt, Aurora, Chk1), and inhibitors of other
pathways (HDACs, Hh, BCL2, PI3K, PARP) and many others. The readout was
based on viability of cells after a 72 hour culture.The DSEA approach is
based on taking the top most sensitive drugs (above a defined sensitivity
score cut-off) in an individual cancer sample and then identifying
overlapping drug response profiles in previously screened reference
samples. Our hypothesis is that the most sensitive drug sets in any given
sample tend to show similar response profiles in a cohort of similar
samples. We convey the correlations and drug set enrichment analysis
results as dendrogram trees, plots and tables with enrichment and
significance scores.Interestingly, our results show that clustering of
drug sensitivity testing data does not place all cancer cell line samples
within well-established subgroups based on biological features or
histological origin. We find a similar tendency in ex vivo patient
samples. Therefore, comprehensive drug response profiles seen may reveal
novel biological data that reflect pharmacologically-relevant, phenotypic
cancer cell states. DSEA could also provide novel means to subtype
previously poorly characterized cancer samples based on their drug
response profiles and thereby in the future facilitate the choice of
therapies to patients whose cancers repond in an atypical way as compared
to the expectations based on anatomical origin or genomic composition.

