Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in Nrdp1 regulation of ErbB3 in androgen-dependent vs.
independent prostate cancer


In prostate cancer, the androgen receptor (AR) is a major regulator of
gene transcription. We previously demonstrated that the E3 ubiquitin
ligase Nrdp1 is transcriptionally regulated by the AR [Chen, L., Cancer
Res, 2010]. The effect of the AR on ErbB3 is mediated by Nrdp1, which
regulates the degradation of ErbB3. Therefore, we investigated the
function of the various domains of Nrdp1 on ErbB3 in prostate cancer.
ErbB3 is a major factor in cell growth and proliferation so finding ways
to regulate it would be beneficial for patient survival. We found that
the Nrdp1 protein had two splice variants, a full length 36kDa protein
and a C-terminal 28kDa protein. In addition, the full-length protein
remained in the cytoplasm of LNCaP cells, which are androgen dependent,
while the 28kDa protein went into the nucleus of C4-2 cells, an androgen
independent subline of LNCaP cells. To further investigate the
subcellular difference and role of these two splice variants on ErbB3, we
used 4 flag tagged vectors that contain either full-length Nrdp1 (Nrdp1),
an N-terminal Nrdp1 containing amino acids 1-169 (Zn), a C-terminal Nrdp1
containing amino acids 169-317 (32) , and an Nrdp1 lacking the coiled
coil domain (CC). We found that the CC vector caused an increase of cell
proliferation in LNCaP cells, an androgen dependent cell line, with no to
little change in cell proliferation in its androgen independent sub cell
lines, LNCaP R273H (LNCaP stably transfected with a mutated p53), C4-2,
and C4-2B, and PC3 and PC3 WT-AR cells. Despite this, we found that the
CC protein caused a decrease of ErbB3 protein in all cell lines. We also
performed subcellular fractionation on these cell lines transfected with
the Nrdp1 flag vectors. All of the Nrdp1 proteins were found in the
cytoplasm of the cell lines. In addition, the CC protein was also found
in the nuclear fraction of LNCaP R273H, C4-2, and C4-2B, while in LNCaP
cells the Zn protein was also found in the nuclear fraction and in PC3
cells the 32 protein was also found in the nuclear fraction. In LNCaP
cells, ErbB3 was found in the nucleus when transfected with Nrdp1
protein, Zn protein, and 32 protein, but found in the cytoplasm when
transfected with the CC protein. However, in LNCaP R273H, C4-2, and C4-2B
cell lines, ErbB3 was found in the nucleus when transfected with all of
the Nrdp1 vectors. Based on available data, we concluded that the coiled
coil domain is important for ErbB3 protein regulation, but it had
opposing effects in castration sensitive and resistant cells. In
castration sensitive LNCaP cells, the coiled coil domain of Nrdp1 likely
suppresses ErbB3-mediated cell proliferation by preventing ErbB3
translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. However, in castration
resistant cells, the coiled coil domain prevents the degradation of ErbB3
by Nrdp1. Further studies are required to determine the mechanism of
action of the Nrdp1 coiled coil domain in these two phenotypes.

