Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolution of preleukemia stem cells to lymphoma initiating cells
requires thymus in msh2-/- mice


Thymic lymphomas have been thought to develop from disregulated
differentiation and proliferation of developing thymocytes. T cell
progenitors are generated from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the
bone marrow (BM). Recent evidence strongly suggests that whereas
transformation events may occur at different developmental stages, the
initial mutation originates in the HSCs, and creates a preleukemic stem
cell (PLSC). Subsequent mutations at either stem cell or progenitor cell
levels would transform the PLSC into lymphoma/leukemia initiating cells
(LIC). Maturation and proliferation of T cells depend on regulatory
mechanisms in the thymus where the T-progenitors must interact with the
microenvironment. Here we investigate the requirement of thymus
environment for lymphoma development.Defects in the mismatch repair
system (MMR) underlie hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer
(HNPCC)/Lynch syndrome. Individuals with no MMR function present with
childhood onset of hematological and brain malignancies. Mice carrying a
null allele for the MMR gene, Msh2, are preferentially prone to develop
thymic lymphomas and to a lesser extent, gastrointestinal tumors.
Consistent with these findings in mice, MMR defects have also been
observed in sporadic and hereditary hematological malignancies. In this
study, we use MSH2-/- mice as a model to investigate the existence of
PLSC and the evolution of PLSC to LIC.Using bone marrow transplantation,
we found that limiting dilutions of MSH2-/- HSCs from young mice are able
to reconstitute lethally irradiated wild-type recipients, and contribute
to development of multiple hematopoietic lineages. However, all the
recipients develop thymic lymphomas after a latency of 3-4 months post
transplantation. Transplantation of different fractions of bone marrow
cells or thymocytes from young MSH2-/- mice showed that only the HSC
enriched fraction leads to lymphoma development. The lymphomas are
transplantable, limiting dilution experiments showed that even 40
lymphoma cells could initiate T cell leukemia in sublethally irradiated
secondary recipients within a month. In contrast, transplantation of the
HSC enriched LSK fraction from the BM of lymphoma bearing mice into
secondary recipients resulted in thymic lymphomas after a latency of 5
months. However, lymphoma development following transplant of HSC
required an intact thymus and was not observed for more than 9 months if
recipients were thymectomized, whereas this stromal requirement was not
observed when transplanting T cell leukemicthymic lymphoma cells.These
results suggested that MSH2-/- HSCs are PLSCs. While they retain full
hematopoietic potential, their T-cell progeny gain lymphomagenic
potential in the thymic microenvironment and become LICs. In this model,
the evolution from PLSC to LIC is stromal-dependent.

