Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinctive roles of Smad3 C-tail and linker phosphorylation
between cancer progression and suppression in TGF-beta1/Smad3 signal


Transforming growth factor B1 (TGF-B) is the prototype of a large family
of pleiotropic polypeptide cytokines that regulate a multitude of
physiological functions. The ability of TGF-B1/Smad3 signal to inhibit
proliferation of epithelial, neuronal and hematopoietic cells from which
most human neoplasms originate suggests a role of TGF-B in tumor
suppression. Smad3, a key transcription factor in TGF-B signaling,
functions as both a positive and negative regulator in carcinogenesis.
TGF-B induces phosphorylation of Smad3 C-terminal SXS motif in its
canonical pathway as well as the serine/threonine residues in the linker
region. The linker region has been known to contain multiple
phosphorylation sites for proline-directed kinases such as CDK, c-Jun,
p38 MAPK, Erk and GSK-3B. Here we present that the blockade of Smad3
C-terminal phosphorylation by adenoviral dominant-negative mutant
promotes tumorigenesis, but markedly inhibits metastasis to the lung as
induced by tail-vein injection and orthotopic transplant of human and
mouse breast cancer cell lines. Conversely, mutation of Smad3 linker
phosphorylation sites greatly suppresses tumorigenesis, while it enhances
metastatic dissemination to the lung. In vitro study revealed that the
Smad3 linker region is constitutively phosphorylated in the cancer cells,
and that the mutation of Smad3 linker phosphorylation sites enhances the
TGF-B1-induced EMT, growth arrest and apoptosis, suggesting that the
canonical TGF-B1 signal mediated through C-tail phosphorylation is
modulated by negative inputs from the linker phosphorylation.
Furthermore, the blockade of linker phosphorylation reduces the stem cell
population following suppression of mammosphere formation and
downregulation of embryonic transcription factors including Oct4, NANOG
and Sox-2, and induces apoptosis by repressing an antiapoptotic protein
Bcl-2, suggesting that the Smad3 linker phosphorylation retains function
for the maintenance of cancer stemness and survival. These results
indicate that oncogenic and cancer-suppressive TGF-B1/Smad3 signals are
regulated by the site-specific phosphorylation of Smad3 protein,
imparting a new aspect to anti-cancer therapies that target the TGF-B
signal pathway.This work was supported by a National Research Foundation
grant of Korea (2009-0081756) funded by the Korea government.

