Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective biomarker study to demonstrate high MET expression
and gene amplification in a subset of patients with advanced gastric
cancer


Aim: To characterize molecular features of HGF-MET axis in patients (pts)
with advanced gastric cancer (GC).Methods: Pts with advanced GC
undergoing routine surgery for tumor staging or resection were studied.
Tumor specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin immediately.
Total (t)- and phosphorylated (p)-MET protein were assayed by IHC, and
MET gene copy number by FISH. Circulating tumor cells were enumerated by
CellSearch. Blood hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and shedMET levels were
measured at pre-, and post-operatively at 2 and 7 days, and 4 weeks.
Biomarkers were correlated with disease stage, tumor size,
histopathology, metastasis status, and overall-survival.Results: Forty
pts were enrolled from East Asian. The median age was 67 years (range,
31-86 years); 78% were male; 37 and 3 pts had stage III or IV disease,
respectively; tumor histopathology was poorly, moderately, or well
differentiated in 18, 17, and 4 samples, respectively (1 sample with
unknown status).Biomarker results were summarized in Table 1. Five out of
32 evaluable pts (15.6%) had MET gene amplification with amplified tumor
cells ranged from 14-100%.Pts who were p-MET positive tended to have
moderately differentiated tumors, larger tumor size (>5 cm), and distant
metastasis compared with pts who were negative. Pts with MET gene
amplification appeared to have distant metastasis, poor survival, and
elevated blood CEA levels. Elevated circulating HGF levels were
associated with larger tumor size (>5cm).Conclusions: In pts with
advanced GC, positive p-MET and MET gene amplification was associated
with larger tumor size, distant metastasis, and poor survival. These
results support using a molecular basis to identify a subset of pts
suitable for anti-MET therapy. This study is sponsored by Sanofi.Table 1:
1Among 100 nuclei counted, >10% tumor cells with MET gene copy number>4
and MET/CEP72; 2Pts having 50% tumor cells with membranous stain level 2;
3H-score 15 on membrane; 4HGF > 787 pg/mL.

