Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of acute and late radiotherapy effects using
genome-wide transcriptomics and quantitative proteomics


Pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells are critically involved in
development of radiation-induced acute inflammation and late fibrosis
often limiting the delivery of sufficient dose to optimally treat lung
cancer. Moreover, tumor-endothelium communication has emerged as a key
target to augment radiotherapy by resensitizing endothelial-specific
survival signals. Therefore, we aimed to employ high-throughput
genome-wide gene expression and whole proteome analysis to uncover the
molecular mechanisms governing tumor-vessel communication and
radiation-induced normal tissue toxicity.Human primary isolated pulmonary
microvascular endothelial cells (HPMEC) were irradiated with 0 or 6Gy.
Cells were harvested two hours (acute) and six days (late) after
irradiation and proteins as well as RNA were extracted. Gene expression
analysis was performed using 47k Illumina microarray (HumanHT-12 v4)
platform. Mass spectrometry on an LTQ-Orbitrap instrument was employed
for protein identification and relative quantification using label-free
quantification techniques. An IMAC/TiO2 enrichment step to obtain
phosphorylated peptides was carried out and analyzed by mass spectrometry
as well. The regulation of candidate radiation-regulated genes and
proteins were confirmed in-vitro and in irradiated lung specimen (C57BL/6
mouse) by real-time qRT-PCR, western blot and ELISA.At the early
timepoint a strong induction of genes involved in apoptosis and
DNA-damage response such as GADD45A, PARP3 and DDB2 was identified. In
contrast to the acute radiation response, cell adhesion (Integrins),
pro-inflammatory (Interleukines), pro-angiogenic and matrix-remodeling
related genes (MMPs, PDGFs, VEGFs) were induced late after irradiation.
Integrative analysis of protein quantification, phosphorylation and
gene-expression further revealed novel insights to an intricate
gene/protein regulatory network underlying late radiation response in
microvascular endothelium. The here identified genes and proteins
involved in late radiation response constitute attractive targets for
modulation of radiotherapy effects in tumor-endothelium or prevention of
undesired radiotherapy-induced late side effects.

