Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic reprogramming of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
triple-negative breast cancer cells with DNA methyltransferase and
histone deacetylase inhibitors


Incidence and mortality of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) are
increasing in women under the age of 40 who develop metastases in
response to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). The purpose
of this study is to determine if the process of EMT can be abrogated by
the use of DNA methytransferase (DNMT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors. For this purpose, we used two triple negative breast
epithelial cell lines which represent a basal breast cancer progression
model [Cancer Res 67 11147-11157, 2007]: 1) the trMCF cell line, which
was transformed from MCF10F cells by treatment with 70 nM 17--estradiol,
and 2) the bsMCF cell line, which was derived by Boyden chamber selection
of invaded trMCF cells. trMCF cells express E-cadherin, form ducts and
masses in 3D collagen matrix, and colonies in agar methocel, but are not
tumorigenic when injected in SCID mice. bsMCF cells express high levels
of vimentin, low levels of E-cadherin, are highly invasive, have lost
ductulogenic capacity in 3D collagen matrix, show high colony formation
in agar methocel, and are tumorigenic and metastatic when injected into
the tail vein of SCID mice. We tested two DNMT inhibitors: Decitabine
(DAC) and SGI-110 (SGI), and two HDAC inhibitors: Vorinostat (SAHA) and
JNJ-26481585 (JNJ) for four days on the trMCF and bsMCF cell lines. The
growth IC50 was calculated after four days of treatment using the MTT
assay. Then, cells treated with the IC50 dose were used for wound
healing, Matrigel invasion, 3D culture in collagen, and colony formation
assay in agar methocel. Changes of EMT markers were evaluated both by
immunocytochemical staining and Western blot analysis.The growth IC50
calculated by MTT assay were as follows: 300 nM for DAC in both cell
lines; 1000 nM for SGI in trMCF, 500 nM for SGI in bsMCF; 300 nM for SAHA
in trMCF, 700 nM for SAHA in bsMCF; 15 nM for JNJ in trMCF, and 25 nM for
JNJ in bsMCF. Our results revealed that DNMT inhibitor SGI-110 was the
best drug to reverse EMT of TNBC by inhibiting cell motility, invasion,
and colony formation in agar methocel, as well as promoting cell
differentiation by increasing the expression of E-cadherin, and down
regulation of vimentin, and SLUG. These results suggest that this new
generation of DNMT inhibitor is superior to previous DNMT and the HDAC
inhibitors tested. (This work was supported by The Pennsylvania Cancer
Cure Grant 6914101 and by NIH core grant CA06927 to Fox Chase Cancer
Center. The compound SGI-110 was provided by Astex Pharmaceutical, Inc.
Dublin CA).

