Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parameters influencing the design of mouse clinical trial
(HuTrialTM)


Patient derived xenograft (PDX or HuPrime) is believed to best mimic
original human cancers from which the models were derived. PDX becomes
popular to evaluate cancer drug for better predictive power. Cancers are
diverse for their molecular pathogenesis and different in response to
treatment. Multiple subjects are always needed in clinical evaluation,
which is also true in PDX. Mouse clinical trial (MCT), or HuTrialTM,
mimics phase II clinical trial, involving multiple subjects. MCT can be
used for drug position and biomarker discovery. A large number of PDXs
have been created globally from diverse cancer patients, enabling MCT.
MCT offers advantages over human trial: a) complex tests (e.g. new
agents, high dose, complex combinations, the same subject repeatedly, and
no need for early stop before completion,...) can readily be performed
with significant less regulatory constraints; b) any single subject can
be assigned to different treatment arms, enabling internal control and
enhancing statistic power; c) the endpoints can be objectively defined
and measured; d) healthy inbred mice can guarantee consistent drug
exposure, avoiding PK and/or other non-tumor related variations; and e)
the potential savings in later clinical trial due to reduction in size
and improving success.Randomized and controlled trial (RCT) with
statistic power, as a gold standard in the clinic, can also be applied in
MCT design and implementation, in order to enable reliable data analysis
and conclusion. In addition, the commonly used clinical endpoints can
also been tested in MCT, including Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors (RECIST: CR, PR, SD, PD) and survival (PFS, OS, HR, MST), besides
those commonly used in mouse study, e.g. T/C, TGI, etc. We have created a
large library of PDX models (1, 2), and also been testing them for drug
evaluation in a MCT format (2) for confirming indication and discovering
predictive biomarker. In this study, we have specifically compared the
clinic endpoint and the endpoints used in MCT, and also investigated the
potential parameters that can influence the study design by
retrospectively analyzing our historic MCT studies. Our result can help
us to design clinic-relevant endpoint and reveal the parameters
influencing trial data integrity: 1) # of models and # mice per arm
needed; 2) the potency of test article, as measured by hazard ratio or
HR, on mouse # requirement; 3) tumor growth rate on response (T/C) or on
survival endpoint (time to event). Our data so far seem to point to that
response endpoint are correlated with survival endpointin general. HR
seems not correlated with tumor growth rate. The smaller HR, the lower
the # mice per arm is needed. These observations can be useful in
facilitating future MCT design.References1. Yang et al. Int J Cancer.
2013;132:E74-84.2. Zhang et al. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2992.

