Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitogen activated protein kinase activated protein kinase 2 (MK2)
signaling in non-small cell lung carcinoma


Rationale: Apoptosis is a type of programmed cell death that occurs in
eukaryotic cells. Apoptosis is thought to be regulated by caspase 3
relocalization from the cytosol into the nucleus. Recent studies in our
laboratory have shown that MK2 is necessary for nuclear translocation of
caspase 3 during apoptosis. Furthermore, studies in lung cancer have
reported defective nuclear translocalization of caspase 3 in non-small
cell lung carcinoma as a potential mechanism of resistance to
apoptosis.Objective: We sought to determine if there is aberrant MK2
signaling in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and if this may play a
role in cleaved caspase 3 relocalization from the cytosol into the
nucleus, and thereby explaining the resistance of non-small cell lung
carcinoma to undergo apoptosis.Methods: We compared two lung cancer cell
lines, a non-small cell lung cancer cell line (H23 NSCLC) and a small
cell lung cancer cell line (H446 SCLC) and treated them with 3.0 ug/ml
etoposide for 24 hours. Etoposide is a topoisomerase inhibitor that was
used to induce apoptosis. After exposure to experimental conditions,
cells were lysed and proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting.Results: In
response to etoposide treatment for 24 hours, cleavage of caspase-3 was
observed in both H23 and H446 cell lines. An increase in cleavage of
ROCK1, a cytoplasmic substrate of caspase 3 was observed in both H23,
NSCLC, and H446, SCLC, cell lines. Cleavage of PARP was only observed in
the H446 SCLC cell line in response to etoposide whereas the H23 NSCLC
cell line exhibited no cleavage of PARP. A difference in the amount of
MK2 expression was also observed between the two cancer cell lines with
the H23 NSCLC cell line having the lower MK2 expression when compared
with the H446 SCLC cell line.Conclusion: Caspase 3 cleavage in both
cancer cell lines shows that the apoptotic machinery is active in both
the H23 NSCLC and H446 SCLC cell lines. The significant increase in
cleavage of ROCK1 in both H23 and H446 cell lines suggests that cleaved
caspase 3 is active in the cytosol in both cell lines. PARP is cleaved in
only the H446 SCLC cell line but not in H23 NSCLC cell line suggesting
that caspase 3 does not translocate from the cytosol into the nucleus in
the NSCLC cell line. The difference in the amount of MK2 expression
between the H23 and the H446 suggests that MK2 signaling may play a vital
role in relocalization of caspase 3 from the cytosol into the nucleus,
similar to our prior work. Further studies are needed in order to explain
the difference in the amount of MK2 expression between the two cancer
cell lines.

