Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of Vintafolide/MK-8109 monotherapy and in
combination with standard of care therapy in triple-negative breast
cancer models


Vintafolide (also known as EC145 or MK-8109), is a small molecule drug
conjugate for the treatment of cancers expressing high affinity folate
receptor (FR). Vintafolide consists of the anti-mitotic vinca alkaloid
desacetylvinblastine monohydrazide (DAVLBH) chemically linked to folic
acid. Binding of vintafolide to FR located on the cell surface delivers
the chemotherapy payload directly to the tumor cell. Clinical
investigations of vintafolide are underway in ovarian and lung cancer,
indications with a high prevalence of FR expression.Triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) may represent an additional indication for
vintafolide due to the prevalence of FR expression (30%), sensitivity to
vinca alkaloids, and unmet medical need. Vintafolide and/or DAVLBH were
evaluated in preclinical models of TNBC as monotherapies and in
combination with taxanes (paclitaxel or docetaxel). Taxanes represent a
commonly used standard of care therapy for TNBC. A panel of TNBC cell
lines was generally sensitive to DAVLBH, with IC50s ranging from 4-67 nM.
In the majority of cell lines tested, DAVLBH in combination with
paclitaxel provided combination benefit and induced more cell death than
either single agent.Vintafolide and DAVLBH were further evaluated in vivo
in the FR-high MDA-MB-231 and FR-low CAL51 TNBC xenograft models.
Vintafolide was dosed at its MTD of 9.6 mg/kg three times per week (TIW),
and at 1.5 mg/kg TIW. DAVLBH was dosed at its MTD of 0.77 mg/kg TIW. Mice
were dosed for 3 weeks followed by a 6 week follow-up. Both vintafolide
doses resulted in marked MDA-MB-231 tumor regressions of 56-78% at the
end of therapy (Day 21) and 75% cures (6 of 8 mice) over the 6 week
follow-up period. In the CAL51 model, vintafolide produced 8% and 76%
tumor growth inhibition (TGI), respectively, at the 1.5 and 9.6 mg/kg
doses, and no cures. DAVLBH was less efficacious compared to vintafolide,
giving 96% TGI in the MDA-MB-231 model and 46% TGI in the CAL51 model. In
mechanism of action studies in the MDA-MB-231 xenograft model, a dose of
vintafolide that gave tumor regressions/cures was associated with
increased phospho-histone H3 staining, indicative of a mitotic block of
tumor cells, and consistent with the mechanism of action of vinca
alkaloids.In combination therapy experiments in vivo, docetaxel (20 mg/kg
weekly) monotherapy achieved near tumor stasis (98% TGI) of MDA-MB-231
tumors over 3 weeks of therapy, but all tumors re-grew upon cessation of
treatment. Since vintafolide monotherapy at 1.5 mg/kg TIW gave
significant regressions and cures, a combination benefit with docetaxel
could not be determined. However, DAVLBH and docetaxel combination
therapy delayed tumor re-growth over single agents upon follow-up,
suggesting benefit of a vinca alkaloid / taxane combination. Taken
together, these preclinical data support further investigation of
vintafolide monotherapy and in combination with taxane therapy in TNBC.

