Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel susceptibility genes in familial gastric
cancer using next generation sequencing and identity-by-descent mapping


Gastric cancer is the second most common cause of cancer related deaths
worldwide, and approximately 10% of gastric cancer cases show familiar
clustering of the disease. It is crucial to identify genes that
predispose to familial gastric cancer because such families can undergo
screening and cancer risk-reduction approaches, such as prophylactic
gastrectomy. Furthermore, identification of new genes is also crucial to
advance our understanding of the molecular basis of tumorigenesis. Till
date, germline mutations in E-cadherin or CDH1 are the only known cause
of Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC), a form of familial gastric
cancer syndrome. However, CDH1 mutations explain only a subset of
familiar gastric cancer cases, indicating that many additional gastric
cancer genes are still to be identified. Identification of cancer genes
can be greatly facilitated if study samples are collected form isolated
populations. These populations have simpler environments and genetic
make-ups than that of large outbred groups and show larger founder
effects, which allows easier and more tractable gene mapping that can
later be portable in the worldwide population. In this study, we combine
exome sequencing and identity by descent (IBD) analysis to identify
novel, highly penetrant mutations in familial gastric cancer cases
recruited in closely related and neighboring isolated populations from
the Iberian Peninsula. We have already collected germline and tumor DNA
samples from gastric cancer cases that belong to 32 families from the
northwest regions of Portugal and Spain. All these cases and families are
CDH1 mutation negative, and thus, potentially harbor mutations in unknown
genes. We have completed exome sequencing of 16 of the index cases, and
our preliminary data analysis has identified several interesting
mutations that are in the phase of validation. Moving forward, we plan to
complete exome sequencing of the remaining index cases as well as
selected relatives from these families and validate mutations in a larger
gastric cancer sample set. We will also be performing exome sequencing on
tumor DNA that will enable us to identify loss of heterozygocity (LOH),
as well as second hits and other molecular signatures in these tumor
types. To our knowledge, our gene mapping effort in familial gastric
cancer is one of the largest studies of its type, which can help identify
novel gastric cancer genes and improve clinical management of gastric
cancer cases.

