Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a clinical targeted next generation sequencing test
for challenging formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer samples


Introduction: There is an urgent need for deep targeted sequencing for
detection of varieties of somatic aberrations, including single
nucleotide variants (SNV), insertions/deletions (indels), loss of
heterozygosity (LOH), and copy number variants (CNV) in heterogeneous
FFPE cancer patient specimens. We have developed a Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS)-based assay for deep sequencing of a number of selected
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes for testing of clinical breast
cancer samples. The panel includes those genes, which are commonly
mutated in cancers (e.g. breast and ovarian cancer), based on The Cancer
Genome Atlas studies and are potentially indicative of responses to
experimental compounds undergoing clinical trials. Importantly, the assay
can be used in FFPE samples which pose challenges because of high
variability in quality and often suboptimal quantities.Methods: To
minimize FFPE sample input requirement, we optimized multiple assay
steps. DNA was extracted from macrodissected FFPE tissue, and randomly
fragmented. The DNA library was constructed and subject to target capture
and enrichment before being sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq systems. To
analytically qualify the assays, we tested well-characterized cell lines
and reference HapMap cell lines. Furthermore, to confirm the performance
of the NGS results in clinical FFPE samples, we compared the results
generated using orthogonal methodologies, e.g. SNVs using a custom Ion
AmpliSeq panel (Life Technologies) on Ion Personal Genome Machine (PGM),
or CNVs using real-time PCR assays or custom Nanostring nCounter CNV
assays (NanoString Technologies). To establish the lower limit of
detection, we used mixed DNA samples from FFPE cell lines and from HapMap
DNA and further tested Horizon FFPE reference DNA containing mutations at
defined allele frequencies.Results: For FFPE DNA extraction, we selected
Cobas FFPE kit (Roche), and Maxwell CSC DNA FFPE kit (Promega) for higher
yield and better purity. For library construction, we chose a KAPA
streamlined library preparation kit. For target capture, we used custom
xGEN DNA probes (Integrated DNA Technologies) for improved flexibility in
assay optimization, reduced reagent cost, and minimizing batch-to-batch
variability. We were able to detect SNVs for >99% of exons selected down
to a 5% sensitivity level using about 100 ng FFPE DNA input. Indels, CNV
and LOH could also be detected reliably.Conclusions: We developed a
targeted NGS assay that could be used in clinical trials and meets the
dual challenge of limited DNA amounts and/or variable quality often
associated with FFPE clinical specimens and the detection of low level
mutations. Considering the recent recognition of Illumina NGS platform by
FDA, this approach can represent a path forward to assist in cancer
patient assessment, clinical trial recruitment and care.

