Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rapid and fully automated multiplex assay for KRAS-BRAF
mutations with high mutation sensitivity using novel selective
amplification and detection technologies


IntroductionThe MAPK/ERK pathway is a complex signaling cascade involved
in many cancer types. KRAS and BRAF gene mutations are present in a
number of cancers, including colon, lung and pancreas, and identification
of mutations in these genes is of great importance in clinical
diagnostics. Moreover, there is a growing demand for performing multiple
tests simultaneously on a single sample and there is an increased need to
provide these answers to oncologists in a short timeframe.MethodsIdyllaTM
is a fully integrated and automated molecular diagnostics platform (1)
that combines speed and ease of use with high sensitivity and high
multiplexing capabilities. Moreover, it overcomes the current
time-consuming step of processing formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
(FFPE) samples. After insertion of a single FFPE slice into the
cartridge, the complete process of sample preparation, real-time PCR and
reporting is fully automated and takes less than 2 hours. We present here
a KRAS-BRAF mutations prototype assay that allows the sensitive detection
of 13 KRAS mutations and 5 BRAF mutations in one single assay. The assay
discriminates the individual mutations at codons 12, 13 and 61 of KRAS
and codon 600 of BRAF using novel Primer Assisted Sequence Switching
(PASS) primers along with Multi-component Nucleic Acid enzyme (MNAzyme)
detection. These technologies confer advantages for multiplex mutation
analysis; PASS primers selectively amplify the target sequences of
interest resulting in enhanced specificity between wild type (WT) and
mutant, and between mutants, and MNAzymes allow for efficient detection
and discrimination of multiple mutations simultaneously.ResultsSeveral
performance characteristics of the IdyllaTM KRAS-BRAF prototype assay
were examined: specificity, cross-reactivity, sensitivity and performance
on clinical samples. Specificity of mutant versus WT as well as
cross-reactivity between individual mutations at each codon was
evaluated. Results demonstrated excellent specificity and
cross-reactivity for all individual targets, with delta Cq values of >7
between mutants and >12 between mutant and WT. Sensitivity was assessed
using cell lines embedded in FFPE containing defined ratios of mutants
and dilutions of these in FFPE WT background. The results indicated
sensitivities of 96 % concordance.ConclusionThe new and fully integrated
IdyllaTM KRAS-BRAF prototype assay combines extended multiplexing
capabilities with excellent specificity, high sensitivity, ease of use,
and short turnaround time for mutation analysis on FFPE samples.(1) For
research use only

