Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma circulating miRNAs: a new potential biomarker for prostate
cancer diagnosis


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small, non-coding, single-stranded RNAs
that negatively regulate gene expression mainly binding to 3-untranslated
region (UTR) of target mRNAs at the post-transcriptional level.Recent
studies have demonstrated that aberrant expressions of miRNAs are closely
associated with the development, invasion, metastasis and prognosis of
various cancers including prostate cancer (PCa).However, while the
majority of miRNAs are found at the intracellular level, a significant
number of miRNAs have been observed outside the cells, including various
body fluids.Circulating miRNAs act as extracellular communication RNAs
that could be particularly relevant in the context of neoplastic diseases
and may be useful for early diagnosis as well as to predict the clinical
outcome and the treatment response.The aim of this study was to
investigate the hypothesis that changes in circulating miRNAs represent
potentially useful minimally invasive biomarkers for the diagnosis,
staging and prediction of outcome in prostate cancer.From 2012 onwards,
consecutive men undergoing 12-core prostate biopsy at SantAndrea Hospital
of Rome were enrolled into a prospective database. Indications for a
prostatic biopsy were a PSA value 4 ng/ml and/or a positive digital
rectal examination (DRE). We selected, as a training set, 32 patients
with a mean age and PSA of 66.6 years (SD 7.9) and 14.3 (range to
0,53-185) ng/ml, respectively. Among them 16 patients (50%) have cancer
on biopsy; 8 with Gleason score 6; 3 with a Gleason score 7 and 5 with a
Gleason score 8 and 16 patients (50%) are control individuals with
non-neoplastic prostate disease (i.e. prostatitis). Profiling of
microRNAs by deep sequencing allowed us to identify a signature of 27
microRNAs aberrant expressed in prostate cancer samples.
Receiver-operator characteristics (ROC) curve analysis was used to
evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of miRNAs for the final
histopathological diagnosis of prostate cancer. An AUC of 0.77; 95%CI was
observed for the diagnosis of prostate cancer using all 27 microRNAs,
which is correlated with the Gleason score of the analyzed samples, while
results to be independent from the respective values of serum PSA.
Moreover, ROC curve analysis also highlighted a small subgroup consisting
of 6 miRNAs with a high predictive power able to discriminate patients
with prostate cancer (AUC = 0.805; 95%CI). This signature is under
validation in an indipendent cohort of patients. These preliminary
observations suggest that circulating miRNAs could represent promising
biomarkers for non-invasive diagnosis in prostate cancer unrelated to PSA.

