Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNA expression profile: miR-1246 and miR-185
profile as a novel diagnostic biomarker for melanoma


Melanoma is the leading cause of fatal skin cancer, and in the past few
decades, there has been an increase in the incidence of and mortality
from metastatic melanoma. The conventional pathological assessment of the
tumor is to date the better pronostic factor. Non invasive biomarkers are
needed to assess the aggressivity of the tumor. Many serum biomarkers
were assessed in melanoma, but due their low sensitivity and reduced
specificity, their clinical significance remains a matter of
debate.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non small coding RNAs with regulatroy roles
on gene expression which are involved in a broad spectrum of
physiological and pathological processes. The miRNAs have been described
to circulate in highly stable, cell-free forms in blood and to have
potential of useful non-invasive biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis and
prediction of therapeutic response in cancer.Initially we performed a
miRNA array (576 human miRNAs) using plasma samples from metastatic
melanoma patients and healthy controls. 25 miRNAs upregulated were
selected for further analysis along with 21 miRNAs described in
litterature to be dysregulated in melanoma cells and tissues. We screened
expression of these miRNAs in plasma samples of a training cohort (16
controls and 29 metastatic melanoma patients) using the BioMark 96.96
Dynamic Array (Fluidigm Corporation) for real-time qPCR was used to
simultaneously test up to 96 samples against 96 microRNAs primers in a
single experiment at nanoliter scale. Then miRNAs of interest were then
validated in an independent cohort of 43 controls and 31 patients. After
these processes, 5 miRNAs (Let-7b, miR-20a, miR-185, miR-338 and
mir-1246) displayed significantly different expression levels in melanoma
compared with controls. These miRNas had high sensitivity and specificity
but the combination of miR-185 and miR-1246 was extremely more sensitive
(90.5%) and specific (89.1%) than each individual miRNA to accurately
discern patients and healthy donors. Moreover among these miRNAs, we
observed that miR-185 expression is associated with a significant
increase in survival and may have a protective effect, with an adjusted
hazard ratio of 0.43, showing that miR-185 level could serve as an
important marker for predicting the survival rate independently of other
clinical and pathological factors.All our results showed that
co-detection of miR-185 and miR-1246 profile in the plasma may be used as
a biomarker for monitoring of patients with high recurrence-risk
melanoma. We propose that co-detection of miR-185 and miR-1246 may allow
early detection of disease recurrence or identification of a patient
subpopulation requiring adjuvant therapiesNote: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

