Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the role of nm23-H1 in the metastatic profile of triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC)


Background: Triple negative breast cancer makes up 10-20% of all mammary
tumors. It is so named because it exhibits low or no expression of both
the estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), and has low or
no expression of the human epidermal growth factor (HER2) receptor. With
no current molecular target identified, treatments options for TNBCs are
limited to conventional chemotherapy, which has been shown to be only
moderately effective. Further, diagnosis is correlated with a high rate
of relapse, low survival rate five years past diagnosis, and overall poor
prognosis.Nm23-H1 is the most well characterized in a class of tumor
suppressor genes that have received increased attention as a potential
therapeutic target in breast cancers. First identified in 1988, nm23, has
been shown have low levels of mRNA expression in highly metastatic tumor
cells, compared to normal or non-neoplastic tissue. This expression level
coincides with not only increased metastasis but poor clinical prognosis
in several type cancers, including breast cancer. Further, nm23-H1
inhibits a class of Rho small GTPases including Rac1, Rho and cdc42.
These proteins mediate cell-to-cell adhesion and cytoskeletal
reorganization, which ultimately moderate the metastatic profile i.e.
metastasis, cellular motility, and invasion.Methods: Western blotting was
used to examine the basal level of expression in a panel of mesenchymal
and epithelial TNBC cell lines. Transient siRNA was used to silence
nm23-H1 in MDAMB231 and HCC1806 cells to determine the effects on
downstream Nm23-H1 targets Rac1, Rho and cdc42. The effects of nm23-H1
inhibition on the invasive potential of TNBC cells were assessed using
Matrigel chamber assays. Wound healing assays were employed to assess the
effects of nm23-H1 inhibition on the migratory potential of TNBC
cells.Results: Our studies indicate that nm23-H1 is expressed in all of
the TNBC cell lines that we tested but to varying degrees with
mesenchymal cells expressing the protein at a higher level compared to
epithelial cells. Immunoblotting suggested that silencing of nm23-H1
resulted in an increase in p-Rac. Silencing also increased the invasive
ability of TNBC cells compared to control cells.Conclusion: These results
demonstrate the vital role that nm23-H1 plays in the inhibition of
cellular invasion in TNBCs. An increase in the expression of proteins
associated with motility and invasion pathways validates the role of
nm23-H1 in inhibiting the metastatic profile in TNBC. As a potential
molecular marker for metastatic TNBC, nm23-H1 warrants further
investigation.

