Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 expression in the human tumor
microenvironment


Following the success of imiquimod, agents targeting TLR7 are being
progressed as potential immunotherapeutics. Stimulation of TLR7 initiates
a plasmacytoid dendritic cell driven immune response which drives
efficacy. In addition to a role in regulating immune cell responses, TLR7
has also been reported to play a role in regulating tumor cell function
(1,2).To investigate the expression of TLR7, by both tumor cells and by
tumor infiltrating immune cells, we have used immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Initially, a comprehensive validation of commercially available anti-TLR7
antibodies was conducted revealing one antibody (Epitomics, 3923-1) with
specificity for TLR7 in western blots of cell lysates, and by
immunocytochemistry of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) cell
pellets, of HEK293 cells stably transfected with TLR7, mock-transfected
or non-transfected. 3923-1 was validated further for IHC across FFPE
sections of human spleen, lymph node and tonsil demonstrating expected
tissue and cellular localization. A comparison of staining for TLR7 in
whole sections of FFPE tumors revealed non-specific tumor staining using
antibodies that failed the validation process compared with the staining
pattern observed for 3923-1.Subsequently, five tissue microarrays (TMAs)
comprising 18 different human tumor types (6-25 patients/tumor type,
triplicate cores) and 14 normal tissues (5 donors/tissue type, duplicate
cores) were stained by IHC for TLR7 expression using 3923-1. Pathologist
scores for tumor cells revealed 5/18 tumor types negative for TLR7
(ovarian, glioma, thyroid, liver, renal) and 9/18 tumor types with a
proportion of patients (4%-36%) exhibiting weak (1+) staining (breast,
lung, colorectal, pancreatic, gastric, head & neck, melanoma, esophageal,
endometrial). Furthermore, 11-17% of sarcoma, prostate and bladder tumors
displayed moderate (2+) staining for TLR7, whereas corresponding normal
tissue epithelium was largely negative for TLR7. Importantly, an
increased density of immune infiltrates was observed in tumor tissues
compared with normal tissues, and a greater proportion of the immune
infiltrate in tumors was TLR7 positive. The conclusion drawn is that TLR7
may be less frequently expressed by tumor cells than reported previously
and that tumors exhibit a marked TLR7 positive immune cell infiltrate.
These data identify tumour types which might benefit from TLR7 therapy
and may guide patient selection.1. Grimm M et al. Eur J Cancer
(2010):2849-57.2. Cherfils-Vicini J et al. J Clin Invest (2010):1285-97.

