Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zoledronic acid inhibits proliferation and metastasis of human
pancreatic cancer in the patient-derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX)
model by targeting tumor-educated macrophages


Macrophages harvested from the peritoneal cavity of nude mice with
subcutaneous human pancreatic tumors were defined as tumor-educated
macrophages (EM) and macrophages harvested from mice without tumors were
defined as nave macrophages (NM). EM promote tumor growth and metastasis.
The aim of the present study was to determine the efficacy of Zoledronic
acid (ZA) on EM in a pancreatic cancer patient derived orthotopic
xenograft (PDOX) nude mouse model. In this study, EM and NM were compared
for their ability to enhance tumor progression. We initially demonstrated
that the cancer cells exposed to the conditioned medium harvested from EM
culture significantly increased proliferation (p = 0.016) and had more
migration stimulation capability (p Macrophages harvested from the
peritoneal cavity of nude mice with subcutaneous human pancreatic tumors
were defined as tumor-educated macrophages (EM) and macrophages harvested
from mice without tumors were defined as nave macrophages (NM). EM
promote tumor growth and metastasis. The aim of the present study was to
determine the efficacy of Zoledronic acid (ZA) on EM in a pancreatic
cancer patient derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) nude mouse model. In
this study, EM and NM were compared for their ability to enhance tumor
progression. We initially demonstrated that the cancer cells exposed to
the conditioned medium harvested from EM culture significantly increased
proliferation (p = 0.016) and had more migration stimulation capability
(p < 0.001) compared to cultured cancer cells treated with the
conditioned medium from NM. Next, we examined the efficacy of ZA on EM,
and NM and found that ZA had the ability to kill both EM and NM in vitro.
We then demonstrated that EM promoted tumor growth and metastasis in an
orthotopic mouse model of a human pancreatic cancer cell line, ZA reduced
the tumor growth (p = 0.006) and metastasis (p = 0.025) promoted by EM.
Finally, we examined the efficacy of ZA for pancreatic cancer in the PDOX
model, and found that the combination of gemcitabine (GEM) and ZA reduced
tumor weight (p = 0.016) and tumor growth (p = 0.005) compared to GEM
alone. ZA alone reduced metastasis (p = 0.009). These results suggest
that ZA inhibits the proliferation and the metastasis of human pancreatic
cancer by targeting EM.

