Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid drug target ranking system developed from a systematic
analysis of cancer genomic data from the Oncomine knowledgebase
identifies an oncogenic role for the NFE2L2 pathway in multiple cancer
types


Late stage drug attrition rates in oncology remain higher than other
therapeutic areas. To reduce attrition, it is critical to identify
appropriate drug targets and pre-clinical models. Next-generation
sequencing (NGS) is poised to accelerate the discovery of new drug
targets through identification of genomic markers of response and
identification of models to characterize candidate drivers. To maximize
the value of NGS, it is imperative to develop data
analysis/interpretation solutions that accurately assess genomic
aberrations, delineate driver alterations from passengers, annotate
alterations for clinical relevance and integrate alterations by gene and
pathway.Here, we present our framework for the systematic analysis of
thousands of clinical NGS samples as well as expertly curated oncology
data for the purpose of identifying candidate drug targets. Our
methodology was developed through a systematic interrogation of genomic
aberrations in a training set of gold standard oncogenes such as EGFR and
PIK3CA, and tumor suppressors such as TP53 and PTEN. The resulting
platform was used to rank genes through an assessment of driver genomic
aberrations, associations with patient survival, and potential clinical
actionability. Using this framework, we found supporting evidence
implicating NFE2L2 as an oncogene.Recurrent NFE2L2 mutations were found
in multiple cancer types and associated with poor outcome in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma. Recurrent mutations were identified in:
14.0% of squamous cell lung carcinoma, 12.5% of hepatocellular carcinoma,
11.1% of infiltrating bladder urothelial carcinoma, 7.7% of cervical
squamous carcinoma, and 4% of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. We
also investigated KEAP1, a repressor of NFE2L2 activity. Mutations in
KEAP1 tended to localize within the NFE2L2 binding domains and displayed
evidence of mutual exclusivity with NFE2L2 recurrent mutations. KEAP1
mutations were identified in 14% of lung adenocarcinoma, 13.5% of
squamous cell lung carcinoma, 7.4% of infiltrating bladder urothelial
carcinoma, and 4% of hepatocellular carcinoma. Genes up-regulated in
patients with mutations in either NFE2L2 or KEAP1 in squamous cell lung
carcinoma included many direct NFE2L2 target genes (e.g. GCLC, GCLM,
NQO1). Genes up-regulated in NFE2L2 or KEAP1 mutant patients
significantly associated with genes up-regulated in cell lines resistant
to chemotherapy. Using Oncomine database curated data and cell line exome
data we were able to identify cell lines that were representative of
clinical populations containing these mutations.We have provided proof of
concept identification of a potentially clinically relevant candidate
driver gene using a novel systematic analysis of cancer genomic data.

