Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination chemotherapy significantly reduces indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase activity in NSCLC patients


Heterogeneity and immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment (TME)
has dampened the efficacy of current frontline combination chemotherapies
for lung cancer which has provided limited improvement in patient
survival. Modified amino acid metabolism in the TME contributes to lung
cancer progression and suppression of anti-tumor immunity. Enhanced
tryptophan metabolism in primary lung cancer patients is indicative of
advanced disease stage. One of the key regulators of tryptophan
metabolism is an intracellular, heme-containing enzyme indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). IDO catabolizes the breakdown of tryptophan into a
toxic, immunosuppressive metabolite, L-Kynurenine (L-Kyn). Induction of
IDO and accumulation of its metabolite correlates with poor prognosis and
overall patient survival.We hypothesized that IDO enzymatic activity
would be elevated in lung cancer patients compared to normal healthy
controls. We predicted that combination chemotherapy strategies would
modulate serum levels of L-Kyn and IDO activity in the immune compartment
of lung cancer patients. Using an IDO enzymatic activity assay to measure
the production of L-Kyn, we demonstrate that prior to receiving
combination chemotherapies, Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) patients
(n=11) display significantly elevated levels of this immunosuppressive
serum metabolite compared to healthy relatives (n=8) (Student's t-test
p=0.000087; Paired Means p=0.0001). Following the second cycle of
treatment, serum L-Kyn was reduced significantly (Student's t-test
p=0.023; Paired Means p=0.043) in a subset of patients (n=3 of 5)
suggesting response to chemotherapy, but these post-treatment levels
remained elevated overall compared to healthy relatives. Additionally,
greater levels of IDO enzymatic activity were observed in circulating
immunosuppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells from NSCLC patients
and peripheral blood mononuclear cells prior to receiving combination
chemotherapy compared to those from healthy relatives.These preliminary
studies suggest that the IDO enzymatic pathway and tryptophan metabolism
may serve as important therapeutic targets and diagnostic markers in
predicting clinical outcomes of combination chemotherapies in the
treatment of NSCLC in humans.

