Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of methionine metabolites in predicting recurrent prostate
cancer affordably


Prostate cancer is often an over-treated disease due to our inability to
distinguish its indolent & aggressive manifestations. Aggressive prostate
cancer is characterized by its ability to survive & proliferate at
hypoxic & nutrient deficient conditions in local or distant sites of
metastasis. Metastatic progression is associated with recurrent disease
following local therapeutic intervention. Cancer cells can utilize sulfur
as terminal electron acceptor instead of oxygen in the generation of ATP
under anaerobic conditions. Accordingly, we have previously demonstrated
that patients with recurrent prostate cancer following prostatectomy have
elevated sulfur containing amino acids, homocysteine (p value = 0.003),
cystathionine (p value = 0.04), & cysteine (p value 80% enzyme conversion
of homocysteine & cystathionine. Helicobacter pylori CBS & CGL had been
cloned & expressed in E. coli after codon optimization & purified using
N-terminal cellulose binding domain (Clostridium thermocellum). Following
incubation, samples were filtered & incubated with polymer-coated
gold-nanorods & Cu2+ at room temperature. Subsequent absorption spectrum
analysis demonstrated a sharp red-shift of longitudinal plasmon peaks in
a concentration linearly dependent on the concentration of free cysteine
(0 - 100 M; R2 > 0.94). The plasmon peak shift took place due to end to
joining of gold-nanorods resulting formation of linear chains, validated
by transmission electron microscopic visualization. The translation of
the method of our findings was determined by measuring cysteine in mice
xenografted with metastatic prostate tumors. Cysteine measurements were
correlated to tumor progression by longitudinal monitoring of luciferase
labeled tumor (ARCAPM) bioluminescent detection. Finally, 60 annotated
serum samples of prostate cancer patients were analyzed retrospectively.
The serum was collected prior to prostatectomy & outcomes followed up to
five years following prostatectomy. Biochemically recurrent &
non-recurrent subjects were successfully distinguished using this
modified gold nano-rod technique. The advantages of this system over the
existing methods include: its adaptability to high throughput analysis,
economical, minimal sample requirement (200 l), & reduced technical
complexity.

