Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOTCH3 expression is predictive of efficacy in pancreas tumor
models treated with OMP-59R5, a monoclonal antibody targeting the NOTCH2
and NOTCH3 receptors


The Notch signaling pathway regulates key functions during embryonic
development, stem cell maintenance and differentiation in adult tissues,
and is implicated in many human cancers. OMP-59R5 is a ligand-blocking
antibody targeting both the NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 receptors. We have
developed a series of primary human xenograft models from patients with
pancreatic cancer and used these models to examine efficacy response to
OMP-59R5. We found that anti-NOTCH2/3, either as a single agent or in
combination with chemotherapeutic agents, was efficacious in pancreatic
tumor models. Expression of NOTCH3 mRNA by next-generation sequencing in
ten baseline pancreatic tumors correlates with response to OMP-59R5,
where growth of tumors with moderate to high expression of NOTCH3 was
significantly reduced compared to tumors with low expression. We
developed a Research-Use-Only (RUO) qPCR assay for measuring NOTCH3 mRNA
expression using Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) samples. This
assay shows consistent NOTCH3 expression data with the next-generation
sequencing data in the ten pancreatic xenograft tumors. Expression levels
of NOTCH3 were also examined in 120 human metastatic pancreatic specimens
to determine the reportable range of the assay and to identify
association with clinical factors. This analysis showed that NOTCH3 gene
expression maintained the same distribution across different specimen
types, such as biopsy, surgical biopsy and surgical resection, etc.
Samples with clinically relevant sites of recurrence also showed a
similar range in NOTCH3 gene expression. Moreover, we developed an
immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay for NOTCH3 protein expression. The
correlation between the IHC assay and the qPCR assay was examined in both
the metastatic pancreatic human specimens and the primary human
pancreatic xenograft models. A significant correlation was found between
the gene and protein levels, suggesting that both NOTCH3 gene expression
and protein expression may predict the response to OMP-59R5 in pancreatic
cancer. We are evaluating NOTCH3 levels and patient response in ALPINE, a
Ph1b/2 Anti-NOTCH2/3 trial in first-line advanced pancreatic cancer
patients.

