Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the oncogene ZNF217 by localization in breast cancer


Poor prognosis in breast cancer patients occurs when malignant tumors
adapt to environmental insults, become resistant to chemotherapy, evade
immune surveillance and metastasize to other tissues. Tumors are thought
to arise from individual cells with multiple mutations, including
amplification of genomic regions that provide a growth advantage. A
region on human chromosome 20 called 20q13 is increased in 25% of early
stage human breast cancers and correlates with poor prognosis in
patients. We have studied a novel oncogene ZNF217 within this region.
ZNF217 is key in promoting breast cancer: it is not only a prognostic
indicator of breast cancer progression in patients who have the worst
prognosis but also is itself a drug target and/or a marker of patient
response to therapy. We find that ZNF217 protein is expressed most
strongly in a small subset of cells within normal mammary epithelium and
localizes predominantly in the nucleus of mammary epithelial cells. In
contrast, the localization of ZNF217 is heterogeneous in breast tumors,
with localization in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. Moreover, a
truncated form of the protein localizes exclusively in the cytoplasm. We
hypothesize that ZNF217 cytoplasmic localization affects ZNF217 function
during cancer progression and can be used to predict poor prognosis in
breast cancer patients. Thus, our first aim is to identify the regions of
ZNF217 that are required for ZNF217 localization in the nucleus and
cytoplasm. Second, we will utilize integrated biological approaches to
determine the consequences of mislocalization of ZNF217 on cancer
progression. We will determine which regions of ZNF217 are required for
oncogenesis by overexpressing ZNF217 truncations in mammary epithelial
cells and using these cells in a variety of assays that model steps in
cancer progression_assays that have previously shown that ZNF217 promotes
cancer progression. If our data shows that the cytoplasmic ZNF217 is
implicated in oncogenesis, further studies will be required to identify
the mechanisms by which ZNF217 is truncated in cells. Hopefully, this
will aid in the development of innovative cancer diagnostics and
therapeutics for breast cancer and other cancers.

