Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of cathepsin L and B expression in pediatric
acute myeloid leukemia


Introduction: Cathepsin L and B are commonly expressed cysteine
proteinases that play a major role in lysosomal bulk proteolysis, protein
processing, matrix degradation, and tissue remodelling. In tumors there
is deregulation of these proteases that interferes with these normal
biological processes. In a pilot study done in our lab expression of
cathepsin L and B were found to be significantly elevated in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of pediatric AML patients. However the
expression of these proteases in bone marrow aspirate, which represents
almost true population of blasts, has never been studied before.Methods:
Enzymatic activities of cathepsin L and B were assayed in PBMCs and bone
marrow mononuclear cells (BMMCs) of AML patients and healthy controls.
Further expression of these proteases and its inhibitor were confirmed by
western blotting and real time assay. Cell cycle analysis in PBMCs and
BMMCs of these patients was performed by flow cytometry using propidium
iodide.Results: In the PBMCs of pediatric AML patients activity of
cathepsin L and B was found to be significantly elevated as compared to
healthy controls. Similarly, increased activity of cathepsin L and B was
also observed in the BMMCs when compared with PBMCs of these patients.
Furthermore, protein and mRNA expression also confirmed the increased
level of these proteases in pediatric AML. The protein and mRNA
expression of their endogenous inhibitor cystatin-C was found to be
decreased in PBMCs and BMMCs of AML patients. Moreover, expression of
these proteases correlated positively with the percentage of blasts and
percentage of cells in S-phase.Conclusion: This study for the first time
demonstrates the increased expression of cathepsin L and B in the BMMCs
and PBMCs of pediatric AML patients, along with a positive correlation
with percentage of blasts, thereby suggesting a potential role of these
proteases in the severity of this disease.

