Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular Inversion Probe analysis using OncoScan FFPE Assay Kit
to detect copy number aberrations and somatic mutations in lung tumor DNA
samples from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue


DNA copy number (CN) studies hold great promise for the discovery of
clinical biomarkers to predict disease course, recurrence risk, and
response to therapy. The molecular characterization of a tumor genome
across many samples helps to classify cancers in a biologically and
clinically relevant manner. While exciting results have been found with
genes already known to be involved in key pathways, confirming early
results and genome-wide testing requires large numbers of
well-characterized clinical samples. A vast collection of hundreds of
millions of stored FFPE samples already exists. Unfortunately, many
genomic assays fail to produce high-quality CN and genotype data from
FFPE samples, given the degradation and chemical changes to the DNA and
the small quantity obtained from tiny tissue samples. The higher rate of
sequencing artifacts and genotyping failures in FFPE samples restricts
the application of these promising whole-genome scanning technologies to
the limited number of fresh-frozen samples.OncoScan FFPE Assay Kit is
designed to interrogate the whole genome for copy number aberrations
(CNAs), loss of heterozygosity (LOH), and selected somatic mutations
(SMs) and captures the alleles of over 220,000 SNPs at carefully selected
genomic locations. These SNPs are evenly distributed across the genome
and with increased density within 900 cancer-related genes. Based on
Molecular Inversion Probe (MIP) technology, several OncoScan Assay Kit
features make it highly suitable for the analysis of FFPE tissue-derived
DNA. The assay uses only 80 ng input DNA with no requirement for
amplification of the genomic DNA; rather, the probe itself is amplified,
leading to a high signal-to-noise ratio. The entire assay can be run such
that results can be obtained within 48 hours of gDNA extraction. Cancer
sample data are complex because each sample is inherently mosaic,
comprised of a mixture of normal cells along with one or multiple tumor
clones. OncoScan FFPE Assay Kit includes a component algorithm that
specifically addresses the issue of normal contamination in the tumor
sample.In this study, we will describe the characterization of genomic
variations in a set of 67 lung tumor samples collected in collaboration
with Cancer Research UK (CRUK). From each sample, 80 ng FFPE gDNA has
been extracted and purified as input to OncoScan Assay Kit. Collectively,
the tumor genomes showed frequent CN gains on chromosomes 1q, 5p, 6p, 7,
8q, and 17q and frequent CN losses on chromosomes 6q and 17p. The number
of structural aberrations per sample ranged from 3 to 340, with an
average of 94. The assay simultaneously interrogates 74 SMs of interest
using a panel of 64 MIPs. Forty-nine samples had at least 1 SM call (1
sample having a maximum of 4).

