Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of TNF- by ethanol extract of Moringa oleifera leaves
in benzene-induced leukemic Wister rat: a possible mechanism of
anticancer property


Ethanol extract of Monringa oleifera leaves has been shown to possess
anticancer properties in animal models. The mechanisms of action of its
anticancer properties have not been fully demonstrated. In this study, we
induced leukemia in two groups of 7 rats each by intravenous injection of
benzene chromasolv solution (0.2 mL) 48 hourly for 4 weeks. The extract
(0.2 ml of 100 mg/mL) was administered orally by gavage, after leukemia
induction, daily for 4 weeks to one of the groups while the other group
was not treated. The third group served as the normal control. At the end
of the treatment, the rats were immobilized by cervical dislocation and
blood samples were collected by cardiac puncture. Plasma concentrations
of Beta-2 Microglobulins (2M), Perforins (PF), Interleukin-2(IL2),
Interferon-gamma (IFN-) and Tumour Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF-) were
determined by standard commercial ELISA Results showed that leukemia was
induced within 4 weeks as a significantly elevated leukocyte count and
plasma 2M concentration over the baseline were noted (pEthanol extract of
Monringa oleifera leaves has been shown to possess anticancer properties
in animal models. The mechanisms of action of its anticancer properties
have not been fully demonstrated. In this study, we induced leukemia in
two groups of 7 rats each by intravenous injection of benzene chromasolv
solution (0.2 mL) 48 hourly for 4 weeks. The extract (0.2 ml of 100
mg/mL) was administered orally by gavage, after leukemia induction, daily
for 4 weeks to one of the groups while the other group was not treated.
The third group served as the normal control. At the end of the
treatment, the rats were immobilized by cervical dislocation and blood
samples were collected by cardiac puncture. Plasma concentrations of
Beta-2 Microglobulins (2M), Perforins (PF), Interleukin-2(IL2),
Interferon-gamma (IFN-) and Tumour Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF-) were
determined by standard commercial ELISA Results showed that leukemia was
induced within 4 weeks as a significantly elevated leukocyte count and
plasma 2M concentration over the baseline were noted (p< 0.05). Plasma
IL2 and TNF- were also significantly elevated while PF and IFN- decreased
significantly in Moringa oleifera leaves extract treated rats compared
with untreated groups. Since IL2 and PF are associated with cytotoxicity
of CD8 T lymphocytes, reduced expression of PF in the face of increasing
plasma concentration of IL-2 suggests that Moringa oleifera extract may
not exert its anticancer properties via direct cytotoxicity. We thus
concluded that increased expression TNF- may translate to enhanced
apoptosis and may be a possible mechanism of action.

