Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kindlin-3 enhances breast cancer metastasis through upregulation
of Twist-mediated tumor angiogenesis


The FERM domain containing protein, Kindlin-3, has been recognized as a
major regulator of integrin function in hematopoietic cells but its role
in neoplasia is totally unknown. We have examined the relationship
between Kindlin-3 and breast cancer in mouse models and human tissues.
Human breast tumors showed a 7-fold elevation in kindlin-3 mRNA compared
to non-neoplastic tissue by quantitative polymerize chain reaction. At
the protein level, Kindlin-3 was found to be expressed abundantly in
breast cancer tissue, and its expression increases with the advancing
stage of tumor development. Mining of the Oncomine database
(www.oncomine.com) confirmed this association: Kindlin-3 was in the top 3
% of gene products elevated in breast cancer (pThe FERM domain containing
protein, Kindlin-3, has been recognized as a major regulator of integrin
function in hematopoietic cells but its role in neoplasia is totally
unknown. We have examined the relationship between Kindlin-3 and breast
cancer in mouse models and human tissues. Human breast tumors showed a
7-fold elevation in kindlin-3 mRNA compared to non-neoplastic tissue by
quantitative polymerize chain reaction. At the protein level, Kindlin-3
was found to be expressed abundantly in breast cancer tissue, and its
expression increases with the advancing stage of tumor development.
Mining of the Oncomine database (www.oncomine.com) confirmed this
association: Kindlin-3 was in the top 3 % of gene products elevated in
breast cancer (p< 10-12). When Kindlin-3 was over-expressed in a breast
cancer cell line, primary tumor growth and lung metastasis increased by
2.5- and 3-fold, respectively when implanted into mice compared to cells
expressing vector alone. Mechanistically, the Kindlin-cells displayed a
2.2-fold increase in Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) secretion
and B1 integrin activation. Increased VEGF secretion resulted from
enhanced production of Twist, a transcription factor which promotes tumor
angiogenesis. Knockdown of Twist diminished VEGF production and knockdown
of B1 integrins diminished Twist and VEGF production by Kindlin-3 cells
while non-targeting si-RNA had no effect on expression of these gene
products. The activation of this signaling cascade resulted in the
enhancement of breast cancer cell invasion, and tumor angiogenesis and
metastasis. Hence, our studies established the pathway in which
cross-talk between Kindlin-3 and B1 integrins activates the nuclear
translocation of TWIST, which leads to enhanced VEGF-A production and
secretion, macrophage infiltration as well as activation of the
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) program. The activation of
this signaling cascade culminates in enhanced breast cancer cell
migration, invasion and tumor angiogenesis, all of which are required for
tumor progression and metastasis.In summary, by analysis of human tissue
samples and in vitro and in vivo studies, we have identified a novel role
for Kindlin-3 in the progression of breast cancer. To our knowledge, this
is the first demonstration of the presence and implication of Kindlin-3
in breast cancer or any cancer.

