Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel implementation of cloud computing and mobile technology to
transform data collection and management in cancer epidemiology


Cancer epidemiology cohorts (CECs) make vital contributions to molecular
epidemiology and translational research. Large, well-annotated CECs
require many years and substantial resources to build, mature, and
maintain, but many CECs use inefficient legacy methods to collect and
manage data. CECs must become more cost-efficient and find better ways to
gather, store, and share data, and declining response rates suggest CEC
participants increasingly require more personal and engaging methods. The
California Teachers Study (CTS) is a CEC that has followed 133,479 female
public school professionals since 1995-1996. We implemented a cloud-based
customer relationship management (CRM) solution from Salesforce.com for a
4-year project (2012-2016), funded by the NCI and NIEHS, that is
collecting 21,722 blood or saliva samples from CTS participants for use
in future biomarker discovery and validation research. Phlebotomists at 3
sites (COH, CPIC, & UCI) visit participants in-person, conduct
interviews, collect blood, and ship samples overnight to Fisher
BioServices in Maryland for processing and storage. Our cloud-based
system uses the web, smartphones, and tablets to recruit participants;
schedule appointments; aggregate questionnaire data; and automate
specimen collection, shipping, and tracking. Phlebotomists use a
custom-built mobile app to scan consent forms, blood tubes, and FedEx
shipping labels. The app includes a smart e-questionnaire that is
customized for each person based on her answers to previous CTS
questionnaires. Each night, the system automatically assembles and
transmits a detailed shipping manifest directly to Fisher BioServices.
All data are available for immediate access via a secure, CTS-specific
Salesforce.com instance, in which we can track multiple progress and
performance metrics on demand. Extensive security and validations protect
data privacy and confidentiality. By using mobile technology to automate
the study protocol across all sites, eliminating manual data entry during
collection appointments, and removing data silos, our innovative approach
increases productivity, ensures protocol compliance across study sites,
and reduces data management costs. The Salesforce.com system is easily
scalable for additional types of data collection and is an excellent tool
for improving CEC infrastructure.

