Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of site-specific liver metastasis by collagen
IV-conveyed signals


The liver is a primary site of metastasis for some of the most common
human malignancies. At present, surgical resection is the most effective
curative option for liver metastases, but most patients with liver
metastases still succumb to their disease. A better understanding of the
underlying biology is essential for design of more effective therapy. We
previously identified basement membrane type IV collagen 1/2 expression
levels as determinants of the liver colonizing potential in a murine lung
carcinoma model (1) and observed high collagen IV expression levels in
surgical specimens of liver metastases from diverse tumor types. The aim
of this study was to elucidate the functional relevance of increased
collagen IV expression to liver metastases formation. We reported that
collagen IV 1/2 overexpression in non-metastatic lung carcinoma M-27
(M27colIV) cells increased specifically their liver (but not lung)
metastasizing potential. A transcriptome analysis was therefore performed
on these cells in order to identify changes to gene expression that could
account for the newly acquired metastatic potential. This analysis
revealed that type IV collagen levels regulated the expression of
multiple genes. Prominent among them were genes encoding for chemokines
such as CCL-5 and CCL-7 and for growth factors such as amphiregulin
(AREG) that were all upregulated by 3 fold. These changes were validated
at the RNA and protein levels using qPCR and Western blotting,
respectively. When the expression of these genes in M27colIV cells was
subsequently silenced using shRNA, a significant decrease (5-10 folds)
was observed in their ability to generate experimental liver metastases,
as compared to wild type or mock-transfected cells and they failed to
develop metastases in 40-50 % of injected mice. A similar correlation
between CCL-5 and CCL-7 expression levels and liver metastases formation
was also noted in human colon carcinoma cell lines. The results identify
a type IV collagen-regulated gene expression signature that promotes
liver metastasis and suggest that collagen IV-induced changes in
chemokine and growth factor production levels mediate this effect. They
provide a rationale for further exploration of the clinical utility of
CCL-5, CCL-7 and AREG as targets in the management of liver
metastases.Supported by a grant from the Canadian Institute for Health
Research (to PB) and a Henry R. Shibata Cedars Cancer Fellowship (to
RR).REFERENCES1. Burnier JV, Wang N, Michel RP, Hassanain M, Li S, Lu Y,
et al. Type IV collagen-initiated signals provide survival and growth
cues required for liver metastasis. Oncogene. 2011;30:3766-83.

