Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TCR usage analysis in blood reveals different mechanisms of action
of CTLA-4 and PD-1 blockade in patients


Immune-checkpoint blockade therapies are providing long-lasting responses
in a subset of patients with malignant metastatic melanoma. In an effort
to better understand the underlying mechanism, the T-cell population in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was characterized. The
complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3) of the rearranged T cell
receptor variable chain genes (TCR V) was sequenced. This was performed
using gDNA extracted from the PBMCs of twenty-one patients that were
treated with antibody to Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte Antigen 4 (CTLA-4)
(tremelimumab) and seven patients that were treated with antibody to the
Programmed Death-1 (PD-1) blockade (MK-3475) at baseline and at day 30-60
post first treatment. Four healthy donors were also sequenced as
controls. Control PBMCs displayed random distribution with three patients
showing a decrease and one showing an increase in the number of unique
productive sequences (UPS) from baseline to the time after first cycle.
In PBMCs from patients receiving the CTLA-4 antibody, two out of 21
samples showed a decrease in total number of UPS, while 19 out of
21samples experienced an increase. In PBMCs from patients receiving PD-1
antibody, the reponse was more similar to healthy donors as 5 out of 7
(71%) displayed a decrease and 2 out 7 (29%) an increase in total UPS
from the pre to post timepoint. There was an increase in the absolute
lymphocyte count (ALC) after CTLA-4 blockade therapy (p=0.03), but not in
the samples from patients treated with PD-1 antibody (p=0.53). A direct
correlation between ALC increase and increase in UPS for CTLA-4 blockade
was ruled out (p=0.1 Spearman Correlation). When analyzing according to
clinical response status, all responders to CTLA-4 blockade (4 out of 19)
experienced an increase in the number of circulating clones. However,
samples from clinical responders to PD-1 blockade showed an increase (2
out of 5) or decrease (1 out of 2) in the circulating pool. Considering
the concerning toxicity profile for CTLA-4-blockade versus the mild
toxicity for PD-1 antibodies, this data supports a model where CTLA-4
blockade induces a non-specific systemic expansion of T cells, while PD-1
blockade may have more specific effects directly in the tumor.

