Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olfactomedin 4 inhibits prostate stem/progenitor cells growth
through regulating the hedgehog signaling pathway


The olfactomedin 4 gene (OLFM4) plays critical tumor suppressor roles in
human and murine prostate cancer. We have previously reported that loss
or reduce of OLFM4 expression is associated with the progression of human
prostate cancer. We further found that loss of Olfm4 leads to prostate
neoplastic progression in the Olfm4-knockout mouse model. To study the
cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying neoplastic progression of
the prostate, we have performed gene chip microarray and quantitative
real-time RT-PCR analysis to compare Olfm4 knockout with wild-type mouse
prostate. The gene-expression signature of prostate tissues from
Olfm4-deficient mice revealed significant changes for genes associated
with neoplastic progression. In this study, we further detected that
hedgehog signaling-pathway components are up-regulated in Olfm4-knockout
mice. Since hedgehog signaling pathways are involved in regulating
prostate stem/ progenitor cell proliferation, we performed sphere
formation analysis with Olfm4 mutant mouse prostate and found that loss
of Olfm4 increased proliferative abilities of prostate stem/progenitor
cells. Interestingly, administration of human OLFM4 protein and
cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of Shh-signaling pathway, into the
sphere culture media reduced Olfm4-deficient mouse prostate
stem/progenitor cell growth.To extend the observation from the mouse
model, we established OLFM4-GFP fusion stably expressing cell clones by
using human prostate cancer cell lines PC-3, 22RV1 and DU145. We found
significant inhibition of sphere and colony formation in OLFM4 expressing
cells compared with vector expressing control cells. The expression
levels of Shh signaling pathway components were significantly inhibited
in OLFM4 expression cells compared to vector expressing control cells.To
detect whether or not OLFM4 down regulates the Shh signaling pathway
through interaction with Shh protein, we performed co-immunopricipitation
in 293T and PC-3 OLFM4 stably expressing cells. We found that OLFM4
directly interacts with Shh protein. We then carried out Gli- reporter
assay using 293T and prostate cancer cells. We demonstrated that
expression of OLFM4 inhibited Gli-reporter activity in a dose-dependent
manner.Taken together, these results suggest that OLFM4 inhibits prostate
stem/progenitor cells growth by mediating the Shh signaling pathway
through a direct interaction of OLFM4 with Shh protein.

