Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationships between somatic genomic alterations, tumor stage and
progression-free survival in cervical cancer


Background:Cervical cancer is a major public health problem worldwide. We
have recently identified novel significantly recurrent somatic mutations
in HLA-B, ERBB2 and MAPK1 in cervical squamous cell carcinomas. However,
the significance of somatic mutations and copy number alterations for
clinical phenotype in cervical cancer is not well understood. This study
seeks to identify relationships between somatic genomic alterations,
epidemiological exposures, tumor stage (FIGO) and progression-free
survival in cervical carcinomas.Methods:Cervical tumors were surgically
resected or biopsied from 100 Norwegian women with tumor stages I - IV.
Patients were subsequently followed for 0-109 months (mean=25 months).
Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on DNA extracted from tumors
and corresponding normal blood. Somatic single nucleotide variants and
small insertion/deletions were identified by the MuTect and Indelocator
algorithms respectively. The ABSOLUTE algorithm was used to classify
mutations as clonal or subclonal. Somatic copy number (CN) data were
derived from WES data using the CapSeg algorithm, and significantly
recurrent CN alterations were identified by GISTIC2.0 analysis
(qBackground:Cervical cancer is a major public health problem worldwide.
We have recently identified novel significantly recurrent somatic
mutations in HLA-B, ERBB2 and MAPK1 in cervical squamous cell carcinomas.
However, the significance of somatic mutations and copy number
alterations for clinical phenotype in cervical cancer is not well
understood. This study seeks to identify relationships between somatic
genomic alterations, epidemiological exposures, tumor stage (FIGO) and
progression-free survival in cervical carcinomas.Methods:Cervical tumors
were surgically resected or biopsied from 100 Norwegian women with tumor
stages I - IV. Patients were subsequently followed for 0-109 months
(mean=25 months). Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on DNA
extracted from tumors and corresponding normal blood. Somatic single
nucleotide variants and small insertion/deletions were identified by the
MuTect and Indelocator algorithms respectively. The ABSOLUTE algorithm
was used to classify mutations as clonal or subclonal. Somatic copy
number (CN) data were derived from WES data using the CapSeg algorithm,
and significantly recurrent CN alterations were identified by GISTIC2.0
analysis (q<0.25). HPV typing was done by the multiplex fluorescent f-HPV
DNA and MassARRAY assays. The log-rank test was used to compare survival
curves.Results:Non-localized tumors (FIGO stages II) were associated with
focal amplification of the FGFR2 gene on chromosomal cytoband 10q26
(GISTIC q = 0.18531). Indeed, 6 of 8 (75%) tumors with FGFR2
amplification were non-localized, in contrast to 16 of 92 (17%) tumors
without FGFR2 amplification (p = 0.001). In addition, patients with
somatic ERBB2 mutations and/or amplifications (p = 0.04), somatic TP53
mutations and/or deletions (p = 0.04), or infection with multiple HPV
types (p = 0.02) had poorer prognosis (progression-free survival). We
also observed a trend for higher frequency of subclonal driver events in
patients with poorer survival (p = 0.07).Conclusion:We have identified
novel relationships between somatic genomic alterations, tumor stage and
patient prognosis in cervical cancer. Our data suggest a potential for
exploring FGFR2 inhibition in non-localized cervical carcinomas with
FGFR2 alterations in a clinical trial context.

