Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-transcriptome analyses of EBV-associated nasopharyngeal
carcinoma using next-generation transcriptome sequencing


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is unique among epithelial cancers arising
from the head and neck regions. This specific cancer type is consistently
associated with EBV infection. Using RNA-seq, we have conducted a
comprehensive assessment of EBV and cellular gene expression in six NPC
cell line and patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). In these tumor lines,
expression of EBV latent genes including EBNA1, LMP1, LMP2A and BamH1 A
transcripts was quantitated. Among the viral genes, the BamH1 A
transcripts were detected as the major transcripts with various splicing
variants. Expression of these transcripts in NPC was further validated by
qRT-PCR analysis. Active lytic gene expression and lytic viral
replication was not observed in these tumor lines. Analysis of the
RNA-seq data has identified multiple fusion transcripts. A total of 18
candidate fusions were validated in these tumor lines. A novel fusion
transcript, UBR5-ZNF423 was detected in C666-1 cells and 8.3% of primary
tumors. The transcript produces a chimeric fusion protein which might
alter the function of EBF transcription factor. A significant growth
inhibitory effect was observed in UBR5-ZNF423 knockdown C666-1 cells.
Constitutive expression of UBR5-ZNF423 fusion in NIH3T3 cells induced in
vivo tumor formation in nude mice model. The findings strongly suggest
that the fusion gene play a causative role in NPC tumorigenesis. Using
the expression profile of immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cells as
control, our study also revealed the differential expression of cellular
genes and specific alternative spliced transcripts in NPC. Significant
upregulation of genes involved in cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction
(e.g. CCL5, CCL20, CXCL10, CXCR4, IL2RG) was consistently detected in the
tumor lines. Most of them were targets of the NF-kappaB signaling
pathways, which are constitutively activated in EBV-associated NPC. In
addition, the analyses also discovered several potential druggable
targets (e.g. CD74) and oncogenic non-coding RNAs (e.g. AFAP1-AS1) in
NPC, which may contribute to the development of new therapeutic
strategies for this cancer. The whole-transcriptome analyses greatly
enhance our understanding of the molecular basis of EBV-infected NPC.

