Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulation of integrin 4 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and is a novel prognostic marker in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is a highly aggressive and lethal malignant tumor.
Recent reports have shown that the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) plays an essential role in cancer invasion and metastasis. We
previously reported that EMT was frequently observed in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) and was related to a high metastatic rate and a poor
outcome in patients with PDA (Masugi et al. Hum Pathol. 2010). Further,
using cDNA microarray analyses, we identified integrin 4 (ITGB4) as one
of the EMT signature genes in 12 patient-derived PDA xenografts. The aim
of the current study was to clarify the clinicopathological and
functional significance of ITGB4 in PDA. ITGB4 up-regulation in
xenografts with high EMT was confirmed by immunohistochemistry.
Immunohistochemical analyses of 134 resected PDAs revealed intratumoral
heterogeneity with respect to ITGB4 expression and showed that cancer
cells undergoing EMT often display diffuse and intense expression of
ITGB4. High levels of ITGB4 expression were significantly correlated with
the histological hallmarks of EMT (solitary cell infiltration, reduced
E-cadherin expression and increased vimentin expression), the grade, and
the presence of lymph node metastasis, and showed an independent
prognostic effect. Immunocytochemical analyses of PDA cell lines revealed
that the distribution of ITGB4 changed from regions of cell-cell contact
to a diffuse presence in cytoplasm with occasional localization in
filopodia during EMT. Knockdown of ITGB4 by small interfering RNA reduced
the migratory and invasive ability of PDA cells. Overexpression of ITGB4
promoted cell scattering and cell motility in combination with
down-regulation of E-cadherin and up-regulation of vimentin expression.
In conclusion, our study demonstrated the prognostic significance of
ITGB4 overexpression in PDA. Moreover, we also identified a potential
role for ITGB4 in the regulation of cancer invasion and EMT.

