Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High content clonogenic survival assay for drug library screening
identifies potent radiation sensitizers for non-small cell lung cancer


Radiotherapy is a critical component in the definitive treatment of
locally-advanced non-small cell lung cancer (LA-NSCLC), and while
concurrent platinum-based chemoradiation is the standard approach,
improvements have been minimal. Molecularly-targeted therapy to further
enhance radiation effects beyond platinum-sensitization is needed to
further improve radiotherapy efficacy. A systematic approach needs to be
developed that can rapidly identify novel drugs that can be combined to
enhance radiation effects. However, current approaches using traditional
clonogenic survival assay (tCSA) and colorimetric assays are inadequate
for high throughput drug screens to identify novel radiation sensitizers.
To enable screens adapted for radiation drug screening, we have developed
a method which we coin the High Throughput Clonogenic Survival Assay
(HCSA) that allows rapid screening of drug libraries to identify potent
radiation sensitizers. As a proof-of-principle, we used the Kras mutated
lung cancer cell line H460, and validated the hits using traditional
assays. Drugs at various concentrations or vehicle were added to cells
seeded overnight in 96 well plates at low densities, and after 6 hours,
plates were irradiated at various doses. After incubation, colonies were
stained and imaged on the INCell 6000 (GE Health), and colony count
determined using the INCell Developer image analysis software. Drug
screens were done using a Custom Clinical Collection of 150 compounds. We
compared the HCSA method to tCSA and found that HCSA recapitulates a
similar cell survival curve and survival fraction at 2 Gy (SF2) values
for several cancer cell types. Drug screens identified several compounds
that were cytotoxic to the KRAS mutant H460 cells alone at 1 M
(inhibitors to Src/Abl, IGF1R, ROCK1, AKT, PI3K, c-MET) and at low nM
concentrations (HSP90 and HDAC inhibitors). Multiple drugs of the same
class were found to be radiation sensitizers and levels of potency seemed
to reflect the clinical relevance of these drugs. For instance, several
late generation PARP inhibitors were found to be good sensitizers in the
HCSA, but the ones that have not made it into clinical development, or in
the case of BSI-201, was proven to not even be a PARP inhibitor, do not
come out in the screen. We also discovered that several inhibitors of
pathways downstream of activated mutant KRAS (PI3K, AKT, mTOR, and
MEK1/2) sensitized H460 cells to radiation, which is biologically
relevant for this Kras mutant cell line. We believe these results
demonstrate the promise of HCSA as a high throughput drug screening
platform to identify novel radiation sensitizers. This will greatly
expedite the discovery of novel targets and drugs for clinical
translation to enhance the effects of radiotherapy in lung cancer.

