Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of GSK3 axis by combination treatment with TRAIL and
Troglitazone in cancer cells


Prostate cancer is estimated to account for 29% of all new cancers and is
the second leading cause of cancer-related death in men in the United
States. Hormonal therapy is the only treatment for advanced forms, but
androgen-independence eventually develops in most patients. Developing
new treatment strategies are urgently needed, which needs a deeper
molecular understanding of the events that lead to tumor progression.
TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) has gained much importance
recently due to its ability to preferentially induce cell death in
malignant and transformed cells. However, since many tumor cells develop
resistance to TRAIL, recent approaches are focused on developing
combinatorial therapeutic regimens that can enhance TRAIL sensitivity.
There are multiple reasons behind TRAIL resistance, and recent studies
(including ours) indicate that, Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 (GSK3) might
be a key player in mediating this. Thus pathways that can antagonize GSK3
axis are important targets for cancer drug development. GSK3 is a
serine/threonine kinase, initially identified as a critical mediator of
glycogen metabolism and insulin signaling and is now well accepted to
regulate various cellular processes including cell survival. In our
earlier studies, combinatorial treatment with Troglitazone (TZD), a
synthetic ligand for peroxisome proliferator-activator receptor gamma
(PPAR) and TRAIL induced significant apoptosis in TRAIL-resistant cancer
cells. Utilizing this combination, we also observed an increase in
GSK3Ser9 phosphorylation that preceded the onset of apoptosis. At a later
time, however, TRAIL-TZD combination produced a dramatic reduction of
total GSK3 levels, suggesting that GSK3 is being targeted by multiple
pathways following this treatment. Similar results were observed in
various prostate as well as pancreatic cancer cells, indicating this to
be a generalized event. Interestingly, pretreatment of Bx-PC3 pancreatic
cancer cells (with a shorter half-life of GSK3) with protein synthesis
inhibitor Cycloheximide (CHX) significantly reduced TRAIL-TZD-induced
inhibition of total GSK3 expression, suggesting mostly a transcriptional
regulation. Luciferase assays carried out in both pancreatic and prostate
cancer cells indicated dramatic reduction of GSK3 promoter activity with
TRAIL-TZD. Knockdown of endogenous PPAR expression by PPAR- siRNA
resulted in a reduction of PPAR levels with siRNA transfection, which was
unable to antagonize TRAIL-TZD-induced reduction of GSK3 transcription or
protein expression. These suggested a potential PPAR-independent
regulation of GSK3 in this pathway. Since the mechanisms that regulate
GSK3 expression in cancer cells are largely unknown, these studies
indicate a novel strategy of targeting GSK3, elucidation of which might
provide newer insights to improve our understanding of TRAIL resistance.

