Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the biological properties of human breast cancer
in a nude rat model


Developing imaging technology for cancer diagnosis and treatment
monitoring is best performed on larger pre-clinical animal models
recapitulating tumor growth and metastasis more similar to that found in
humans. Such models are amenable to morphological and functional imaging
techniques at spatial resolutions appropriate for animal imaging and,
translatable to human imaging. In comparison to mouse xenografts, rat
models offer the advantages of clinical imaging capabilities, development
of xenograft and metastatic models, in orthotopic sites. Human breast
cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 show a variable take rate in mice,
68% incurring considerable cost and time. Having a more reproducible
method is needed for breast cancer studies. Here we present evidence for
development of a novel method in the immune-compromised nude rats.
Spheroids grown under stem cell conditions were derived from human breast
adenocarcinoma estrogen dependent (MCF-7, ZR-75-1) and independent
(MDA-MB-231) lines, and xenografted in both subcutaneous and orthotopic
(fat pad) sites in the nude rat. To verify that rat tumors could be
studied in detail at spatial resolutions achievable on a clinical 3 Tesla
scanner, high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging was performed to
identify vascular, viable, and necrotic tumor regions. The breast cancer
phenotype and was confirmed by immunohistochemistry for ER and HER2.
Tumors were characterized with proliferation marker Ki67, vascularization
by CD34 and VEGF, and presence of hypoxic regions by HIF1. Our results
indicated that spheroids from all three lines readily generated tumors
independent of exogenous estrogen. MRI is an effective and sensitive
method for investigating the biological behavior and vascularization of
breast cancer. These findings offer a potential novel method for
pre-clinical study and investigation of human breast cancer.

