Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor targeting and pharmacodynamics of the novel targeted
immunocytokine FAP-IL2v in a tumor-bearing Rhesus monkey


FAP-IL2v is a novel monomeric FAP-targeted immunocytokine where a single,
engineered IL-2 variant (IL-2v) with abolished IL-2Ralpha (CD25) binding
is fused to the C-terminus of an high affinity anti-FAP antibody (1).
FAP-IL2v was designed to selectively bind to the tumor thereby avoiding
the systemic toxicity inherent to systemic administration of
cytokines.The goal of this study was to assess the tumor targeting and
pharmacodynamic properties of FAP-IL2v in an appropriate tumor bearing
animal model. Explanted tumor xenografts in mice do not have high
expression of FAP and lack the complete immune system which is important
to assess the safety, efficacy, and biodistribution of these targeted
immunocytokines. Therefore, we elected to use monkeys with spontaneous
tumors for this study. Herein, we report a first of kind study in monkeys
with spontaneous tumors to better understand tumor targeting and
pharmacodynamics of FAP-IL2v.Three monkeys with a history of cancer and
suspected relapse were identified. Immunohistochemistry was done on
archival tumor tissue to assess target (FAP) expression and FDG-PET
performed to detect metastatic lesions. Based on the positive FAP
expression on tumor tissue and detectable tumor lesions and lesion
locations from FDG-PET scans, a rhesus monkey with metastatic breast
cancer was selected for further experimentation with FAP-IL2v.The monkey
was administered with 0.5 mg/kg of FAP-IL2v mixed with tracer amounts of
89Zr labeled FAP-IL2v for assessment of tumor targeting using PET
imaging. Baseline and on-treatment blood samples and tumor biopsies were
collected after single-administration for assessment of pharmacodynamic
effects.The study revealed that FAP-IL2v selectively targets and
accumulates in the tumor lesions with minimal uptake in the lungs, spleen
and lymphoid tissues (major sink organs and potential risk factors). All
three FDG-avid lesions showed accumulation of FAP-IL2v over 6 days with
peak uptake of SUV= 3.1 at day 3. After single administration, transient
lymphocytosis and peripheral expansion of immune cells were observed.
Analyses of tumor biopsies suggested increased immune cell infiltration.
No signs of distress or cytokine release were observed during the
treatment period.In conclusion, using a monkey with spontaneous tumors,
we demonstrated that the FAP-IL2v targeted immunocytokine can selectively
be delivered to tumor and induce intended changes in immune
microenvironment without major adverse events.(1) C. Klein et al.,
Tumor-targeted, engineered IL-2 variant (IL-2v)-based immunocytokines for
the immunotherapy of cancer, AACR 2013, Poster 486

