Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential level of L-homocysteic acid and
lysophosphatidylcholine (16:0) in sera of patients with ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer (OVC) is one of the most difficult cancers to detection in
the early periods of its development. Therefore there have been numerous
attempts to find a biomarker for OVC, but an accurate diagnostic marker
is yet to be discovered. In this study, we profiled OVC candidate
metabolites from serum to find potential diagnostic marker for OVC.
Information of low-mass-ions (LMIs) in serum was obtained by using
MALDI-TOF. MALDI-MS analysis of each serum sample was repeated six times
in order to reduce experimental errors. Intensity of LMI mass peak was
normalized using total peak area sums. Normalized intensity of LMI was
used in principal component analysis-discriminant analysis (PCA-DA) to
discriminate 142 OVC from 100 controls. LC-MS/MS was used to identify the
selected LMIs. Extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) analysis was used to
measure the relative quantity of candidate metabolite from the LMI mass
peak areas. The concentration of common metabolite in serum was
determined by ELISA. Top 20 LMI mass peaks with weigh factor over 0.05
were selected to separate OVC from controls. Among them two LMIs with
184.05 m/z and 496.30 m/z were identified as L-homocysteic acid (HCA) and
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) (16:0), respectively. Relative quantity of
LPC (16:0) was decreased in OVC serum (P=0.05), whereas the amount of HCA
was significantly higher in OVC serum (POvarian cancer (OVC) is one of
the most difficult cancers to detection in the early periods of its
development. Therefore there have been numerous attempts to find a
biomarker for OVC, but an accurate diagnostic marker is yet to be
discovered. In this study, we profiled OVC candidate metabolites from
serum to find potential diagnostic marker for OVC. Information of
low-mass-ions (LMIs) in serum was obtained by using MALDI-TOF. MALDI-MS
analysis of each serum sample was repeated six times in order to reduce
experimental errors. Intensity of LMI mass peak was normalized using
total peak area sums. Normalized intensity of LMI was used in principal
component analysis-discriminant analysis (PCA-DA) to discriminate 142 OVC
from 100 controls. LC-MS/MS was used to identify the selected LMIs.
Extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) analysis was used to measure the
relative quantity of candidate metabolite from the LMI mass peak areas.
The concentration of common metabolite in serum was determined by ELISA.
Top 20 LMI mass peaks with weigh factor over 0.05 were selected to
separate OVC from controls. Among them two LMIs with 184.05 m/z and
496.30 m/z were identified as L-homocysteic acid (HCA) and
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) (16:0), respectively. Relative quantity of
LPC (16:0) was decreased in OVC serum (P=0.05), whereas the amount of HCA
was significantly higher in OVC serum (P<0.001). HCA was not detected in
59 cases out of 63 controls, but most cases of OVC (16 out of 25) showed
significantly higher amount of HCA. When the cutoff was 10 nmol/ml,
sensitivity and specificity of HCA were 64.0% and 96.9%, respectively.
Level of LPC (16:0) was significantly correlated with tumor grade
(P=0.045). Both HCA and LPC (16:0) showed correlation with stage and
tumor histology, but limited sample number could not assign the
statistical significance. HCA alone showed a potential power of biomarker
for OVC. Even the stratified screening including LPC (16:0) did not
significantly increase the power for OVC screening, our present study
showed that a good example of profiling of LMIs in serum can be useful to
select and identify candidate metabolites for OVC screening.

