Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining FK228 and cisplatin synergistically induces cancer cell
death and reduces clonogenic survival


The purpose of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of FK228
(romidepsin) to increase cisplatin's ability to induce cell death and
reduce clonogenic survival of human urinary bladder cancer cells. Human
urinary bladder cancer is the fifth most common cancer in the United
States, but long-term, disease-free survival in patients is still
suboptimal. Therefore, it is crucial to develop effective
chemotherapeutic regimens to decrease the morbidity and mortality of this
cancer. FK228, a depsipeptide and histone deacetylase inhibitor, is
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treatment of T cell
lymphoma. However, its therapeutic value in treatment of bladder cancer
is yet to be determined. Cisplatin is a DNA-damaging agent for treating
various human cancers, including bladder, brain, ovary, lung, and testis
cancers. However, the efficacy of cisplatin is often dampened by cancer
cell drug resistance, mostly associated with glutathione (GSH)-based
detoxification. Our study revealed that FK228 combined with cisplatin
synergistically induced cell death and reduced clonogenic survival of
human urinary bladder cancer cells. The Erk-Nox pathway played an
important role in mediating signals highly increased by this combined
treatment to induce significantly-elevated levels of reactive oxygen
species, leading to substantially-induced caspase activation and
synergistically-increased death in cancer cells. Cisplatin was able to
enhance the ability of FK228 to significantly reduce GSH, indicating a
novel activity of combined FK228 and cisplatin in reducing drug
resistance. The ability of combined FK228 and cisplatin to
synergistically induce cell death and reduce clonogenic survival was also
applicable to colon cancer cells. Hence, combined use of FK228 with
cisplatin should be considered in development of therapeutic strategies
to control urinary bladder cancer and other cancer development and
recurrence.

