Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing of a case of olfactory neuroblastoma


Purpose: Olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB) is an unusual malignancy occurred
in sinonasal tract and molecular characteristics were poorly understood.
Here we analyzed sequence of a fresh tissue from an olfactory
neuroblastoma patient through whole exome sequencing to identify
ONB-specific mutations.Methods: We examined fresh tumor sample with
matched peripheral blood from a patient diagnosed olfactory
neuroblastoma. All procedures were approved by IRB in Seoul National
University Hospital. He was 30 years old and had chemotherapy, surgery
and radiotherapy. He had a recurrent disease with metastasis to bones and
lymph nodes, and tumor tissue was obtained from a lymph node. Genomic DNA
was isolated from a dissected tissue and whole exome library was
constructed using Agilent SureSelectXT Human All Exon V4+UTRs (71Mb).
Sequencing was performed by Illumina HiSeq2000 platform with paired-end
101bp reads and sequenced data was aligned to human reference genome g1k
v37 using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA). Then, a series of
bioinformatical tools were used such as SAMtools, PICARD, the Genome
Analysis Toolkit (GATK) and MuTect to list up potential candidate genes.
These genes were filtered out considered as germline variants informed in
database like dbSNP, 1000 genome project and exome sequencing project
6500 (esp6500). Final candidate genes were identified by manual curation
based on cancer gene classification of public database and
publications.Results: Our approach generated 15Gb and 17Gb of mapped
sequence, with 97.91% and 98.43% of the target regions covered at least
10X depth in tumor and normal sample, respectively. After processing and
filtering, we identified 8 candidate cancer genes including 5 somatic
nucleotide variants (SNVs; CDKN2C, NBPF1, NBPF10, TGFBR2 and TP53) and 3
insertion/deletion mutations (ACVR1B, AR and CARD11). Among SNVs, CDKN2C
showed stopgain SNV resulted in truncated mutation and the same mutation
in TP53 were recurrently reported in COSMIC database. Cancer gene
candidate indel mutations included 2 frameshift insertions (ACVR1B and
CARD11) and 1 nonframeshift insertion (AR).Conclusions: We analyzed a
patient of olfactory neuroblastoma using our WES pipeline and several
genes were identified to candidate cancer gene mutations which should be
validated in large number of samples.

