Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-based design and development of pyrazolopyridine-based
inhibitors of Mcl-1


The anti-apoptotic myeloid cell leukemia protein Mcl-1, a member of the
Bcl-2 family proteins, has emerged as a promising therapeutic target.
Mcl-1 is overexpressed in many human cancers which has been associated
with inferior survival, poor prognosis and resistance to chemotherapies.
Disruption of Mcl-1 interaction with its pro-apoptotic partners through
small molecules is a viable strategy to overcome Mcl-1 mediated
resistance to apoptosis. Targeting Mcl-1 protein represents a promising
strategy either alone or in combination with other therapies.Applying an
integrated screening approach through combining high throughput and
virtual screenings, several novel chemical classes were identified as
Mcl-1 inhibitors. Compound 38 with a pyrazolopyridine scaffold was
selected as a promising high throughput lead for medicinal chemistry
efforts. Using reported chemistry a focused library of analogs of 38 was
generated. Through HSQC protein-observed NMR studies and chemical shift
mapping, the binding of the lead compound 38 was characterized and
confirmed to be the BH3 binding pocket of Mcl-1. Computational modeling
guided by NMR studies was applied in lead optimization and rational
design of more potent analogs. Structure-activity relationship was
established utilizing two different competitive platforms of fluorescent
polarization and surface plasmon resonance, and confirmed by HSQC NMR
spectroscopy. The binding affinity of this class of compounds was
improved more than twenty fold in comparison with the lead compound 38.
In vitro binding, functional and cell-based assays were performed in
order to determine selectivity profile against five members of Bcl-2
family, mechanism of action and cellular activity of analogs with
improved potency. The obtained results show promise for further chemical
modification and development of pyrazolopyridine-based inhibitors of
Mcl-1.

