Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib synergizes with the MET kinase
inhibitor crizotinib in both crizotinib-sensitive and
crizotinib-resistant MET-driven renal tumor models


Introduction: The proto-oncogene MET is aberrantly activated via
overexpression or mutation in numerous cancers including papillary renal
carcinoma, making it a prime anti-cancer molecular target. However, the
clinical success of MET-directed tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) has
been limited due, in part, to mutations in the MET kinase domain that
confer therapeutic resistance. Circumventing this problem remains a key
challenge to improving durable responses in patients receiving
MET-targeted therapy. Small molecule HSP90 inhibitors cause HSP90 to
dissociate from its client proteins, resulting in their destabilization
and eventual degradation. HSP90 inhibitors have been validated in
numerous preclinical tumor models and have shown promising activity in
several clinical trials. Given the distinct mechanisms of action of TKI
and HSP90 inhibitors, we evaluated the synergistic effects of these two
drugs on both TKI-sensitive and TKI-resistant MET-driven tumor
models.Methods: We tested efficacy of the MET TKI crizotinib, the HSP90
inhibitor ganetespib and their combination in MKN45, wild-type
MET-overexpressed cell line and MET-Y1248H, TKI-resistant mutant MET-
verexpressed cell line in vitro. The antitumor efficacy of HSP90
inhibition in vivo was verified in xenograft models.Results: MET is an
HSP90-dependent kinase, and we show that HSP90 preferentially interacts
with and stabilizes activated MET, whether the activation is
ligand-dependent or is a consequence of kinase domain mutation. In
contrast, many MET TKI show a preference for the inactive form of the
kinase and activating mutations in MET can confer resistance. Combining
the HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib with the MET TKI crizotinib achieves
synergistic inhibition of MET, its downstream signaling pathways, and
tumor growth in TKI-sensitive MET-driven tumor models. Unexpectedly,
low-dose ganetespib also partially restores crizotinib sensitivity, in
vitro and in vivo, to cells and tumors expressing TKI-resistant MET
mutants.Conclusion: Our findings support the use of HSP90 inhibitors to
overcome or delay the initiation of resistance to MET TKI, and they
provide the basis for clinical evaluation of this combination in patients
with MET-driven papillary renal cancer.

