Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib suppresses desmoid tumor growth and invasion via
inhibition of ERK signaling


Introduction: Desmoid tumors (DTs) are mesenchymal tumors that occur
sporadically or in association with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
Surgical resection is the initial treatment of choice for DTs, but
medical options are limited for patients with recurrent or unresectable
disease. Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor that blocks cell
proliferation in various cancers via suppression of the Raf/MEK/ERK
signaling cascade. The PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway is also known to be a key
regulator of cell proliferation involved in carcinogenesis. Sorafenib
activity against desmoid tumor cells has not yet been well characterized.
Here, we examined the effects of sorafenib on patient-derived DT cell
lines, with the aim of characterizing the efficacy and mechanism of
action of sorafenib in DTs.Methods: DT-derived cells were isolated and
cultured from fresh patient tumor specimens, resulting in 12 distinct
cell lines, from both sporadic and FAP patients. Human dermal fibroblasts
(HDF) were purchased from ATCC for use as controls. Early passage cells
were treated with increasing doses of sorafenib, and the effect at 72
hours was measured by CellTiter proliferation assay. To assess invasion,
DT cells and HDF were plated in invasion chambers with either 5 M
sorafenib or vehicle, with resultant invasive cells counted after 24
hours. Cells were treated with 5 M sorafenib, and lysates were collected
at intervals from 15 minutes to 3 days. These lysates were used for
immunoblot analysis, as well as phosphoprotein signaling arrays.Results:
Sorafenib at 10 M significantly inhibited DT-derived cell proliferation,
suppressing growth in each of 3 sporadic and 3 FAP cell lines to less
than 25% relative to controls, while the same concentration minimally
affected HDF growth. In addition, sorafenib inhibited the invasiveness of
DT-derived cells in comparison to controls. Immunoblot analysis revealed
that sorafenib inhibited ERK phosphorylation, and this effect correlated
with inhibition of total MEK and total Akt, while total ERK levels
remained unchanged. Interestingly, signaling arrays also identified
multiple other potential targets, as phosphorylated Akt, mTOR, and PTEN
were suppressed by sorafenib.Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that
sorafenib suppresses proliferation and invasion of DTs via inhibition of
ERK signaling, with additional involvement of the mTOR signaling pathway.
Sorafenib may be a potential therapeutic option in the treatment of
desmoid tumors. Additional studies to examine the efficacy of combination
therapy with sorafenib and a PI3K inhibitor are warranted.

