Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel ovarian cancer transplantable models generated from
MUC1KrasPten tumors show in vitro and in vivo heterogeneity


Introduction: Ovarian epithelial tumors are highly heterogeneous.
Patients are diagnosed late, when tumors have spread to the surrounding
tissues, most often to the omentum. Despite optimal removal and response
to therapy, the tumors often recur. Personalized medicine approaches
often require molecular profiling of tumors, for patient selection and to
predict response to therapy. Given intratumor heterogeneity,
identification of tumor sites that are best to select for profiling is
still up for debate.Approach: We recently developed triple transgenic
(MUC1KrasPten.Tg) mice that develop orthotopic MUC1-expressing
endometrioid ovarian tumors. The tumors develop in the ovaries and spread
throughout the peritoneal cavity, closely mirroring the human disease.
Using tumor cells isolated from either the MUC1KrasPten primary ovarian
tumor (MKP-T) or the liver implant (MKP-L), we generated several new
murine ovarian cancer cell lines which express human MUC1 as self, while
simultaneously carrying constitutively active oncogenic Kras and
defective Pten tumor suppressor.Results: MKP-T and MKP-L showed variable
expression pattern of MUC1, EpCAM, folate receptor, ALDH, cytokeratin and
vimentin, demonstrating the relationship between the anatomical location
of each originating tumor and the cell line's in vitro phenotype. Unlike
the MKP-L cells, the MKP-T cells display loss of K-ras heterozygosity,
suggesting that migration to a metastatic site was an early event.
Although both cell lines can grow IP tumors in syngeneic triple
transgenic MUC1KrasPten.Tg, they carry distinct in vivo phenotypes. MKP-T
cells multiply at higher rate and generate larger loco- regional tumors.
In contrast, the MKP-L cells, derived from a metastatic site, have a
slower growth rate but spread throughout the peritoneal cavity, undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and trigger distant metastases to
the lungs(MKP-Lng). In line with their Kras status, MEK 1/2 inhibitor
AZD6244 (currently tested in several Phase II clinical trials) is more
effective on MKP-T cells than on MKP-L and MKP-Lng cells in vitro,
suggesting that metastatic tumor cells may be more resistant to MEK1/2
inhibitiors.Conclusions: Using novel murine tumor cell populations, we
reproduce intratumoral heterogeneity and demonstrate that in vitro and in
vivo biological properties vary with the location of originating tumor.
Most importantly, we show that cells derived from metastatic sites, which
are more likely to reproduce the characteristic of the recurrent tumors,
have an increased metastatic potential and reduced response to
therapeutic drugs. These results suggest that molecular profiling of
tumors needs to focus on multiple tumor sites and that in ovarian cancer,
distant tumor implants may be particularly important.Supported by NIH R01
CA163462 and DOD OC093429.

