Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXB13: Investigating mechanisms of G84E mutation associated with
prostate carcinogenesis


In collaboration with Dr. K. Cooney's lab at the Univ of Michigan, our
group recently discovered that a recurrent glycine-to-glutamic acid
germline mutation (G84E) in HOXB13 is associated with an increased
prostate cancer (PCa) risk. HOXB13 is an androgen receptor
(AR)-independent prostate-specific transcription factor shown to play a
critical role in the development of the mouse prostate. However, the
exact function of HOXB13 in normal human prostate biology and the
mechanism by which HOXB13 G84E predisposes carriers to PCa remain
unknown. The purpose of this study is to test our hypothesis that HOXB13
G84E, by itself or together with other oncogenes, may reprogram normal
prostate cells to be prone to transformation, possibly due to altered
molecular characteristics that have downstream effects on transcriptional
targets. To this end, using patient-derived normal prostate epithelial
cells immortalized with hTERT in the presence or absence of transduced AR
(957e/hTERT and 957e/hTERT/AR), we generated cell lines stably expressing
HOXB13 WT or G84E to examine neoplastic phenotypes and differentiation.
In the presence of AR, HOXB13 WT and G84E caused a change in cell
morphology to a fibroblast-like appearance and suppressed proliferation
without any significant differences between WT and G84E. In the absence
of AR, the morphological and growth suppressive effects of HOXB13 were
ablated, which indicates a cooperative relationship between HOXB13 and
AR. In addition, we analyzed several molecular aspects of HOXB13 WT and
G84E such as protein-interactions, subcellular localization and half-life
which could hypothetically contribute to carcinogenesis when altered.
Whether the HOXB13-MEIS and HOXB13-AR interactions are affected by G84E
was studied for the following reasons. Most HOXB13 mutations identified
in PCa lie in the MEIS-interacting domains (MID) of HOXB13 and the
biological significance of HOX-MEIS complexes has been shown in leukemic
transformation. HOXB13 mediates the transcription of a subset of
AR-target genes and the HOXB13-AR interaction has been documented.
Immunoprecipitation analysis in 957e/hTERT/AR demonstrated that HOXB13
and MEIS2 interact through the MIDs and G84E did not alter this
interaction. Additionally, G84E did not disturb the HOXB13-AR
interaction. Finally, HOXB13 G84E localized properly to the nucleus and
no significant differences were found in the half-lives of HOXB13 WT and
G84E, at least in the absence of AR. Taken together, our study suggests
that HOXB13 G84E alone or with AR cannot initiate PCa in our cell line
model with a caveat that our model does not accurately recapitulate human
PCa since patients harbor the G84E mutation throughout development.
Moreover, the lack of molecular differences between WT and G84E calls for
further investigation of potential areas of G84E-induced alterations,
such as gene-protein and protein-protein interactions on a global scale.

