Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing PK parameters using dynamic contrast enhanced
multispectral optoacoustic tomography (DCE-MSOT)


Pharmacokinetic imaging is a powerful platform for evaluating new
candidate drugs and imaging agents, and multitude of applications have
been demonstrated in DCE MRI. Interesting parameters such as Ktrans,
half-life and Tmax can be retrieved for a tumor region after injection of
a perfusion agent, allowing one to draw important conclusions on tumor
growth, vascularization or therapy response. DCE MRI however is to a
certain extent limited to magnetic agents and provides limited spatial
and temporal resolution.Multispectral Optoacoustic Imaging (MSOT) is an
emerging modality that combines ultrasound resolution of 150 m and
acquisition times of a few microseconds with optical contrast in the near
infrared (NIR) spectral region. Multispectral imaging allows the
localization of injected fluorophores without necessity of a baseline
scan before injection, while a core imaging rate of 10 images/second
allows the acquisition of a multispectral image within a second or even
less. This enables fast image acquisition to support pharmacokinetic
imaging, where the temporal profile of individual pixels is fit to a
model equation and resulting parameters are plotted as parametric maps.
Using targeted agents, binding specificity and its kinetics can be
evaluated, while perfusion agents allow the assessment of perfusion and
tissue uptake through Ktrans. One advantage in regards to DCE-MRI is the
ability to extract the arterial input function from the data itself by
monitoring a single cross-section with maximal temporal resolution.
Another important feature is the use of intrinsic contrast that allows
blood oxygenation quantification, enabling the co-registration of
functional oxygenation measurements with DCE perfusion measurements.In
particular, various algorithms can be applied in order to visualize blood
oxygenation as a result from tissue intrinsic optoacoustic contrast
without the injection of additional agents. These can be evaluated for
pixel dependent temporal changes using the fast image acquisition
techniques described above, which allows for tumor delineation and
assessment of perfusion in a CO2 challenge experiment by visualizing the
localized change in blood oxygenation. This can be cross-validated by the
subsequent injection of a perfusion agent and evaluation of its transfer
coefficient using DCE-MSOT techniques to paint a complete picture of the
evaluated tumor microenvironment. The presented work uses the U87-MG
glioblastoma and 4T1 tumors to illustrate the abilities of the technique
in both subcutaneous and orthotopic settings.The extension of
contrast-enhanced kinetic modeling to the optoacoustic imaging regime
allows access to a library of optical probes that are otherwise
unavailable to traditional DCE-MRI, while maintaining high spatial
resolution and providing access to functional hemodynamic parameters.

