Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment with Hedgehog inhibitor PF-913 attenuates
leukemia-initiation potential in acute myeloid leukemia cells


Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in
a variety of cancers, and required for maintenance of the leukemic stem
cell (LSC) populations in several experimental systems. Cumulative
evidence suggests that dormant self-renewing LSC contribute to acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) propagation and relapse by evading conventional
chemotherapies that target cycling cells. PF-04449913 (PF-913) is a novel
oral small molecule inhibitor that selectively binds and targets
Smoothened (SMO), a membrane protein regulating the Hh pathway. Treatment
with PF-913 has shown promising results regarding safety, tolerability,
and early signs of efficacy in patients with hematologic malignancies
including AML. However, the detailed mechanisms and biomarkers remain to
be elucidated in AML therapy. Using the co-culturing system with HS-5
stromal cells, the colony assay system, and the immunodeficient
NOD/SCID/IL2rnull (NOG) mouse model serially xenotransplanted with
primary AML cells, we examined the effects of PF-913 on LSC population
and AML propagation. In primary AML cells, the Hh signaling pathway was
activated more in CD34-positive cells than CD34-negative cells. Ex
vivo-treatment with PF-913 inhibited proliferation and induced minimal
cell death in leukemia cell lines and primary AML cells. However, in
vivo-treatment with PF-913 attenuated leukemia-initiation potential in
AML cells through the serial transplantation system (0% human-CD45+ cells
in bone marrow cells derived from the 2nd recipient mice), while limiting
reduction of tumor burden in the primary leukemia system. Also in the
colony-assay system using primary AML cells, treatment with PF-913
reduced serially colony formation. In leukemia cell lines and primary AML
cells, treatment with PF-913 decreased the quiescent
(Hoechst-33342low/Pyronin-Ylow) cell population as well as down-regulated
mRNA encoding downstream effector GLIs and GLI-targeting molecules in the
canonical Hh pathway. In the in vivo-NOG mouse system, comprehensive Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) revealed that PF-913 treatment modulated
cell cycle regulation and self-renewal signaling in primary AML cells.
Moreover, combined treatment with PF-913 abrogated resistance to Ara-C in
AML cell lines co-cultured with HS-5 stromal cells and sensitized AML
cells to Ara-C in the cutaneous tumor system. Our findings imply that
selective Hh inhibitor, PF-913 treatment can attenuate the
leukemia-initiation potential in AML cells by modulation of cell cycle
regulation and self-renewal signaling, and can also improve AML therapy
through sensitizing dormant LSC to chemotherapy and overcoming the
resistance in the bone marrow microenvironment.

