Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The plasmonic photothermal therapy efficacy of Au NRs in vivo
using a SCCHN xenograft mouse model


The plasmonic photothermal therapy (PPTT) is promising for the treatment
of cancer because it overcomes the challenges in conventional treatments
by avoiding drug resistance, surgery infections, and minimizing healthy
cell destruction. It is well suited for the treatment of the squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) as this type of cancer is
readily accessible to NIR light. We have synthesized the Au nanorods
(NRs) with different sizes (25nm and 40nm) and modified the particle
surface with PEG stabilizer, and conjugated Au NRs with SCCHN-targeted
HNSCP peptides. The new Au NRs -assisted PPTT was tested in a SCCHN
xenografted tumor model. The SCCHN xenograft tumors were inoculated by
injection of 1x106 Tu212 cells subcutaneously into the right flank of
nude mice and allowed to grow to approximately 100 mm3. Fifty nude mice
were divided into ten groups (n=5) in a way to minimize weight and tumor
size differences among the groups: control group treated with PBS (A),
laser treatment (diode laser, 808 nm, 1-2 W/cm2, 1cm diameter, 2 min)
(B), non-targeted AuNRs ( 25nm size) with (C)or without laser
treatment(D), HNSCP-Au NRs(25 nm size) with (E) or without laser
treatment( F), non-targeted Au NRs (40 nm size) with (G) or without laser
treatment (H), HNSCP-Au NRs(40 nm size) with (I) or without laser
treatment (J). Au NRs (25 L) at concentration of, 25 nM in PBS buffer
were injected into mice via intratumoral injection. Our results showed
that the Au NRs with laser treatment could significantly inhibit the
tumor growth in vivo compared with that of control and laser treatment
only groups (without Au NRs). In addition, the tumor targeted Au NRs
didn't show enhanced antitumor efficacy compared with the non-tumor
targeted Au NRs. The mice showed complete response to the PPTT didn't
have tumor relapse after 15 weeks of the treatment. There are no
remarkable toxicities observed. (This research was supported by the
National Cancer Institute award 5U01CA151802 )

