Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RapidFire MS/MS enables both rapid evaluation of multiple histone
methyltransferases and label-free high throughput screening of targeted
compound libraries


Introduction: Histone methyltransferases (HMT's) are histone-modifying
enzymes, that catalyze the transfer of one, two, or three methyl groups
from S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) to lysine and arginine residues on
histone proteins. This methylation results in changes in gene expression.
Over-expression and misregulation of these enzymes has been associated
with cancer, making HMT's an attractive area for the development of new
cancer therapeutics. We developed highly sensitive, high throughput
RapidFire-based MS/MS biochemical assays to quantitate the enzymatic
activity of three different HMT's. This methodology allows a label-free,
non-radioactive and coupling enzyme free system to biochemically
characterize the kinetic mechanism of HMT's and determine the mechanism
of inhibition of small molecule inhibitors.Methods: The API4000 mass
spectrometer coupled with an Agilent RapidFire 300 Mass Spectrometry
system was used to rapidly evaluate the enzymatic activity of HMT's using
native substrates for both enzymatic characterization of the target as
well as screening highly specialized and targeted compound libraries. The
Agilent type D column was used for separation of detected products,
S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine (SAH) and SAM from other assay components.
Electrospray ionization multiple reaction monitoring positive polarity
scan was used to detect the two desired analytes of the reaction. SAH was
detected using a Q1 mass set to 399.2 amu and a Q3 mass set to 250.1 amu
while SAM was detected using a Q1 mass set to 385.2 amu and a Q3 mass set
to 136.1 amu.Preliminary data: Pfizer proprietary compound libraries were
assembled and screened in a 384-well plate format against multiple HMT's
using the RapidFire 300 coupled with an API4000 mass spectrometer. The
enzymatic screens using RapidFire LC/MS enable both one platform and one
method for simultaneous investigation of multiple different epigenetic
targets in the portfolio. Total cycle time required to process a single
assay well for a single HMT in a 384 well plate is 10 seconds. Therefore,
one 384-well plate can be sampled in just under 65 minutes, enabling the
processing of more than 7,500 compounds per day. Good correlation and a
sizeable reduction in cost/well is evident with the RapidFire MS/MS
generated results compared with more traditional assay methods for
compound screening such as 3H-SAM scintillation proximity assay and
3H-SAM filter plate assay. This presentation will discuss the results
generated from the screening efforts of multiple histone
methyltransferases against our methyltransferase targeted libraries and
our fragment library, as well as the hit follow-up strategy and
mechanistic characterization implemented to ensure high quality lead
matter was selected for further investment and follow-up.

