Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smo-targeted sonic hedgehog signaling inhibitor enhances
therapeutic antibody deposition and efficacy in a patient-derived
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma model


Tumor stroma supports growth, invasion, and treatment resistance of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), and in conjunction with
hypovascularity, constitutes a barrier that minimizes tumor cell drug
exposure. Targeting tumor stroma is an attractive strategy in PDAC, and
Smo-binding inhibitors are reported to mediate stromal thinning and
increased microvessel density in PDAC models.No information exists as to
the effect of sHHI upon deposition of macromolecular therapeutic agents
such as monoclonal antibodies (mAb). Therefore we investigated effects of
sHHI LDE225 upon tumor vascularity, mAb deposition, and mAb therapeutic
efficacy in a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model of PDAC in SCID
mice.PDAC tumor #18269 was established in SCID mice and has retained
abundant stroma and low microvessel density reminiscent of the original
patient tumor. It expresses EGF receptor. Tumor-bearing mice were dosed
orally with LDE225 (40 mg/kg) for 10 days, and pharmacodynamic biomarkers
of sHHI effect were quantified. Mouse-specific TaqMan probes demonstrated
high Gli1 expression in stromal cells, which was deeply suppressed within
3 days of sHHI dosing. Human-specific probes showed little Gli1
expression in tumor cells and no effect of sHHI treatment. Over 10 days
of sHHI treatment, tumor microvessel density did not change significantly
(based on CD31 staining), but the fraction of functional vessels
increased significantly by day 7 (based on staining with fluorescent
Lycopersicon esculentum lectin injected IV prior to tumor
harvest).Fluorescently labeled mAbs that were tumor-targeted (cetuximab;
anti-EGFR) or non-targeted (anti-topotecan) were co-injected on d7 of
sHHI treatment. Compared to untreated controls, tumor exposure (AUC) of
cetuximab more than doubled, and was observed to distribute to regions of
the tumor enriched in tumor cells. Deposition of non-targeted mAb also
was increased relative to controls, but distributed more to stromal areas
than tumor cell areas.To investigate whether the enhanced deposition of
cetuximab mediated by sHHI pretreatment would enhance efficacy, cetuximab
was administered on d 5, 8, 11 of a 10-day sHHI or vehicle (control)
regimen. This sequence was repeated 6 times, with an inter-cycle gap of 5
days. Rituximab (anti-human CD20) was the non-targeted control. Cetuximab
alone showed no therapeutic benefit. However, cetuximab combined with
sHHI suppressed tumor progression for more than 80 days, and median time
to study endpoint was more than 250% longer than for all other treatment
groups except sHHI-alone, which mediated a 30% increase.Conclusions:
increased perfusion and vascular permeability mediated by sHHI
pretreatment permits access of therapeutic mAb to otherwise inaccessible
regions of the tumor interior, and reveals anti-tumor activity of a mAb
that previously failed clinically for PDAC treatment.

