Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioblastoma multiforme utilizes system Xc- in survival under
oxidative stress and chemoresistance


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive malignant
primary brain tumor in humans, with a median survival rate of 10-15
months and a five year survival rate of 2.9% from initial diagnosis.
Characteristically, GBM exhibits high proliferation and metabolism rates
as well as low reactive oxygen species (ROS) production that is sustained
using a sodium-independent, electro-neutral transporter known as system
XC-. System XC- is composed of a regulatory heavy subunit (4F2hc) linked
to a catalytic light subunit (xCT). This protein complex mediates the
uptake of L-cystine into the cell, and L-glutamate out of the cell, at a
1:1 ratio. Imported cystine is reduced to L- cysteine, the rate limiting
substrate in glutathione (GSH) synthesis. Glutathione is an essential
antioxidant in the central nervous system that is responsible for
maintaining intracellular redox homeostasis by neutralizing ROS. High
intracellular GSH levels in cancer cells are associated with drug
resistance and detoxification of alkylating agents such as temozolomide
(TMZ). Therefore, system XC- expressed in glioma cells may be used as a
target to reduce glioma survival and tumor burden. Sulfasalazine inhibits
system Xc- and demonstrated a strong antitumor potential in preclinical
models of malignant glioma. However, the first clinical trial using
sulfasalazine to treat GBM patients was terminated due to off-target
effects. To further elucidate the protective role of system XC- in GBM,
we generated stable xCT knock-down and over-expressing U251 glioma cells.
These lines were characterized for survival, proliferation, apoptosis and
resistance to insult. The xCT-over-expressing cells were more resistant
to hydrogen peroxide treatment and GSH depletion. Interestingly,
over-expression of system XC- in U251 cells also resulted in decreased
sensitivity to TMZ treatment compared to parental and empty vector
controls. As expected, xCT-knock-down cells exhibited increased
intracellular ROS after treatment. Using glioma lines stably transduced
to over-express or knock-down xCT, we demonstrate for the first time that
system XC- over-expression in GBM not only promotes survival under
oxidative stress but may also modulate sensitivity to chemotherapy
treatment. Therefore, therapeutic manipulation of this transporter either
alone or in combination with other treatments may improve clinical
outcome in patients diagnosed with GBM.

