Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of inhibitors of TWIST1 as a treatment for lung
cancer


Although a large fraction of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are
dependent on defined oncogenic driver mutations, little progress has been
made in the treatment of patients with the most frequently observed
driver mutation, mutant KRAS. Acquired resistance to therapy targeting
other driver mutations (EGFR mutant and ALK translocation positive
tumors) is all but inevitable. We recently demonstrated that Twist1, a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, cooperates with mutant Kras
to induce lung adenocarcinoma in mouse models, and that inhibition of
Twist1 in murine models and human lung cancer cell lines led to
oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) and in some cases, apoptosis. We have
also found that TWIST1 is essential for tumor maintenance in human NSCLCs
characterized by oncogenic drivers including KRAS mutation, EGFR mutation
and c-MET amplification. As TWIST1 is not typically expressed
post-natally, therapies directed against TWIST1 may present a more
specific and perhaps less toxic therapy. Targeting the TWIST1 pathway
represents an exciting and novel therapeutic strategy which may have a
significant clinical impact.We employed a combined
bioinformatics-chemical approach to identify pharmacologic inhibitors of
TWIST1. We used gene expression profiles from several KRAS mutant human
NSCLC cell lines following shRNA-mediated TWIST1 knockdown to perform
connectivity map (CMAP) analysis. We found that several of our highly
ranked compounds had significant growth inhibitory effects in NSCLC cell
lines. Furthermore, several of our candidate agents produced
dose-dependent inhibition of TWIST1-induced dissemination in a novel 3D
organoid dissemination assay. Interestingly, a family of related harmala
alkaloids including harmine ranked highly on the CMAP analysis. We found
that harmine could not only inhibit growth in several oncogene driver
defined NSCLC cell lines through the induction of apoptosis but could
also decrease TWIST1 levels through a post-transcriptional mechanism. The
growth inhibitory effects of the harmala alkaloids correlated with the
ability to degrade TWIST1. Additionally, independent of our CMAP
analysis, we identified another compound, salinomycin, which appears to
modulate cancer cell growth and resulted in a decrease in TWIST1 levels
through a post-transcriptional mechanism as well. Interestingly,
salinomycin treatment induced a mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET)
in NSCLC which could be partially blocked in TWIST1 overexpressing NSCLC
cell lines. We are currently examining the in vivo efficacy of these
agents. In conclusion, we have identified several compounds that inhibit
TWIST1 dependent dissemination and in some cases can lead to TWIST1
degradation. Since TWIST1 is essential for not only KRAS mutant NSCLC but
more broadly for oncogene driven NSCLC, these studies could lead to the
development of a novel class of inhibitors which could have a significant
clinical impact.

