Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing cancer gene mutations in non-small cell lung cancer
from African American patients


Background and Hypothesis: Lung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States. The reasons for higher
incidence and inferior survival rates among African American lung cancer
patients have not been adequately defined. We hypothesized that molecular
differences, specifically differential incidence of somatic cancer gene
mutations, may be a contributing factor to these population-based
disparities. Large-scale, high-throughput genomic studies of the major
subtype of lung cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), have so far
neglected to adequately represent African American patients. Such
information holds potential to transform treatment decisions to improve
care for subsets of patients and address disparities.Methods: We tested
our hypothesis using a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry approach to analyze
tumor DNA for 214 coding mutations in 26 cancer genes previously linked
to NSCLC, including oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. The sample sets
investigated included NSCLC specimens from 335 patients of European
ancestry and 137 African Americans. For 299 of these 472, DNA from normal
matched specimens was available and included in the study, thus totaling
771 samples.Results: There was no significant difference in frequencies
for somatic cancer gene coding mutations across populations and gene
mutation frequencies were within reported ranges, e.g., KRAS (11%), EGFR
(10%) and PIK3CA (2%). However, this study also uncovered a previously
unrecognized germ line variant in the DDR2 oncogene. In addition, we
found that the frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
STK11, cMet, and NOTCH differ between African American and European
ancestry patients.Conclusion: This body of work is among the largest
reported on to date comparing somatic cancer gene mutations in African
American and European-ancestry patients. The outcomes show that across a
broad spectrum of coding mutations, genomic tumor testing could equally
benefit both populations.

