Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: QTLs in breast tumor and breast normal adjacent FFPE specimens
from the Nurses Health Study


Rationale: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of breast cancer have
identified 71 risk alleles, majority of which are located in intergenic
or intronic regions. We used a network medicine approach to associate
breast cancer risk single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with transcript
abundance in formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) breast tissue.
Identification of expression quantitative loci (eQTLs) may help to better
understand the regulatory mechanisms by which these risk variants
influence breast cancer susceptibility.Method: We identified invasive
postmenopausal breast cancer cases in the Nurses Health Study (NHS)
diagnosed from 1990-2004 with GWAS data and sufficient RNA for expression
profiling in breast tumor and normal adjacent breast tissue. RNA was
extracted using the Qiagen AllPrep RNA isolation kit, amplified using the
NuGen Ovation FFPE WTA kit, and profiled using the Affymetrix Human
Transcriptome Array (HTA 3.0v1). The HTA includes 6,892,960 features for
measuring gene expression, alternative splicing, coding SNPs, and
noncoding transcripts. After filtering and removing probes with a low
dynamic range in our samples, we included 25,000 gene expression probes
in our QTL analyses. We mapped these probes to genes using hg19.Results:
Analyses were conducted separately for 376 breast tumor and 274 normal
adjacent samples. We conducted quality control analyses, corrected for
assay plate-to-plate variation and included patient's age at diagnosis
and year of diagnosis as covariates in the multivariate linear regression
model. We identified 11 trans eQTLs in normal adjacent breast tissue, 11
trans eQTLs in estrogen receptor (ER)+ breast tumor samples, and 12 trans
eQTLs in ER- breast tumor samples (permutation adjusted p-valueRationale:
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of breast cancer have identified
71 risk alleles, majority of which are located in intergenic or intronic
regions. We used a network medicine approach to associate breast cancer
risk single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with transcript abundance in
formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) breast tissue. Identification of
expression quantitative loci (eQTLs) may help to better understand the
regulatory mechanisms by which these risk variants influence breast
cancer susceptibility.Method: We identified invasive postmenopausal
breast cancer cases in the Nurses Health Study (NHS) diagnosed from
1990-2004 with GWAS data and sufficient RNA for expression profiling in
breast tumor and normal adjacent breast tissue. RNA was extracted using
the Qiagen AllPrep RNA isolation kit, amplified using the NuGen Ovation
FFPE WTA kit, and profiled using the Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array
(HTA 3.0v1). The HTA includes 6,892,960 features for measuring gene
expression, alternative splicing, coding SNPs, and noncoding transcripts.
After filtering and removing probes with a low dynamic range in our
samples, we included 25,000 gene expression probes in our QTL analyses.
We mapped these probes to genes using hg19.Results: Analyses were
conducted separately for 376 breast tumor and 274 normal adjacent
samples. We conducted quality control analyses, corrected for assay
plate-to-plate variation and included patient's age at diagnosis and year
of diagnosis as covariates in the multivariate linear regression model.
We identified 11 trans eQTLs in normal adjacent breast tissue, 11 trans
eQTLs in estrogen receptor (ER)+ breast tumor samples, and 12 trans eQTLs
in ER- breast tumor samples (permutation adjusted p-value<0.05). We also
developed a new method, functional quantitative trait loci (fQTL)
analysis, to gain additional pathway insight into genetic associations
important in breast cancer. In the fQTL analysis we tested for the
association between SNPs and the expression of gene functional classes
and pathways, evaluating the hypothesis that SNPs may also be associated
with regulation of processes in addition to individual genes. Using a
cutoff of false discovery rate Rationale: Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) of breast cancer have identified 71 risk alleles, majority of
which are located in intergenic or intronic regions. We used a network
medicine approach to associate breast cancer risk single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with transcript abundance in formalin fixed paraffin
embedded (FFPE) breast tissue. Identification of expression quantitative
loci (eQTLs) may help to better understand the regulatory mechanisms by
which these risk variants influence breast cancer susceptibility.Method:
We identified invasive postmenopausal breast cancer cases in the Nurses
Health Study (NHS) diagnosed from 1990-2004 with GWAS data and sufficient
RNA for expression profiling in breast tumor and normal adjacent breast
tissue. RNA was extracted using the Qiagen AllPrep RNA isolation kit,
amplified using the NuGen Ovation FFPE WTA kit, and profiled using the
Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array (HTA 3.0v1). The HTA includes
6,892,960 features for measuring gene expression, alternative splicing,
coding SNPs, and noncoding transcripts. After filtering and removing
probes with a low dynamic range in our samples, we included 25,000 gene
expression probes in our QTL analyses. We mapped these probes to genes
using hg19.Results: Analyses were conducted separately for 376 breast
tumor and 274 normal adjacent samples. We conducted quality control
analyses, corrected for assay plate-to-plate variation and included
patient's age at diagnosis and year of diagnosis as covariates in the
multivariate linear regression model. We identified 11 trans eQTLs in
normal adjacent breast tissue, 11 trans eQTLs in estrogen receptor (ER)+
breast tumor samples, and 12 trans eQTLs in ER- breast tumor samples
(permutation adjusted p-value<0.05). We also developed a new method,
functional quantitative trait loci (fQTL) analysis, to gain additional
pathway insight into genetic associations important in breast cancer. In
the fQTL analysis we tested for the association between SNPs and the
expression of gene functional classes and pathways, evaluating the
hypothesis that SNPs may also be associated with regulation of processes
in addition to individual genes. Using a cutoff of false discovery rate
<10%, we identified 2 SNPs associated with 2 Gene Ontology Molecular
Functions in normal adjacent breast tissue, 1 SNP associated with 5
Molecular Functions in ER- tumor samples but no significant SNP
associations in ER+ tumor samples. Integrated eQTL and fQTL analyses and
variant annotation are ongoing.Conclusion: In summary, our results
provide functional insights on the underlying biology of loci identified
in breast cancer GWAS in the specimen type that is most impactful in
translation to clinical practice. Identification of gene transcripts that
can be measured in FFPE tissue and are associated with breast cancer risk
loci is critical in understanding the mechanism by which these variants
affect risk and mediate disease processes.

