Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of histone deacethylase 8 expression by inhibitory GTP
binding proteins signaling via JNK pathway in H1299 non-small-cell lung
cancer cells


Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been reported to regulate the cell
growth, proliferation, and apoptosis, and HDAC8 seems to be involved in
tumor growth and progression. Inhibitory heterotrimeric GTP-binding
proteins (Gi) are activated by seven transmembrane receptors, and
regulate cell proliferation by regulating the activity of adenylate
cyclase, phospholipase C beta, and ion channels. This study investigated
the effects of Gi signaling system on the expression of HDAC8 and the
underlying mechanism in lung cancer cells. When Gi signaling system was
activated by expressing Gi1Q204L, a constitutively active mutant Gi1, the
expression of HDAC8 protein and mRNA was increased in H1299
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Inhibition of transcription by
treatment with Actinomycin D did not block the increase in mRNA, and the
degradation of HDAC8 mRNA was facilitated in Gi1Q204L -expressing cells,
suggesting Gi1 signaling system increases HDAC8 expression by stabilizing
mRNA. In addition, treatment with adenosine or an adenosine receptor
agonist, CCPA (2-chloro-N(6)-cyclopentyladenosine), which activate
Gi-coupled receptors, also increased HDAC8 mRNA and protein levels. The
effect of adenosine was blocked by treatment with DPCPX
(8-Cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine), an adenosine A1 receptor
antagonist. JNK phosphorylation was inhibited by treatment with the
adenosine and CCPA. Treatment with a JNK inhibitor, SP600125 increased
HDAC8 expression. Adenosine inhibited the activation of MKK4 and CDC 42,
which act upstream of JNK. Activation of Gi signaling stimulated
proliferation of H1299 cells, and the stimulating effect was abolished by
knockdown of Gi1. Thus, we conclude that Gi signaling increases HDAC8
expression via JNK pathway, resulting in stimulation of cell
proliferation of H1299 lung cancer cells. This study suggests that Gi
signaling may be involved in epigenetic control of gene expression by
regulating HDAC8 expression.

