Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: iNOS inhibition increases survival in triple negative breast
cancer by targeting metastasis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer with no effective targeted therapy. Inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) is associated with poor survival in breast cancer
patients by increasing tumor aggressiveness. This work aimed to
investigate the potential of iNOS inhibitors as a targeted therapy for
TNBC. We hypothesized that inhibition of endogenous iNOS would decrease
TNBC aggressiveness by reducing metastasis through modulation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducing factors. We also propose
an effective clinically relevant-targeted therapeutic regimen by
re-purposing the iNOS inhibitor L-NMMA which has been extensively
investigated in thousands of patients with cardiogenic shock.Cell
migration was determined in confluent MDA-MB-231 cells with a wound
healing assay treated with different concentrations of the specific iNOS
inhibitor 1400W (0, 0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 2, 4 mM) in low serum
conditions (1%) for 72h. EMT-inducing factors (Snail, Slug, Twist1, and
Zeb1) were determined by Western blot in MDA-MB-231 cells. For in vivo
studies, 3x106 MDA-MB-231 and SUM159 cells were injected in the right
mammary fat pad of female SCID Beige mice (n=10/group). The clinically
relevant dose regimen consisted on two cycles of docetaxel (20mg/kg, i.p,
on day 0) twelve hours before being combined with L-NMMA (400mg/kg on day
1, and 200mg/kg for 4 additional days by oral gavage) and amlodipine on
day 0 (10mg/kg, i.p, daily, for 6 days). Docetaxel alone, as well as
saline (i.p) + sterile water (oral gavage) were used as controls.Our
results show that the specific iNOS inhibitor 1400W was able to diminish
cell migration in vitro for all concentrations tested. Importantly,
impact of iNOS inhibition on cell migration was further correlated with a
dose-dependent decrease of the EMT transcription factors- Snail, Slug,
and Twist1. Zeb1 was mainly affected at millimolar concentrations. In
vivo, the combination of L-NMMA and docetaxel was able to decrease tumor
growth in a MDA-MB-231 and SUM159 orthotopic models. Additionally, the
combination with amlodipine did significantly prevent the
L-NMMA-dependent increase of blood pressure. More importantly, this dose
regimen also improved survival compared to docetaxel alone.In conclusion,
targeted therapy with iNOS inhibitor impacts cell migration and changes
in epithelial-mesenchymal transition might influence metastatic events.
Based on these findings, we have planned a phase Ib/II targeted
therapeutic trial by re-purposing L-NMMA as an anti-cancer indication.
Targeting TNBC with L-NMMA could significantly alter clinical practice
for treatment of breast cancer in the near future.

