Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of patient tumor-derived orthotopic xenograft models
of metastatic pediatric germinoma


Despite comprising up to 10% of pediatric CNS tumors, an animal model of
intracranial germinoma has not been previously established. Standard of
case for germinoma is radiation therapy, with recent evidence that
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy may allow reduction of radiation dose, but
concern for neuro-cognitive toxicity remains despite the reduction of
radiation. A clinically relevant animal model of germinoma would
facilitate investigation and discovery of novel agents which may obviate
the need for radiation in the future. To develop xenograft mouse models,
we implanted germinoma tumor cells from two children with metastatic
disease, one from a surgical specimen of a cervical metastatic tumor and
the second from disseminated tumor cells in the CSF, directly into the
right cerebral hemispheres of NOD-SCID mice. Both patient tumor samples
have undergone whole exome sequencing; one of the two models has a
germinoma-associated mutation in c-kit. The tumors have been serially
passaged in xenografts for 3-5 times, with each passaged tumor
maintaining the ability to generate tumors, suggestive of the persistence
of viable tumorigenic/tumor stem cells. Data from additional tumor models
established by our lab have confirmed molecular and genetic fidelity
between xenograft-initiating human brain tumors and their corresponding
murine models. The orthotopic location in the mouse brain of the
xenograft model should also reasonably replicate the human germinoma
tumor microenvironment. Cultured cells are currently growing from both
tumor models in order to establish germinoma cell lines. In summary, our
orthotopic xenograft murine models of two metastatic pediatric germinomas
are the first to be established for this tumor type. These models will
allow much needed pre-clinical drug testing of chemotherapeutics and
combination therapies as well as further biologic characterization of
pediatric germinomas.

