Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin-RNAi nanotherapeutics for synergistic anti-tumor activity


Cisplatin and other DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics are widely used to
treat a broad spectrum of malignancies. However, the development of
acquired chemoresistance is a persistent clinical problem limiting the
successful treatment of malignancies and considerable work has been done
to identify the molecular mechanisms involved. Many possible mechanisms
have been suggested for platinum resistance emergence, such as drug
efflux, apoptosis inhibition among others. Recent studies have shown that
the suppression of crucial gene products (e.g. REV1, REV3L) involved in
the error-prone translesion DNA synthesis pathway can sensitize
intrinsically resistant tumors to chemotherapy. Due to the lack of
effective inhibitors and the undruggable feature of some targets, it is
not easy to screen and validate the target combinations, especially in
vivo. Since synthetic siRNA has emerged as a class of attractive
therapeutics for treatment of various cancers by silencing genes that
cause diseases. Given the ability to target and silence nearly any gene
of interest, specific siRNA can be constructed to target genes encoding
proteins involved in DNA repair and the acquisition of multidrug
resistance. Although a powerful means to silence the expression of target
genes, the safe and effective systemic delivery of siRNA therapeutics
remains an important challenge. Herein we have developed an innovative
chemo-RNAi nanotherapeutic strategy that can simultaneously deliver
platinum drugs and multiple siRNAs. We hypothesize that the NP-mediated
delivery of multiple siRNAs against different platinum resistance
mechanisms will allow the validation of key targets. We aim to improve
the efficacy of chemotherapy through additive or synergistic effects
coupled by platinum drug and siRNAs targeting different drug resistance
mechanisms. As proof-of-concept, we have used
poly(lactide-co-glycolide)-b-poly(ethylene glycol)-lipid hybrid
nanocarriers as a delivery platform, translesion DNA polymerases Rev1/3L
as model target proteins responsible for platinum resistance, and
prostate cancer as a model disease. We have successfully created
polymer-lipid NPs that exhibited simultaneous entrapment of siRNA (up to
99%) and cisplatin (around 10%). The size of the NPs ranges from 180 to
220 nm and the drug release profile shows a controlled release of
cisplatin and siRNA over 10 days. We demonstrated the potency of the
siRNA-containing NPs to efficiently knockdown target genes both in vitro
and in vivo. The therapeutic efficacy of NPs containing both cisplatin
prodrug and REV1/REV3L specific siRNAs was further investigated in vitro
and in vivo. qRT-PCR results showed that the NPs exhibited a significant
and sustained suppression of both genes in tumors for up to 3 days after
a single dose. Administering these NPs revealed a synergistic effect on
tumor inhibition in an LNCaP xenograft mouse model that was strikingly
more effective than platinum monotherapy.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

