Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deadly KISS, Kisspeptin10 interaction with osteoblasts and breast
cancer metastastic cells


Current cancer research focuses on blockading metastasis with the hope of
increasing patient survival and prognoses. This research has spurred an
interest in metastasis suppressor genes, such as KISS-1, whose role in
breast cancer remains controversial. This study focuses on the
interactions among one of the proteolytic processing products of the
Kiss1 protein (kisspeptin10, KP10), its receptor, KISS1R (GPR54, AXOR12),
osteoblasts (bone forming cells), and bone-metastatic breast cancer
cells, MDA-MB-231. Previous research suggests that treatment with KP10
reduces the ability of the cancer cells to invade a reconstituted
basement membrane (Matrigel) and to migrate in response to osteosarcoma
cells. The aim of this present study was to determine if KP10 affected
the interaction of MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and bone-metastatic breast cancer
cells.Our laboratory had previously determined that osteoblasts exhibit
an inflammatory response when treated with conditioned medium from breast
cancer cells. This inflammatory response may contribute to cancer cell
proliferation in the bone. This response has not yet been characterized
in the presence of KP10. I hypothesized that KP10 would down regulate the
inflammatory response of osteoblasts to breast cancer cells. MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells express theKISS1R; therefore, these cells were
treated with KP10 (10-100 nM, 2hr), the medium was collected, and the
osteoblasts were treated with it. KP10 significantly decreased the
inflammatory response of osteoblasts to breast cancer conditioned media
indicated by decreased levels of IL-6 as determined by ELISA. This
research has important implications because it provides insight into how
KP10 may be acting on either the breast cancer cells or the bone cells.
In my future research, I will continue to characterize how KP10 can be
used to prevent proliferation or activation of breast cancer metastases
in the bone.This work was supported by an undergraduate research grant
from the Eberly College of Science of Penn State University.

