Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora A kinase and progesterone receptor cross talk in breast
cancer


Breast cancer is the number one diagnosed cancer in women. Luminal breast
cancers express steroid hormone receptors (SR) and these cases can be
effectively treated with endocrine therapies that block estrogen receptor
(ER) activity or estrogen synthesis. Unfortunately, at least 40% of women
develop resistance to anti-estrogen treatments and progress to metastatic
disease. One of the important transitions from hormone responsive
(ER+/PR+ luminal A) to refractory (ER+ luminal B) disease involves the
loss of progesterone receptor (PR) protein expression. However, data from
large clinical trials showed that exposure to a synthetic progestin (MPA)
and estrogen, but not estrogen alone, increased breast cancer incidence
and tumor grade. These data, while somewhat controversial, implicate PR
action in breast cancer development and progression. PR isoforms (A and
B) are ligand-activated transcription factors, though they can be
activated in the absence of progestin via signaling pathways commonly
elicited downstream of growth factor receptors. We have shown that growth
factor signaling (EGF or heregulin) through PR-B can initiate rapid
proliferation and survival of breast cancer cells growing in soft-agar.
PR-B is phosphorylated and hyperactived by mitogenic protein kinases,
including MAPK, CDK2, and CK2. Notably, over-expression and activation of
Aurora A kinase (downstream of MAPKs) is associated with invasive breast
cancer and poor prognosis. We hypothesize that activation of protein
kinases commonly overexpressed in breast cancer provide a context for
aberrant PR activity, resulting in upregulation of Her2/erbB2 signaling,
EMT, and increased expression of mammary stem-cell mediators (stemness).
To model this process, we over-expressed oncogenic Raf1 in ER+/PR+ MCF-7
breast cancer cells. MCF-7-Raf1 cells exhibited constitutive activation
of the MAPK pathway and upregulation of both ER and PR mRNA and protein
relative to parental controls. Addition of progestin to MCF-7-Raf1 cells
increased PR phosphorylation and soft agar growth that was blocked by
MLN8237, an Aurora kinase inhibitor. Interestingly, passage of MCF-7-Raf1
cells as mouse xenografts (1GX) led to rapid tumor progression that was
associated with increased Aurora A phosphorylation, loss of PR mRNA and
protein, expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) markers, increased
stemness, and tamoxifen resistance. These data suggest that Aurora A
kinase and PR cross-talk may drive early breast cancer progression in
response to growth promoting signals. Targeting this cross-talk with
Aurora kinase inhibitors and anti-progestins, in conjunction with
conventional estrogen-blocking therapies, may improve survival outcomes
by preventing progression to endocrine failure. MCF-7-Raf1 and
MCF-7-Raf-1 (1GX) cells may provide a useful model for the study of
SR-loss during luminal A to luminal B transition.

