Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting trastuzumab-resistant HER2+ breast cancer with a
HER3-targeting nanoparticle


HER2-positive breast cancers represent almost a quarter of invasive
breast cancers and are indicative of poor patient survival. Although many
patients with HER2-positive breast cancer initially respond to anti-HER2
treatments, such as trastuzumab, a significant portion of them develop
resistance to these therapies. Consequently, there is a great need to
develop new drugs that are effective against these HER2+ tumors that are
non-responsive or have become resistant to these therapies. Recently, it
has been shown that another member of the HER family, HER3, is commonly
upregulated in these drug-resistant cancers. This observation led us to
develop a novel drug delivery protein, called HerPBK10, that specifically
targets another member of the HER receptor family, HER3. HerPBK10, once
it has bound to the HER3 receptor, triggers rapid endocytosis and
endosomal penetration, enabling it to deliver a toxic payload to the
cell, resulting in cell death. We hypothesized that cytotoxic drugs
delivered by HerPBK10 would induce significant targeted cell death in
trastuzumab-resistant HER2+ breast cancers due to the high levels of
surface HER3 and would therefore provide an effective treatment for
patients who have developed resistance to traditional therapies. First,
we verified that cell surface levels of HER3 are elevated in
trastuzumab-resistant cell lines compared to trastuzumab-sensitive cells.
We then demonstrated, through competitive inhibition with free HER3
ligand, that HerPBK10 binds specifically to HER3 on multiple HER2+ cell
lines. We assembled our targeted molecule, HerPBK10 with the
chemotherapeutic doxorubicin. The resulting nanoparticle, called HerDox,
was used to treat HER2+ breast cancer cell lines that were either
inherently resistant to trastuzumab or had acquired resistance to
trastuzumab. We demonstrated that HerDox caused significant cell death in
both types of resistant cells. We also compared the effect of the HerDox
nanoparticle to trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and the two drugs together and
showed that it caused superior cell death in all three instances. In
addition, we combined our nanoparticle with trastuzumab, and showed that
together, they have an additive effect on cell death. These results
indicate that our HER3 targeting nanoparticle, HerDox, efficiently
targets and kills cancer cells that have become resistant to trastuzumab,
and has the potential to be used either as a single drug or as part of a
combinatorial therapy in eliminating drug-resistant HER2+ breast cancers.
We are in the process of verifying these findings in vivo in order to
demonstrate the potential of HerDox as a treatment for patients who have
become non-responsive to traditional anti-HER2 therapies.

