Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel strategy for the selective and tissue specific inhibition
of MMPs in active breast cancer to bone metastases


Bone metastasis is a common event during breast cancer progression: The
delicate balance between bone matrix synthesizing osteoblasts and bone
resorbing osteoclasts activities is typically subverted by the presence
of tumor cells at the bone site. The resulting incurable lesions cause
extensive osteolysis and severely impact the patient's quality of life.
Understanding how active breast-to-bone metastases manipulate the bone
microenvironment is critical for the development of new therapies to
treat the disease. We have recently shown in preclinical animal models of
breast to bone metastases that MMP-2 proteolytic activity is critical for
the growth of the tumor and the associated osteolysis. We therefore
hypothesized that the selective inhibition of MMP-2 at the tumor site
would be a potent means through which to prevent the progression of the
malignancy. Given that previous broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor (MMPI)
trials were unsuccessful mainly because of consistent side effects, we
took a novel chemical approach to generate a selective MMPI that would
preferentially target the skeleton. To this end, we utilized a
bisphosphonate backbone (tiludronate) to synthesize an MMPI (BMMPI) with
high specificity for MMP-2 (IC50 0.14 0.04M). To test the efficacy of the
BMMPI in vivo, we inoculated 6-week old immunocompromized female mice
with a luciferase expressing osteolytic breast cancer cell line, PyMT-Luc
(105 cells). Following tumor injection, mice (n=6/group) received saline,
tiludronate (25mg/kg, to control for bisphosphonate effects) or BMMPI
(25mg/kg) sub-cutaneously, twice weekly. Tumor growth was measured by
quantitating luminescence over time. Our results show that application of
the BMMPI significantly reduced the breast cancer growth over a two-week
period (pBone metastasis is a common event during breast cancer
progression: The delicate balance between bone matrix synthesizing
osteoblasts and bone resorbing osteoclasts activities is typically
subverted by the presence of tumor cells at the bone site. The resulting
incurable lesions cause extensive osteolysis and severely impact the
patient's quality of life. Understanding how active breast-to-bone
metastases manipulate the bone microenvironment is critical for the
development of new therapies to treat the disease. We have recently shown
in preclinical animal models of breast to bone metastases that MMP-2
proteolytic activity is critical for the growth of the tumor and the
associated osteolysis. We therefore hypothesized that the selective
inhibition of MMP-2 at the tumor site would be a potent means through
which to prevent the progression of the malignancy. Given that previous
broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor (MMPI) trials were unsuccessful mainly
because of consistent side effects, we took a novel chemical approach to
generate a selective MMPI that would preferentially target the skeleton.
To this end, we utilized a bisphosphonate backbone (tiludronate) to
synthesize an MMPI (BMMPI) with high specificity for MMP-2 (IC50 0.14
0.04M). To test the efficacy of the BMMPI in vivo, we inoculated 6-week
old immunocompromized female mice with a luciferase expressing osteolytic
breast cancer cell line, PyMT-Luc (105 cells). Following tumor injection,
mice (n=6/group) received saline, tiludronate (25mg/kg, to control for
bisphosphonate effects) or BMMPI (25mg/kg) sub-cutaneously, twice weekly.
Tumor growth was measured by quantitating luminescence over time. Our
results show that application of the BMMPI significantly reduced the
breast cancer growth over a two-week period (p<0.05). Furthermore, using
Faxitron analysis to determine the extent of tumor induced bone
destruction, we observed significantly less osteolysis in the tibia
images of BMMPI treated mice compared to the control group. Our initial
studies also suggest that BMMPIs perform better than clinically used
bisphosphonates such as tiludronate. We are currently following up our in
vivo/ex vivo analyses with histomorphometrical and histology approaches.
In conclusion, our data thus far demonstrate that an MMP-2 specific BMMPI
may be an effective means to prevent the progression of breast to bone
metastases while at the same time eliminating some of the noted
off-target effects of broad-spectrum MMP inhibitors. Since
bisphosphonates are well tolerated in the clinical setting, we predict
that BMMPIs could be rapidly translated to the patient.

