Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of RET/PTC3 oncogene's inflammatory and transformative
signaling on tumorigenicity of thyroid and non-thyroid tumorigenic cell
lines


Rearranged in transformation/ papillary thyroid carcinoma 3 (RET/PTC3 or
RP3), is a unique fusion oncogene, responsible for a benign version of
PTC. RP3 has an active inflammatory component leading to the secretion of
various pro-inflammatory cytokines, however the role of inflammation in
development and progression of PTC has not been clearly defined.
Facilitating investigation of this issue is our finding that the
transforming and inflammatory signals of RP3 can be functionally
separated allowing us to study each in isolation. We generated several
RP3 mutants ablated in; 1) transformative signaling due to mutation of a
tyrosine residue (RP3Y588Fmutant) which prevents the binding of
downstream adaptor proteins 2) inflammatory signaling through mutation of
binding sites for TRAF2 and TRAF6. Transformation only RP3 mutants grew
tumors in immunodeficient and immunocompetent mice, strengthening our
hypothesis that the inflammatory component of RP3 is responsible for the
benign nature of PTC.To assess the impact of inflammatory RP3 on the
progression of different tumors, various thyroid and non-thyroid
tumorigenic cell lines were transduced with MSCV_IRES_GFP_RP3 mutants and
sorted for GFP expression. With highly immunogenic MC57G cells (C57BL/6
mice), the transforming only mutants developed tumors whereas wild type
RP3 along with inflammatory only RP3 were rejected. Inflammation only RP3
mutant also led to slower tumor growth in Renca cell line (Balb/c)
demonstrating the effect to be independent of haplotype. We are currently
extending the analysis to PTC lines with BRAF and KRAS mutations, which
are usually associated with more aggressive tumor profiles without an
inflammatory tumor microenvironment. Our data so far suggest that
contrary to the contemporary view, inflammation can retard tumor
progression. Thus, the RP3 oncogene might be exploited in this regard.
Future experiments aim to further characterize the importance of
RP3-driven inflammation in tumor growth through continued in vivo and in
vitro studies.

