Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of miR-21 as a potential circulating biomarker
for osteosarcoma


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small noncoding RNAs that are
implicated in various important biological processes by regulation of
gene expression. Aberrant miRNA expression is suggested to be associated
with various human disorders including cancer. In this study, we studied
if miRNAs can be used as biomarkers in osteosarcoma (OS). OS is the most
common malignant bone tumor in children and young adults. Despite the use
of surgery and multi-agent chemotherapy, OS patients who respond poorly
towards chemotherapy or develop relapses have a dismal outcome. Thus, it
is of clinical significance if a biomarker approach can be developed to
monitor tumor burden and detect early relapses in the patients, so that
they can be treated as early as possible to improve the survival. To
achieve this goal, we performed miRNA profiling on a cohort of OS plasma
samples collected from the Texas Children's Hospital. miR-21 and other
miRNAs were identified to be elevated in OS patients relative to a group
of healthy controls. Circulating miR-21 has been detected in other types
of cancer and in the tumor it is known to negatively regulate tumor
suppressor genes involved in proliferation, apoptosis and invasion;
however, its role in OS is still unclear. Hence, we first validated that
miR-21 was elevated in a set of independent osteosarcoma plasma samples
but not in the control samples. Using serial plasma samples from a group
of patients, we found that the circulating miR-21 level was lower in the
posttreatment plasma samples than in the pretreatment samples. These
results suggest that circulating miR-21 may correlate with tumor burden
of the patients. In addition, miR-21 was expressed in many OS tumors as
detected by in situ hybridization on an OS tissue microarray. When tested
on two OS cell lines, miR-21was significantly increased in the culture
media between 24 and 48 hours after plating in a cell number dependent
manner, suggesting that miR-21 could be released from the tumor cells.
Taken together, our results suggest that miR-21 is expressed in OS and
its level in plasma may reflect tumor burden in OS patients.

