Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated exome analysis in childhood hepatoblastoma: Biological
approach for next clinical trial designs


Background: Hepatobastoma (HBL) accounts for more than 80% of childhood
hepatic malignant tumors. The outcome of the HBL cases mainly depends on
the biological characteristics and disease stagings, but the candidate
genes correlated with HBL progression have not been identified. Sequence
capture enrichment strategies and massively parallel next generation
sequencing (NGS) were used for such gene discovery.Methods: Out of
approximately 300 HBL case treated according to the JPLT (Japanese study
group for Pediatric Liver Tumor)-2 protocol, 48 samples cases were
analyzed by a method for whole-exome sequencing coupling Ilumina Nextera
whole-exome capture to the Illumina DNA-sequencing platform. In these
cases, 10 had lung metastatic cases and 13 of the remaining 38 cases had
vascular invasion or multifocal lesions at admission. Consequently, 14
cases had a relapse and 10 cases died of disease. Using conventional
technology, we investigated CNNB1 point-mutations and deletions in these
cases.Results: Among these 48 HBL cases, mutation and deletion in CNNB1
exon 3 was identified in 40 cases, which had been already detected by
conventional techniques. The remaining 8 cases showed the mutation of Wnt
signal genes including AXIN1 and FAP genes. Among the cases with
metastatic lesion and/or consequently dead cases, stemness-associated and
cancer-associated genes showed homozygous deletion (e. g. CDKN2A), a
homozygous inversion in the genes including NF1, and an unbalanced
translocation. The response rates in the 35 cases that underwent
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy revealed that existence of the mutations in
several genes associated with proliferation was significantly correlated
with chemo-resistance. Therefore, we are now constructing next clinical
trial for HBL based on the whole-exome era.Conclusions: Whole-exome
sequencing using NGS in hepatoblastoma revealed several candidates
mutated or deleted genes except for CNNB1 in Wnt-signaling pathway. NGS
can be also used in research and diagnostic settings to screen for
mutations and deletion/insertion of the genes associated with malignant
grade and chemo-resistance. Further NGS analysis provided important
candidates of indicators for diagnostic and therapeutic targets for HBL
clinical trials.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

