Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for GLI1 in the development of multidrug resistance in
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cells


RMS is the most common sarcoma of childhood. About 30% of patients with
localized tumors will recur following treatment. The outcome for patients
with recurrent RMS remains poor. Therefore, development of chemotherapy
resistance during RMS therapy represents an important problem and novel
approaches to prevent or reverse drug resistance are essential.
Activation of multidrug transporter genes, including MDR1, MRP1, LRP and
TAP1 represents an important mechanism for drug resistance in RMS.
However, the mechanism of expression of multidrug resistance genes in RMS
is incompletely understood. Recent reports have suggested a role for the
Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway and its downstream mediator GLI1 in
acquisition of a multidrug resistance phenotype in esophageal
adenocarcinoma, glioblastoma, and myeloid leukemia. Since approximately
60% of embryonal RMS (ERMS) and more rarely alveolar RMS (ARMS) express
HH pathway components, we hypothesized that HH pathway activation may
up-regulate the expression of multidrug resistance genes in RMS. We
demonstrated expression of HH pathway components, including GLI1, in ERMS
(RD, Rh18 and Ruch-2) and ARMS (Rh30 and Rh41) cell lines by qRT PCR
and/or Western blot. We found variable expression of MDR1, MRP1, LRP and
TAP1 by qRT PCR in these cell lines. Treatment of RMS cells with GLI1
siRNA (RD, Rh18 and Rh41) or the GLI1 antagonist GANT61 (Rh18 and Rh30)
caused down-regulation LRP and TAP1 expression. In addition, GLI1, MDR1,
LRP and TAP1 expression was increased in vincristine resistant UKF Rhb-1
RMS cells compared with parental cells (obtained from Dr. Cinatl) by qRT
PCR. Treatment of vincristine resistant UKF Rhb-1 cells with vincristine
together with either GANT61 or Cpd#33 (GLI1 inhibitors), each at a dose,
which did not reduce cell viability individually, significantly decreased
cell viability by MTT assay. Our results suggest that GLI1 up-regulates a
subset of multidrug resistance genes in RMS cells and that
GLI1-inhibitors may reduce multidrug resistance.

