Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive molecular characterization of esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma


BackgroundEsophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a world-wide
prevalent cancer, which is particularly common in certain regions of
Asia. However, the genetic alterations of this disease have not been
fully described.MethodsWe determined the mutational landscape of ESCC
through whole-exome or targeted deep sequencing of 139 tumor/germline
pairs. The somatic copy number variations (SCNV) of over 180 ESCC tumors
were analyzed by SNP-array or array-CGH. Candidate driver mutations were
mathematically calculated by the most updated algorithm MutSigCV, and the
protein expression of which were thoroughly evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. Finally, biological effects of candidate drivers
were examined through functional studies in vitro and in vivo.ResultsDeep
sequencing and computational analysis identified frequent and novel
driver mutations affecting genes such as FAT1 (11.5%), ZNF750 (7.2%),
EP300 (7.9%) and MLL2 (18.0%). FAT1 and ZNF750 genes were homozygouly
deleted in 3.5% and 3.4% ESCCs, respectively, and their RNA transcripts
and proteins were expressed at much lower levels in primary tumors
compared to adjacent normal esophageal epithelial. Importantly, silencing
of wild-type FAT1 or ZNF750 expression with siRNA/shRNAs significantly
promoted cell proliferation and decreased cell differentiation, whereas
ectopic expression of these genes resulted in opposite biological
consequences. These genetic alterations and biological evidence strongly
suggest that FAT1 and ZNF750 likely encode tumor suppressors which are
frequently disrupted in ESCC. Furthermore, by integrating the landscape
of somatic mutation, SCNV and protein dysregulation, we proposed that
RTK-PI3K-MAPK pathways, cell cycle and epigenetic regulation are
frequently altered by multiple molecular mechanisms in esophageal tumors.
Finally, our systematic approaches uncovered many novel druggable
candidates in this disease, such as FGFR1, ALK and XPO1.ConclusionsBy
demonstrating the genomic landscape of over 180 ESCC cases, our
integrated study unmasks a number of novel genetic lesions in ESCC and
provides an important molecular foundation for understanding esophageal
tumors and developing therapeutic targets.

