Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astrocytic elevated gene 1 (AEG1) a target for pharmacological
anticancer intervention


AEG1 is highly expressed in solid tumors; hyperexpression confers
multidrug resistance, increased tumor proliferation, angiogenesis,
metastatic potential and poor outcome in most solid tumors. AEG1
activates multiple protumorogenic signal transduction pathways like
PIK3/ALT, NFKB, MAMPK, WNT and is a rational target for therapeutic
intervention in solid tumors.Also AEG1 functionality is instrumental in
the natural history of brain tumors. Our data in NSCLCs confirm AEG1
overexpression as the main parameter (uni and multivariate analysis)
indicative of outcome to targeted and cytotoxic therapy. We designed an
in silico model based on inhibition of AEG1-p65 crosstalk, identifying a
possible interacting interface between the 2 proteins that could be
modeled as a three-dimensional structure. This interface was further
reduced and transformed into a 3-point pharmacophore for virtual
screening comparing both molecular interaction fields and the
pharmacophore. A total of 217.000 chemical entities (CEs) were tested in
this model giving a Hercules affinity ranking. Sixty CEs with the highest
Hercules ranking were identified for a second (16 CEs) and third (5 CEs)
selection to implement the first round of in vitro studies in our human
solid tumor panel. Twenty analogs were generated to seek for a lead
according to prospective selection criteria. PB0412-3 (PB3), a small
molecule polyheterocyclic compound, was selected for further development.
PB3 displays antitumor activity in the human solid tumor panel (median
IC50 1.3 uM) and PB3-induced growth inhibition appears independent of
EGFR, KRAS & p53 mutational status, Her2 amplification, PIK3 mutations
and BRCA1 expression;tumor cell lines bearing highest AEG1-mRNA
expression levels were sensititive to PB3. Median IC50 in our
glioblastoma (GBM) panel was 60 nM with no impact of MGMT methylation
status on PB3's molar potency (MP). IC50s delta solid vs brain tumors
were significant (pAEG1 is highly expressed in solid tumors;
hyperexpression confers multidrug resistance, increased tumor
proliferation, angiogenesis, metastatic potential and poor outcome in
most solid tumors. AEG1 activates multiple protumorogenic signal
transduction pathways like PIK3/ALT, NFKB, MAMPK, WNT and is a rational
target for therapeutic intervention in solid tumors.Also AEG1
functionality is instrumental in the natural history of brain tumors. Our
data in NSCLCs confirm AEG1 overexpression as the main parameter (uni and
multivariate analysis) indicative of outcome to targeted and cytotoxic
therapy. We designed an in silico model based on inhibition of AEG1-p65
crosstalk, identifying a possible interacting interface between the 2
proteins that could be modeled as a three-dimensional structure. This
interface was further reduced and transformed into a 3-point
pharmacophore for virtual screening comparing both molecular interaction
fields and the pharmacophore. A total of 217.000 chemical entities (CEs)
were tested in this model giving a Hercules affinity ranking. Sixty CEs
with the highest Hercules ranking were identified for a second (16 CEs)
and third (5 CEs) selection to implement the first round of in vitro
studies in our human solid tumor panel. Twenty analogs were generated to
seek for a lead according to prospective selection criteria. PB0412-3
(PB3), a small molecule polyheterocyclic compound, was selected for
further development. PB3 displays antitumor activity in the human solid
tumor panel (median IC50 1.3 uM) and PB3-induced growth inhibition
appears independent of EGFR, KRAS & p53 mutational status, Her2
amplification, PIK3 mutations and BRCA1 expression;tumor cell lines
bearing highest AEG1-mRNA expression levels were sensititive to PB3.
Median IC50 in our glioblastoma (GBM) panel was 60 nM with no impact of
MGMT methylation status on PB3's molar potency (MP). IC50s delta solid vs
brain tumors were significant (p<.0001) representing a 25-fold increase
in MP. Data from nitrosureas in the same GBM panel indicate PB3 is 250
times more potent than BCNU and temozolamide. Median IC50s in human non
cancer lines is 2 uM. PB3 was re-screened in the in silico model; PB3
fully matches the AEG1 binder pharmacophore model and was screened in the
Chemical Space web tool; results confirm PB3 as first-in-class CE.
Functional studies are ongoing; preliminary data in PC9 NSCLC cell line
demonstrate significant PB3-induced downregulation of AEG1 mRNA
expression. Expansion of the CNS tumor panel, cell kinetics, drug-induced
cell death & in vivo/PK-PD studies in SC orthotopic models is ongoing. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first successful attempt at the
Pharmacological intervention against the AEG1 pathway. A dual
developmental plan for PB3 as local brain drug delivery and systemic
therapy is proposed.

