Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Myc induced senescence is dependent on transactivation of actin
depolymerizing factor (ADF)/cofilin to mediate potent bystander effect


Oncogene-induced senescence may prevent unlimited proliferation and lead
to cell death. This phenomenon is likely to be associated with
up-regulation of p53 and p16INK4 tumor suppressor. Morphological
transformation is also an important feature of senescence that exhibits
enlarged cell volume and flat morphology. In this study, we found that
c-Myc was co-upregulated with cofilin-1, an actin-binding protein
essential for actin dynamics and morphological maintenance in replicative
senescence. Additionally, oxidative stress induced senescent phenotypes
also accompanied by up-regulation of both c-myc and cofilin-1. Knockdown
of cofilin-1 was sufficient to minimize the cell shapes and senescence
associated -galactosidase marker that was induced by over-expressed c-myc
or oxidative stress. Over-expression of cofilin-1 was also sufficient to
induce senescence in the absence of p53 and p16INK4, but was unable to
influence c-Myc level. On the other hand, over-expression of c-Myc could
induce cofilin-1 expression. We next found that c-myc was able to induce
the transactivation of cofilin-1 gene according to results of
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and luciferase reporter
gene assay. Furthermore, the results of ChIP assay provided evidence that
c-myc can bind to two proximal E-box elements nearby the transcriptional
initiation on cofilin-1 gene promoter. Although c-myc promoted cellular
senescence in vitro, the conditional medium from c-myc over-expressing
A549 cells accelerated migration and proliferation in separate cultured
cells without c-myc over-expression. Knockdown of cofilin-1 also
alleviated this bystander effect caused by over-expression of c-myc.
Therefore, c-myc oncogene may require cofilin-1 for cell senescence that
influences the growth of other tumor cells. Taken together, current data
provide evidence that c-myc/cofilin-1 signaling pathway is a novel
mechanism on promoting oncogene-induced cellular senescence and tumor
progression.

