Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E-selectin mediates targeted delivery of mesenchymal stem cells to
tumor


Objectives. Tumor tissue produces abundant stromal cell-derived factor-1
(SDF-1/CXCL12) that promotes recruitment of circulating stem/progenitor
cells. We have recently found that SDF-1 induces elevated expression of
CD162 and CD44, both are E-selectin ligands, on luminal endothelial cells
lining capillaries. We thus postulate that highly expressed E-selectin
ligands on tumor endothelium can serve as docking molecules to mediate
specific homing of E-selectin-expressing circulating stem cells to tumor
tissues. Here, we tested the role of E-selectin in mediating and
facilitating homing of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), which are modified
to overexpress E-selectin, to SDF-1rich melanoma tissue.Methods. MSC from
C57 BL6 and E-selectin-/- mice were enriched by culturing bone marrow
cells in MesenCultTM medium. MSC were genetically labeled with luciferase
(Luc2) or GFP in vitro. MSC from C57 BL6 mice were engineered to stably
overexpress E-selectin (E-selectin+). Human melanoma cells were
engineered to overexpress SDF-1. 2 x 10^6 SDF-1+/melanoma cells were
pre-engrafted into NSG mice via tail-vein or subcu to form lung
metastatic foci or skin melanoma, respectively. After 7-10 days, 1 x 10^6
E-selectin+ or E-selectin-/- MSC were injected into tumor-bearing mice
through tail-vein or subcu, respectively. Homing of injected MSC to
melanoma was assessed at various time points by IVIS (for Luc2+/MSC) and
flow cytometry (for GFP+/MSC), respectively.Results. There were
significantly increased numbers of engineered E-selectin-overexpressing
MSC homing to melanoma tissues via systemic and local approaches,
compared to control MSC or E-selectin-/-/MSC (pObjectives. Tumor tissue
produces abundant stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1/CXCL12) that
promotes recruitment of circulating stem/progenitor cells. We have
recently found that SDF-1 induces elevated expression of CD162 and CD44,
both are E-selectin ligands, on luminal endothelial cells lining
capillaries. We thus postulate that highly expressed E-selectin ligands
on tumor endothelium can serve as docking molecules to mediate specific
homing of E-selectin-expressing circulating stem cells to tumor tissues.
Here, we tested the role of E-selectin in mediating and facilitating
homing of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), which are modified to overexpress
E-selectin, to SDF-1rich melanoma tissue.Methods. MSC from C57 BL6 and
E-selectin-/- mice were enriched by culturing bone marrow cells in
MesenCultTM medium. MSC were genetically labeled with luciferase (Luc2)
or GFP in vitro. MSC from C57 BL6 mice were engineered to stably
overexpress E-selectin (E-selectin+). Human melanoma cells were
engineered to overexpress SDF-1. 2 x 10^6 SDF-1+/melanoma cells were
pre-engrafted into NSG mice via tail-vein or subcu to form lung
metastatic foci or skin melanoma, respectively. After 7-10 days, 1 x 10^6
E-selectin+ or E-selectin-/- MSC were injected into tumor-bearing mice
through tail-vein or subcu, respectively. Homing of injected MSC to
melanoma was assessed at various time points by IVIS (for Luc2+/MSC) and
flow cytometry (for GFP+/MSC), respectively.Results. There were
significantly increased numbers of engineered E-selectin-overexpressing
MSC homing to melanoma tissues via systemic and local approaches,
compared to control MSC or E-selectin-/-/MSC (p<0.05).Conclusions.
E-selectin is an effective adhesion molecule in mediating tumor selective
homing of MSC. Our study provides a useful method for targeted delivery
of cells to tumor and may have therapeutic potential for developing stem
cell-based cancer treatment.

