Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial differences in the association of cruciferous vegetable
intake with breast cancer hormone receptor status and tumor subtype


Background: Dietary isothiocyanates (ITCs) are chemopreventive
phytochemicals from cruciferous vegetables (CV). ITCs down-regulate
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal
growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) in breast cancer cells, and inhibit
development of breast cancer in animal models. CV intake was found to be
inversely associated with breast cancer risk. However, the association of
CV intake with breast cancer subtype is unknown. Further, racial
differences exist in dietary habits and polymorphic genes in
ITC-metabolizing pathway. In a prospective cohort, we examined the
association of prior CV intake with breast cancer hormone receptor status
and subtype by race.Methods: Among 2908 breast cancer patients diagnosed
2005-2013 at Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC), data on CV
intake in the past 6 months were obtained from a validated food frequency
questionnaire as part of a comprehensive baseline interview about two
months post-diagnosis. Breast cancer characteristics came from the KPNC
Cancer Registry. CV intake and its association with hormone receptor
status (ER+/-, PR+/-, and HER2+/-) and subtype (luminal A/luminal
B/triple negative/HER2-overexpressing) were examined among Whites,
African Americans (AA), Asians, and Hispanics. Logistic regression was
used adjusting for age at diagnosis, race, menopausal status, parity,
energy intake, and dietary fiber from vegetables.Results: CV intake
(grams/day) differed across racial groups (pBackground: Dietary
isothiocyanates (ITCs) are chemopreventive phytochemicals from
cruciferous vegetables (CV). ITCs down-regulate estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2
(HER2) in breast cancer cells, and inhibit development of breast cancer
in animal models. CV intake was found to be inversely associated with
breast cancer risk. However, the association of CV intake with breast
cancer subtype is unknown. Further, racial differences exist in dietary
habits and polymorphic genes in ITC-metabolizing pathway. In a
prospective cohort, we examined the association of prior CV intake with
breast cancer hormone receptor status and subtype by race.Methods: Among
2908 breast cancer patients diagnosed 2005-2013 at Kaiser Permanente
Northern California (KPNC), data on CV intake in the past 6 months were
obtained from a validated food frequency questionnaire as part of a
comprehensive baseline interview about two months post-diagnosis. Breast
cancer characteristics came from the KPNC Cancer Registry. CV intake and
its association with hormone receptor status (ER+/-, PR+/-, and HER2+/-)
and subtype (luminal A/luminal B/triple negative/HER2-overexpressing)
were examined among Whites, African Americans (AA), Asians, and
Hispanics. Logistic regression was used adjusting for age at diagnosis,
race, menopausal status, parity, energy intake, and dietary fiber from
vegetables.Results: CV intake (grams/day) differed across racial groups
(p<0.01), with 46.9, 35.6, 30.7, and 27.8 for Asians, AA, Whites, and
Hispanics, respectively. Except for broccoli, intake of other individual
CVs differed across racial groups (pBackground: Dietary isothiocyanates
(ITCs) are chemopreventive phytochemicals from cruciferous vegetables
(CV). ITCs down-regulate estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor
(PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) in breast
cancer cells, and inhibit development of breast cancer in animal models.
CV intake was found to be inversely associated with breast cancer risk.
However, the association of CV intake with breast cancer subtype is
unknown. Further, racial differences exist in dietary habits and
polymorphic genes in ITC-metabolizing pathway. In a prospective cohort,
we examined the association of prior CV intake with breast cancer hormone
receptor status and subtype by race.Methods: Among 2908 breast cancer
patients diagnosed 2005-2013 at Kaiser Permanente Northern California
(KPNC), data on CV intake in the past 6 months were obtained from a
validated food frequency questionnaire as part of a comprehensive
baseline interview about two months post-diagnosis. Breast cancer
characteristics came from the KPNC Cancer Registry. CV intake and its
association with hormone receptor status (ER+/-, PR+/-, and HER2+/-) and
subtype (luminal A/luminal B/triple negative/HER2-overexpressing) were
examined among Whites, African Americans (AA), Asians, and Hispanics.
Logistic regression was used adjusting for age at diagnosis, race,
menopausal status, parity, energy intake, and dietary fiber from
vegetables.Results: CV intake (grams/day) differed across racial groups
(p<0.01), with 46.9, 35.6, 30.7, and 27.8 for Asians, AA, Whites, and
Hispanics, respectively. Except for broccoli, intake of other individual
CVs differed across racial groups (p<0.01). Total CV intake was not
associated with breast cancer subtypes in any racial group. However,
compared with PR+ disease, coleslaw intake was associated with reduced
odds of PR- disease in Asians (high vs. low: OR=0.63, 95%CI=0.41-0.97),
while intake of greens including collard, kale, turnip and mustard was
associated with increased odds of PR- disease in Whites (high vs. low:
OR=1.34, 95%CI=1.09-1.66). Broccoli and cabbage intake were associated
with reduced odds of HER2+ disease in Asians, compared with HER2- disease
(high vs. low: OR=0.46, 95%CI=0.23-0.94 for broccoli, and OR=0.48,
95%CI=0.24-0.95 for cabbage). No associations were observed for Hispanics
and AAs. In all racial groups combined, total CV intake, specifically
broccoli intake, was associated with increased odds of luminal B,
compared with luminal A subtype (OR=1.83, 95%CI= 1.19- 2.79). However,
the association became null with increasing broccoli intake.Discussion:
The association of CV intake with breast cancer characteristics varied by
race and by individual CV. The differences may be attributable to diverse
genetic background among racial groups, and specific ITCs in individual
CVs.Funded by K07 CA148888 and R01 CA105274

