Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rac1 accumulates in the nucleus at the invasive front of
colorectal cancer through promoting cell motility


[Background] Rac1 is one of the key regulators in a variety of
physiological processes, including membrane trafficking, cell motility,
and cancer invasiveness. Although evidence describing the function of the
Rho family small GTPases in colorectal cancer has been recently
accumulated, its mechanism in invasion and metastasis remains poorly
explored. Here, we directly explore the interaction between Rac1 and
-catenin in colon cancer morphogenesis and metastasis. [Methods]
Expressions of cell-cell junctional molecules, small GTPases and some
tyrosine kinases such as IGF-1R and c-MET were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in the surgical specimens with human colon cancers.
Ten colon cancer cell lines were assessed for Rac1 activation by
pull-down assay. Invasion assay was performed to evaluate cells behavior.
Cell adhesion associated proteins such as E-cadherin and -catenin and
actin cytoskeleton were evaluated with several kinase inhibitors by
immunocytochemistry. [Results] First, we found that active Rac1
expression at the invasion front and distant liver metastatic site
correlates with loss of E-cadherin and nuclear -catenin accumulation in
colon cancer patients. Next, rho-GTPase activation status was evaluated
in various colon cancer cell lines with GST-fused Cdc42 and Rac
interactive binding (CRIB) domain of PAK1 (PAK-CRIB). Expression level of
active Rac1 correlates with cell invasiveness in colon cancer cell lines.
The cell invasiveness was enhanced or inhibited by over expression of
either constitutive active mutant of Rac (V12Rac) or dominant negative
mutant of Rac (N17Rac) with Matrigel assay. The downstream signaling of
Rac1-dependent pathway was inhibited by either dominant negative WAVE
(WAVE-MT) or CA region of N-WASP (CA region). The finding that endogenous
-catenin and Rac1 directly were bound in nuclear fractions of cells was
detected by co-immunoprecipitation assay. Rac1 inhibition by not only
NSC23766, but also IGF-1R inhibitor restores the adhesion of colon cancer
cells through inhibiting translocation of -catenin to the nucleus. We
confirmed that Rac1 inhibition induces cell-cell adhesion through
restoring E-cadherin localization to the cell membrane and redistribution
of -catenin to the cytoplasm. [Conclusions] Taken together, our results
raise the possibility that nuclear translocation of Rac1 and -catenin at
the invasive front could play a role in the invasive activity of
colorectal cancer cells. Thus present study provides a concept for a new
therapeutic strategy that targeting Rac1 molecul would be effective to
suppress colon cancer invasive cell.

