Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Hsp90 inhibitor ganetespib is a potent chemosensitizer in
preclinical colorectal cancer models


Background: More than half of all individuals diagnosed with colorectal
cancer (CRC) will develop metastases and require chemotherapy. These
treatments have significantly improved overall patient survival; however,
drug resistance is a frequent cause of treatment failure often due to
alteration in cell cycle regulators or DNA damage repair. The molecular
chaperone HSP90 plays an important role in both processes by stabilizing
proteins required for pathway activation and maintenance. Here, we sought
to determine if HSP90 inhibition by the investigational drug ganetespib
could enhance the activity of standard chemotherapeutics utilized in CRC
in order to extend responses and bypass/delay drug resistance.Results:
Western blot analyses revealed that low nanomolar ganetespib treatment
promoted the degradation of a number of proteins involved in
proliferation (EGFR, PDGFR, PI3-K/AKT/p70 S6 kinase, cMET and MAPK),
survival (MCL1), anigiogenesis (VEGFR), cell cycle check points and DNA
repair (CDK1, CHK1, Survivin, WEE1) in a panel of CRC cell lines. This
activity directly correlated with G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and loss of CRC
cell viability (average IC50 in 19 CRC cell lines = 43 nM). In vitro
combination of ganetespib with conventional chemotherapies (cisplatin,
oxaliplatin, 5-FU) augmented the accumulation of DNA damage
(phospho-H2AX) and mitotic catastrophe more effectively over monotherapy
alone in HCT116, HT29 and LoVo CRC cells. Ganetespib also sensitized CRC
cells to ionizing radiation by inducing aberrant mitosis and enhanced DNA
damage/fragmentation, resulting in a significant increase in apoptosis.
In vivo, ganetespib displayed comparable antitumor activity as
capecitabine, cisplatin, and bevacizumab in human CRC tumor xenografts,
with treatment/control values of 50 indicative of slowly progressive
disease. Combining ganetespib with capecitabine resulted in significant
tumor regression (T/C = -52, pBackground: More than half of all
individuals diagnosed with colorectal cancer (CRC) will develop
metastases and require chemotherapy. These treatments have significantly
improved overall patient survival; however, drug resistance is a frequent
cause of treatment failure often due to alteration in cell cycle
regulators or DNA damage repair. The molecular chaperone HSP90 plays an
important role in both processes by stabilizing proteins required for
pathway activation and maintenance. Here, we sought to determine if HSP90
inhibition by the investigational drug ganetespib could enhance the
activity of standard chemotherapeutics utilized in CRC in order to extend
responses and bypass/delay drug resistance.Results: Western blot analyses
revealed that low nanomolar ganetespib treatment promoted the degradation
of a number of proteins involved in proliferation (EGFR, PDGFR,
PI3-K/AKT/p70 S6 kinase, cMET and MAPK), survival (MCL1), anigiogenesis
(VEGFR), cell cycle check points and DNA repair (CDK1, CHK1, Survivin,
WEE1) in a panel of CRC cell lines. This activity directly correlated
with G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and loss of CRC cell viability (average IC50
in 19 CRC cell lines = 43 nM). In vitro combination of ganetespib with
conventional chemotherapies (cisplatin, oxaliplatin, 5-FU) augmented the
accumulation of DNA damage (phospho-H2AX) and mitotic catastrophe more
effectively over monotherapy alone in HCT116, HT29 and LoVo CRC cells.
Ganetespib also sensitized CRC cells to ionizing radiation by inducing
aberrant mitosis and enhanced DNA damage/fragmentation, resulting in a
significant increase in apoptosis. In vivo, ganetespib displayed
comparable antitumor activity as capecitabine, cisplatin, and bevacizumab
in human CRC tumor xenografts, with treatment/control values of 50
indicative of slowly progressive disease. Combining ganetespib with
capecitabine resulted in significant tumor regression (T/C = -52,
p<0.01). Further, ganetespib improved the tumor suppressive capacity of
cisplatin and bevacizumab.Conclusions: The HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib
promotes the destabilization of numerous proteins essential for tumor
growth and survival as well as those involved in chemotherapeutic
resistance. As a result, ganetespib sensitizes colon cancer tumor models
to chemotherapy and targeted agents, including VEGF inhibitors.
Ganetespib is currently being evaluated in combination with capecitabine
and radiation in patients with locally-advanced rectal cancer as part of
an open-label, investigator-sponsored Phase 1 clinical study.

