Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implications of the downregulation of stemness/reprogramming
factor expression by ibuprofen and biguanides


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are thought to have the capacity to renew
indefinitely, to initiate tumor formation, and to give rise to multiple
non-tumorigenic progenies via asymmetric cell division. As a result of
this phenotypic drift, an established tumor would consist of a mixture of
CSC and non-CSC. Based on the current view, the CSC population is likely
responsible for distant metastases, drug resistance and recurrence.
However, the process by which this cell population is generated in a
tumor mass has continued to be unclear. Based on our previous study (PNAS
Vol. 110: 6097-6102, 2013), this process may involve nuclear
reprogramming, namely the elevated expression of stemness/reprogramming
factors (SOX2, OCT4, NANOG, LIN28, KLF4, MYC/MYCN, and those with
equivalent functions). If so, it is conceivable that destabilization of
these proteins would prevent or substantially slow down the generation of
CSC compartment(s) within a tumor mass. Recently, we have reported that
anti-inflammatory Ibuprofen and anti-diabetic biguanides destabilize MYC
and MYCN in neuroblastoma cells. In this study, we have investigated the
effects of Ibuprofen and Phenformin on stemness phenotypes of cancer
cells (i.e., the expression of stemness factors) using the
teratocarcinoma cell line NT2. NT2 cells were chosen as the experimental
system because unlike many other cancer cell lines, they retain the
expression of stemness/reprogramming factors. Furthermore, they express
both MYC and MYCN proteins. Our data showed that high-dose/short-term
treatment of NT2 cells with Phenformin and Ibuprofen significantly
down-regulated the expression of MYC/MYCN, OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG.
Moreover, the anti-stemness effect of Ibuprofen in the low-dose/long-term
treatment was also evident (0.15 mM at Day 7 of the drug-treatment or
0.15 mM and 0.25 mM at Day 4). Experiments are underway to address the
similar effect of low-dose/long-term treatment of Metformin and
Phenformin in NT2 cells. We are also investigating a change in global
gene expression in the drugs-treated NT2 cells, with the emphasis on stem
cell-related genes and pathways. Results of these studies will help us
better understand how these common drugs (anti-inflammation and diabetes
medications) can be used in anti-cancer therapeutics, and more
importantly, in cancer prevention, which is the key to eradication of
this disease.

