Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of uPA-system members correlate with the
clinico-pathological parameters of PCa patients


Background: Members of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA)
system play an important role in tumor progression and angiogenesis in
different human malignancies including breast, kidney, colon, stomach and
prostate cancer (PCa). The objective of this study was to determine the
mRNA expression and protein levels of uPA system components in tissue
specimens and serum samples, respectively, from patients with PCa, and to
assess their potential association with clinic-pathological parameters
and overall survival (OS).Material and methods: mRNA levels of uPA, its
receptor (uPAR) and its inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) were analyzed in
corresponding malignant and adjacent non-malignant prostate tissue
specimens from 132 PCa patients. Relative mRNA expression levels were
determined by quantitative PCR and normalized to the reference gene
TATA-box-binding protein. Pre-operative serum samples from 81 of the 132
PCa patients and 36 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) were
analyzed for antigen levels of uPA system members by ELISA.Results: mRNA
levels of the uPA system components displayed significant correlations
with each other in the tumor tissues (uPA vs. uPAR: rs = 0.550; uPA vs.
PAI-1: rs = 0.552; uPAR vs. PAI-1: rs = 0.643; all P Background: Members
of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) system play an
important role in tumor progression and angiogenesis in different human
malignancies including breast, kidney, colon, stomach and prostate cancer
(PCa). The objective of this study was to determine the mRNA expression
and protein levels of uPA system components in tissue specimens and serum
samples, respectively, from patients with PCa, and to assess their
potential association with clinic-pathological parameters and overall
survival (OS).Material and methods: mRNA levels of uPA, its receptor
(uPAR) and its inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) were analyzed in corresponding
malignant and adjacent non-malignant prostate tissue specimens from 132
PCa patients. Relative mRNA expression levels were determined by
quantitative PCR and normalized to the reference gene TATA-box-binding
protein. Pre-operative serum samples from 81 of the 132 PCa patients and
36 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) were analyzed for
antigen levels of uPA system members by ELISA.Results: mRNA levels of the
uPA system components displayed significant correlations with each other
in the tumor tissues (uPA vs. uPAR: rs = 0.550; uPA vs. PAI-1: rs =
0.552; uPAR vs. PAI-1: rs = 0.643; all P < 0.001). A significantly
decreased uPA mRNA expression in PCa tissue compared to the corresponding
non-malignant tissue specimens was detected (data not shown). High mRNA
expression of uPA and PAI-1 was significantly associated with a high
Gleason score (P = 0.001 and P = 0.007, respectively; Fig. 2). Antigen
levels of uPA and soluble uPAR (suPAR) in serum correlated weakly, but
significantly, with each other (rs = 0.382, P Background: Members of the
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) system play an important role
in tumor progression and angiogenesis in different human malignancies
including breast, kidney, colon, stomach and prostate cancer (PCa). The
objective of this study was to determine the mRNA expression and protein
levels of uPA system components in tissue specimens and serum samples,
respectively, from patients with PCa, and to assess their potential
association with clinic-pathological parameters and overall survival
(OS).Material and methods: mRNA levels of uPA, its receptor (uPAR) and
its inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) were analyzed in corresponding malignant and
adjacent non-malignant prostate tissue specimens from 132 PCa patients.
Relative mRNA expression levels were determined by quantitative PCR and
normalized to the reference gene TATA-box-binding protein. Pre-operative
serum samples from 81 of the 132 PCa patients and 36 patients with benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) were analyzed for antigen levels of uPA
system members by ELISA.Results: mRNA levels of the uPA system components
displayed significant correlations with each other in the tumor tissues
(uPA vs. uPAR: rs = 0.550; uPA vs. PAI-1: rs = 0.552; uPAR vs. PAI-1: rs
= 0.643; all P < 0.001). A significantly decreased uPA mRNA expression in
PCa tissue compared to the corresponding non-malignant tissue specimens
was detected (data not shown). High mRNA expression of uPA and PAI-1 was
significantly associated with a high Gleason score (P = 0.001 and P =
0.007, respectively; Fig. 2). Antigen levels of uPA and soluble uPAR
(suPAR) in serum correlated weakly, but significantly, with each other
(rs = 0.382, P < 0.001). A significant association was found between
elevated suPAR concentrations in serum and poor OS of PCa patients (P =
0.022, log rank test). In multivariate Cox's regression analysis (adj.
for age, lymph node status, tumor stage and Gleason sum) a high suPAR
level was associated with a 7.12-fold increased risk of death
(P=0.027).Conclusion: The observed association of high suPAR levels with
poor survival of PCa patients is consistent with published data on
patients afflicted with other types of solid cancer and strongly suggests
a general prognostic impact of uPAR antigen levels in serum of cancer
patients.

