Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A next generation sequencing biopsy protocol


BackgroundSampling metastatic tumor sites, especially bone, can be
challenging, at times yielding suboptimal tissue even for diagnosis. With
introduction of next generation sequencing (NGS) in cancer care, high
quality genomic material is required. The following is our
multi-disciplinary approach to validate an effective biopsy protocol and
tissue processing that generates superior samples for clinical and
research application.DesignAfter informed consent as part of an IRB
approved protocol, image-guided biopsies of metastatic sites were
performed on 42 consecutive cancer patients. Novel interventional
radiology tools were implemented on a case-by case basis (i.e. OnControl
drill for sclerotic bone metastases). Fresh tissue was transported on wet
ice to Pathology. After gross examination, a photograph was taken and
tissue was placed on Tissue Tek OCT, frozen in isopentane/dry ice
combination to avoid freeze artifact. An H&E stained section was reviewed
for diagnosis confirmation and evaluation of tumor content. If there were
multiple biopsies, each core was embedded separately. After evaluation of
all slides, a selected sample was converted to formalin-fixed paraffin
embedded tissue for further assays (i.e. IHC, FISH). Slides were
annotated to highlight areas for DNA/RNA extraction, then scanned.
Real-time updates were provided until pathologic evaluation is finalized.
A minimum of 2g DNA and RNA (RIN> 6) was extracted for sequencing.
Corresponding germline DNA from blood is extracted and used to prepare
sequencing libraries to cover the whole exome. Sequencing was performed
using Illumina HiSeq2500 under rapid run mode (average duration 1.5
days). When amount of tissue was enough, samples were utilized for
organoid and xenograft model development.ResultsWe achieved >95% success
rate in obtaining high-quality material for NGS using the OnControl drill
to biopsy bone sites, 100% success rate for all other sites. The amount
of extracted DNA ranged between 200 and 9339.14ng (median 2221.2ng). On
average, 99.5% (>170M) and 95.8% (>70M) of paired-end reads generated
have been mappable, confirming the high quality of extracted DNA and RNA,
respectively.ConclusionWe have developed a multi-disciplinary approach to
validate an effective biopsy protocol that increases the efficiency and
quality of metastatic tumor samples for NGS sequencing. The essential
role of the pathologist is highlighted. This protocol has been
implemented for Precision Care and Clinical Trials at our Institution and
has now recently been successfully implemented by various other sites as
part of an ongoing Stand Up To Cancer -PCF Dream Team grant, thus
demonstrating wide applicability.

