Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming macrophage immunosuppression in small cell lung cancer
with high-affinity SIRPa variants


CD47 allows cancer cells to evade the immune system by signaling through
SIRPa, an inhibitory receptor on macrophages. Therapies that block CD47
convert tumor-promoting macrophages to a tumoricidal state within the
tumor microenvironment. We recently developed next-generation CD47
antagonists by engineering the extracellular domain of SIRPa. As
single-domain polypeptides, these high-affinity SIRPa variants have an
affinity for human CD47 (KD) as low as 11.1 pM, approximately 50,000-fold
improved over wild-type SIRPa. By themselves, the high-affinity SIRPa
variants are inert and therefore non-toxic in mouse and primate studies.
However, when combined with tumor-specific antibodies, the high-affinity
SIRPa variants act as immunotherapeutic adjuvants to antibody therapies
by maximizing the ability of macrophages to destroy cancer cells.In our
current study, we hypothesized these novel CD47-blocking agents could be
applied to the treatment of small cell lung cancer (SCLC), a cancer with
poor prognosis for which no clinically-approved antibodies or
immunotherapies exist. We examined a panel of human SCLC samples and
found all samples tested expressed high levels of CD47 on their surface.
Using purified macrophages in vitro, we found that CD47-blocking
therapies were able to induce macrophage phagocytosis of SCLC cell lines
and primary patient samples. As a proof-of-concept, treatment of mice
bearing primary SCLC tumors with CD47-blocking antibodies was able to
inhibit tumor growth and significantly prolong survival.To identify novel
SCLC antigens that can be targeted in combination with the high-affinity
SIRPa variants, we screened SCLC samples by high-throughput flow
cytometry using LEGENDScreen comprehensive antibody arrays. We identified
several new and established therapeutic targets on the surface of SCLC
cells, including CD99, CD56, CD166, CD326, and CD164. We identified
antibodies to these antigens that could elicit macrophage phagocytosis in
vitro, validating these antigens as targets for immune-based therapies.
The ability of these antibodies to induce phagocytosis was dramatically
enhanced when combined with the high-affinity SIRPa variants. Future
studies will test these immunotherapeutic combinations in vivo against
SCLC samples to develop novel therapeutic combinations for patients. We
propose this strategy as a universal method to identify new tumor
antigens and overcome macrophage immunosuppression within the tumor
microenvironment.

