Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting senescence-induced pro-survival pathways in PR+ ovarian
cancer cells


Despite major advances in surgical techniques and chemotherapeutics, over
90% of women with advanced ovarian cancer ultimately succumb to recurrent
chemo-resistant disease. Accordingly, the discovery of molecular targets
that appropriate multiple signaling pathways is desperately needed. In
recent years, the progesterone receptor (PR) has become an attractive
target in ovarian cancer. Like estrogen receptors (ER), expression of PR
in ovarian tumors is associated with longer progression-free survival of
ovarian cancer patients. Both steroid hormone receptors are typically
expressed in normal ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells, but PR mRNA
and protein levels decrease during the transformation to malignancy.
However, up to 35% of ovarian cancers (primarily endometrioid and serous
sub-types) express abundant PR. The detailed molecular mechanisms of loss
of PR expression in OSE cells and its anti-tumorigenic effects remain
poorly understood. Recently, we demonstrated that PR-B is an ovarian
cancer tumor suppressor that exhibits anti-proliferative properties by
inducing cellular senescence. Progesterone and progestins induce
FOXO1-dependent p21 expression. We showed that PR-B and FOXO1 were
co-recruited to the same PRE-containing region of the p21 upstream
promoter upon progestin (R5020) treatment. Both proteins were required to
cooperatively induce p21 mRNA and protein expression as determined using
PR-null control cells and lentiviral-delivered shRNA FOXO1-knockdown
studies. Stable knock-down of FOXO1 inhibited progestin-induced p21
expression in ES-2 cells stably expressing GPF-tagged PR-B and blocked
progestin-induced cellular senescence. Senescent cells, although growth
arrested, remain viable and metabolically active for an extended period
of time. To sustain long-term viability, senescent cells are oncogene
addicted to intrinsically activated pro-survival pathways. For example,
the epidermal growth factor (EGF) and hepatocyte growth factor (MET)
receptors are constitutively active in ovarian cancer cells.
Interestingly, treatment of PR+ ovarian cancer cells with small molecule
inhibitors to either receptor in combination with progestin caused a
dramatic increase in cell death relative to either kinase inhibitor
alone. These findings, although preliminary, suggest a means to
dramatically improve the sensitivity of PR+ ovarian cancer cells to
apoptosis-inducing chemotherapeutic agents. Future studies will validate
the biological effects of combination treatments of progestin and
receptor-specific inhibitors in novel ex vivo ex-plant models, wherein
primary ovarian tumors are supported by hemostatic gelatin sponges.
Combination therapies that exploit mechanisms of cellular senescence may
provide a novel strategy to improve current cancer therapy for patients
with PR+ ovarian cancer. (Studies supported by NIH R01 CA159712, T32
CA009138, CTSA 8UL1TR000114-03, and MN Ovarian Cancer Alliance.)

