Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of MEK and PI3 kinase signaling results in
improved survival in a preclinical orthotopic model for human
glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; astrocytoma grade IV) is the most frequent
and aggressive brain tumor for which no effective therapy is currently
available. It has been shown that PI3K, RTK/RAS, and Rb signaling are
commonly altered in human GBM. We utilized a genetically engineered mouse
(GEM) model for GBM, designatedTRP, that expresses GFAP-T121 (T; for Rb
suppression), the KrasG12D mutation (R), and is heterozygous for a PTEN
null allele (P), to develop an orthotopic mouse model for the preclinical
evaluation of potential therapeutics for GBM treatment. Although the de
novo TRP brain tumor GEM model recapitulates features of human GBM
including tissue invasion, pseudopalisading necrosis and dense
vascularization, the latency to tumorigenesis (4-6 months) makes its use
as a preclinical model for drug screening challenging. Therefore we
isolated primary GBM cells from TRP GEMs and injected cells
intracranially (IC) into syngeneic mouse brains. Recipient mice developed
grade IV astrocytomas and recapitulated TRP GEM tumor histopathology. The
orthotopic tumors presented linear foci of necrosis with peudopalisading
by neoplastic cells that are hallmarks of human GBM, and were highly
proliferative, invasive, and vascular. In addition, immunohistochemistry
analysis of TRP orthotopic tumors identified markers characteristic of
human GBM, and tumor progression was readily examined by serial MRI.We
used primary tumor cells derived from the TRP model in cell proliferation
assays and found that PI3K and MAPK pathway inhibitors used as single
agents inhibited cell growth alone, but did not result in significant
apoptosis. However, when cells were treated with a combination of agents
such as BKM120 (a pan-PI3K inhibitor currently in clinical trials for
solid tumors) and PD0325901 (a MEK inhibitor), potency was enhanced and
there was a substantial increase in cell death. Analysis of downstream
targets revealed a synergistic effect on target downregulation in the
PI3K pathway. The drug combination was also evaluated in vivo in the
orthotopic model. We found that it delayed tumor growth by increasing GBM
cell apoptosis, resulting in significantly increased survival. Our
results show that combined targeting of the PI3K and MAPK pathways can
have a synergistic effect in glioblastoma, and that our primary cells
were a valuable tool to predict the in vivo outcome. We also validated
this new orthotopic model of GBM and showed that it is tractable for the
assessment of potential therapeutic regimens for human GBM.

