Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor miR-339-5p regulates PD-L1 expression in lung
cancer


The PD1/PD-L1 (programmed death 1/programmed death 1 ligand 1) pathway is
a central mechanism by which tumors escape host immunity. PD1 is a B7
receptor and is expressed by immune effector cells, including T cells, B
cells, and natural killer cells. The predominant ligand for the PD1
receptor is PD-L1. Tumor expression of PD-L1 is thought to promote T-cell
tolerance by binding PD1 on activated T cells and suppressing their
capacity to secrete stimulatory cytokines. Tumor expression of PD-L1 has
also been shown to directly inhibit T-cell-mediated lysis by inactivating
tumor-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Targeting immune checkpoints that
promote immune suppression such as PD1/PD-L1 has proven effective for
suppressing tumor growth. Thus an important area of focus is on
clarifying the mechanisms of cellular sensitivity and resistance to
PD1/PD-L1 blockade and identifying biomarkers of response and survival
with such therapy. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNAs that regulate
virtually all processes in the cell, including immune response. However,
there are very few studies linking miRNAs regulation to immune
modulators. In this study, we aimed to identify miRNAs that regulate the
immunoregulator PD-L1 in lung cancer. By using three different prediction
programs (targetscan; MirWalk; miRNAbodymap), we identified a list of
twenty miRNAs that potentially regulate PD-L1. We then selected the
miRNAs that inversely correlated with PD-L1 expression in 532 patients
with non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) from The Cancer Genome Atlas data
(TCGA). Next, we overexpressed these miRNAs in NSCLC cells and analyzed
the expression of PD-L1 by quantitative PCR and western blotting. Among
the miRNAs selected, enforced overexpression of miR-339-5p decreased the
expression of PD-L1 mRNA and protein compared with scrambled control. To
investigate whether miR-339-5p interacts directly with the putative
target gene PD-L1, we co-transfected 3 UTR luciferase reporter vectors
with miR-339-5p precursors and used luciferase assays to confirm that
miR-339-5p regulates PD-L1 expression. Specifically, luciferase activity
was reduced in cells transfected with miR-339-5p, PD-L1 3 UTR constructs
compared with scrambled. Mutation of miR-339-5p interaction sites rescued
the luciferase activity, thus confirming that miR-339-5p directly
interacts with the PD-L1 3 UTRs. Taken together, these findings suggest
that miR-339-5p is a new regulator of PD-L1 expression in NSCLC and may
possibly be used as immunotherapy or as biomarker in future clinical
approaches.

