Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a nanostring copy number assay for a customized 55
gene panel using challenging formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (ffpe)
tumor samples


Introduction: Gene amplification/deletion is a common tactic employed by
tumor cells to proliferate uncontrollably. Multiple methods have been
developed to determine gene copy numbers, such as FISH, qPCR, and, more
recently, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). However, these methods have
limitations: FISH and NGS are very labor intensive; and FISH and qPCR can
detect only a limited number of targets. Therefore, it is imperative to
develop methods that are more user-friendly and have increased
multiplexing capabilities to detect copy number variations (CNV). Using a
novel digital barcode technology, NanoString Technologies (Seattle, WA)
has developed the nCounter technology to meet these needs. This new
technology will be especially valuable after the recent FDA approval of
the ProsignaTM assay, a breast cancer gene signature assay for subtype
classification to help guide treatment decisions. In the BioPharma group
at Genoptix, Inc., Carlsbad, CA, we have started to assess the nCounter
technology for copy number determinations in a CLIA laboratory
setting.Methods: A cancer gene CNV panel composed of 55 genes was custom
designed and evaluated. The CNV results of a subset of genes generated
from our gene panel using the nCounter technology were compared with the
results generated from qPCR, digital droplet PCR (ddPCR), FISH,
publications, and NGS. Furthermore, assay robustness was tested by using
different amounts and quality of input FFPE DNA. An initial comparison on
the CNVs obtained from genomic DNA digested by Alu1 enzyme or sonicated
by Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode Inc, Denville, NJ). Finally, the effects of
different DNA isolation methods on copy number determinations were also
evaluated.Results: Overall, the copy numbers generated using nCounter
technology were concordant with results from the abovementioned methods
as analyzed by comparing selected genes with known CNVs. A wide range of
FFPE DNA input (200ng-4ug) could be tolerated by the assay. Based on a
limited number of samples, DNA isolation methods, such as Qiagen, Promega
Maxwell CSC, or Roche Cobas, have minimal effect on copy
numbers.Conclusions: With the short hands-on time, relative high level of
automation, and no amplification requirements, nCounter technology is
able to generate CNVs in good agreement with other established CNV
methods. This new 55 cancer gene CNV assay may be useful in clinical
trials to assist in patient stratification and care.

