Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toll-like receptor activation in bacterial pneumonia increases
lung cancer cell adhesion and metastasis formation


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death. Surgery remains
essential for cure. However, postoperative infections particularly
pneumonia remain high and confer an increased risk for metastasis.
Emerging evidence implicates Toll-like receptor (TLR) signalling in tumor
progression after systemic infection. We hypothesize bacterial pneumonia
increases lung cancer cell adhesion and metastasis and that these effects
are mediated in part by TLR signalling.C57BL6 mice were intranasally
inoculated with 10^5 CFU/mL of S. pneumonia and intrasplenically injected
with H59 murine lung carcinoma 3 days later. Gross liver metastases were
quantified at 2 weeks. Similarly, H59 cell adhesion to liver sinusoids
was assessed by intravital microscopy (IVM) in wild type (WT) and TLR2 KO
and TLR4 KO mice. WT, TLR2 KO, TLR4 KO, and MyD88 KO mice were
intratracheally injected with lipoteichoic acid (LTA), lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), or control (PBS). H59 cell adhesion was assessed 4 hours later
with liver IVM. Using an in vitro pneumonia model, bronchoepithelial
BEAS2B cells were stimulated with LPS, LTA, heat-inactivated E. coli or
heat-inactivated S. pneumonia and supernatants collected. H59 cells were
exposed to various supernatants and adhesion to extracellular matrix
components was assessed. BEAS2B cells were also stimulated in the
presence of anti-TLR2 antibodies or eritoran tetrasodium to inhibit TLR2
and TLR4 signalling respectively. Adhesion of supernatant treated cells
to liver sinusoids was also assessed with IVM.Mice inoculated with S.
pneumonia demonstrated a 2-3 fold increase in gross liver metastases
compared to non-infected controls. Similarly WT and TLR4 KO mice infected
with S. pneumonia demonstrated a 4-5 fold increase in H59 adhesion to
liver sinusoids versus control. TLR2 KO mice infected with S. pneumonia
demonstrated no significant increase in H59 cell adhesion to liver. WT
mice intratracheally injected with LTA or LPS demonstrated a 3-4 fold
increase in cancer cell adhesion to liver compared to control. The
increased adhesion for LTA was negated in TLR2 KO and MyD88 KO mice. For
LPS conditions this increase was absent in TLR4 KO and MyD88 KO mice.
Incubation with TLR-activated BEAS2B supernatants increased H59 cell
adhesion to collagen 1, 4 and fibronectin 2-3 , 3-6 and 4-6 fold
respectively versus media control and adhesion to liver sinusoids in vivo
increased 3-4 fold. These effects were abrogated by blocking TLR2 for LTA
or S. pneumonia conditions and by blocking TLR4 for LPS or E. coli
conditions.Bacterial pneumonia increases the metastatic potential of
circulating lung cancer cells. These effects are facilitated in part by
TLR2 or TLR4 activation and are mediated via interactions of the
respiratory epithelium with the host systemically and lung cancer cells
directly. TLR2 and TLR4 are potential therapeutic targets to decrease
cancer recurrence in patients who suffer severe post-operative infections.

