Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and therapy resistance in
BRCA1-associated breast cancer


Despite progress in the treatment of breast cancer, patients with
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) have limited means for therapy.
Since TNBCs do not express HER2, estrogen and progesterone receptors,
TNBC patients cannot be treated with Herceptin or endocrine therapy.
TNBCs frequently harbor defects in homologous recombination (HR) due to
(epi)genetic inactivation of BRCA1, making them sensitive to the clinical
PARP1 inhibitor olaparib. However, long-term treatment of BRCA1-deficient
mouse mammary tumors with olaparib results in drug resistance. The
growing awareness that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may
influence therapy response prompted us to investigate whether olaparib
sensitivity of BRCA1-deficient TNBCs is affected by MET, a known EMT
inducer that is over-expressed in TNBC and associated with poor survival.
For this purpose we have developed a breast cancer GEMM-ESC pipeline,
using female GEMM-ESCs derived from our well-validated
K14cre;Brca1F/F;Trp53F/F (KB1P) mouse model, of which females
spontaneously develop BRCA1-deficient TNBC due to cre-mediated deletion
of Brca1 and Trp53 in epithelial tissues. The MET proto-oncogene, was
introduced in the Col1a1 locus and resulting KB1P-MET ESCs were injected
into blastocysts and good quality chimeras were monitored for mammary
tumor formation. Our preliminary data show that BRCA1-deficient mouse
mammary tumors with engineered overexpression of MET show accelerated
growth, undergo EMT and show intrinsic resistance to olaparib. The
underlying mechanisms are, however, unclear. Currently we are studying
the impact of EMT-regulators on BRCA1-associated mammary tumorigenesis
and assess the contribution of EMT-regulators to olaparib resistance in
genetically engineered mouse models of BRCA1-associated breast cancer.
Together, these studies will provide novel insights into the roles of EMT
regulators in BRCA1-associated breast tumor development, metastasis and
therapy resistance.

