Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAX3-FOXO1 increases fibroblast reprogramming efficiency and
drives self-renewal in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in
children. Most alveolar (ARMS) cases bear the chimeric transcription
factor PAX3/7-FOXO1 and have a worse prognosis compared to the embryonal
subtype (ERMS). Previous studies identified a CSC subpopulation in ERMS
but no study looked at the translocation positive RMS so far. This
knowledge would be important to guide future treatment strategies. Here,
we show that no CSC subpopulation can be detected in ARMS by a range of
common methods. Furthermore, in vivo limiting dilution experiments
confirmed that even 100 ARMS cells are sufficient to generate tumors in
NOD/SCID mice. Thus, we hypothesized that ARMS follows a clonal evolution
model. In line with this hypothesis, the stem cell factors Nanog, Oct4,
and Sox2 were homogeneously expressed in ARMS cell lines and genetic
loss- or gain-of-function experiments did not change cellular physiology
unlike silencing of PAX3-FOXO1 which caused cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. Based on these observations we then investigated whether
PAX3-FOXO1 itself can act as stem cell gene. For this we reprogrammed
human fibroblast with the known factors Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc in
presence or absence of PAX3-FOXO1. Interestingly, the presence of the
fusion protein significantly increased the reprogramming efficiency
leading to the generation of almost double the number of colonies of
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) than the control cells. PAX3-FOXO1
iPSC expressed the core stem cell genes as well as the PAX3-FOXO1 target
gene AP2beta. Strikingly, PAX3-FOXO1 iPSC showed reduced ability to
differentiate in vitro into all three germ layers. Ongoing experiments
aim at confirming these results also in vivo by generation of teratomas.
In conclusion and in contrary to ERMS, fusion protein positive ARMS seem
to follow the clonal evolution model in which each clone has tumorigenic
potential. Moreover, PAX3-FOXO1 is the critical factor for ARMS
self-renewal and a general inhibitor of differentiation.

