Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol-dysregulated non-codingRNAs in the pathogenesis of
oropharyngeal cancer


Though alcohol consumption has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
oropharyngeal cancer, the molecular mechanism for the pathogenesis of
alcohol-related oropharyngeal cancer is poorly understood. In our study,
we sought to identify key microRNAs (miRNA), piwi-interacting RNAs
(piRNA), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) dysregulated by ethanol, as
well as its known carcinogenic metabolite acetaldehyde, to determine the
role these non-coding RNAs (ncRNA) play in the pathogenesis and
progression of oropharyngeal cancer. Using next generation sequencing
analysis, we analyzed the non-coding RNA of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) patients. In order to further investigate these ncRNAs,
we exposed a panel of normal oral epithelial cell lines (OKF4, OKF 6) to
0.1%, 0.3%, and 1.0% ethanol for 4 weeks to represent social drinkers,
moderate drinkers, and heavy drinkers respectively, and performed qPCR
arrays to determine alcohol regulation of piRNAs and lncRNAs in vitro. We
identified a panel of 5 piRNAs, 6 lncRNAs, 8 miRNAs and that were
dysregulated consistently in vitro and clinically between alcohol
drinkers and those who are non-drinkers. The five piRNAs (piR 25894, piR
35373, piR 266308, piR 34946, and piR 58510) were upregulated between
parental cells and the alcohol-treated derivatives in both clinical and
in-vitro data, and further investigation may elucidate their role as
oncogenes. SAF and Zeb2Nat, two lncRNAs implicated in oncogenesis,
exhibited the highest fold change, and the stem cell genes Nanog and
Oct-4, and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) gene Vimentin,
were also upregulated through ethanol treatment, thus suggesting that SAF
and Zeb2Nat are important in the pathogenesis of alcohol-induced
oropharyngeal cancers by promoting expression of the EMT phenotype and
stemness. Ectopic expression of miR-30a-5p and miR-934 resulted in
increased expression of the stem cell genes, CD44, Oct3/4, Nanog, BMI-1.
Forced expression of these miRNAs also resulted in increased
proliferation, increased invasion, and inhibition of cisplatin-induced
apoptosis, signifying the malignant transformation of normal oral cells.
Identification of key ncRNAs differentially expressed in alcohol-related
oropharyngeal cancer may reveal important steps in the initiation and
progression of oropharyngeal cancer. These key ncRNAs may also serve as
indicators and therapeutic targets for more effective treatments of
alcohol-associated oropharyngeal cancer.

