Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proinflammatory chemokine interleukin-8 in the tumor
microenvironment modulates breast cancer phenotype


Cancer growth and progression is influenced by tumor cells, stromal
cells, as well as various secreted molecules found within the tumor
microenvironment (TME). These secreted molecules participate in various
crosstalk events that contribute to cancer development and progression.
One such secreted molecule found within the tumor microenvironment is the
proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-8 (IL-8). IL-8 influences cancer
development by binding to its G-protein coupled receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2
in turn leading to activation of various signal transduction pathways
that promotes cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, and invasion.
We hypothesized that infiltrating macrophages and tumor cells participate
in cellular crosstalk through the release of inflammatory cytokines which
function to modulate the breast cancer phenotype. Using a cell culture
model, conditioned media (CM) generated from activated THP-1 monocytes as
well as recombinant IL-8 (rIL-8) were individually tested on the breast
cancer cell lines T47D (ER +) and MDA-MB 231 (ER -) in order to evaluate
cell proliferation, cell signaling pathways, invasion, and migration.
Increased proliferation was observed for both T47D and MDA-MB 231
following treatment with rIL-8 as opposed to an inhibition in
proliferation, which was observed following culturing of T47D and MDA-MB
231 with THP-1 CM. It is presumed that THP-1 CM contains both inhibitory
and stimulatory factors, which include IL-8. Activation of the MAPK
signaling pathway, as observed by phosphorylation of MEK and ERK, was
modulated in response to activated THP-1 CM, which may explain the
enhanced migration and invasion observed in the breast cancer cells upon
treatment with rIL-8. In order to further characterize the crosstalk
between THP-1 and breast cancer cells, the inverse experiments were
performed by incubating non-activated THP-1 monocytes with CM generated
from MDA-MB 231 cells. Interestingly, MDA-MB 231 CM was capable of
activating THP-1 monocytes comparable to that of the classical activating
agent phorbol diester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA).
Characterization of the MDA-MB 231 CM by cytokine array analysis revealed
an abundance of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8 and although
this needs further characterization, we believe that secretion of IL-6
and IL-8 is essential to the crosstalk between breast cancer cells and
THP-1 monocytes, which modulates the breast cancer cell phenotype.

