Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of immunoglobulin and its receptor are major
determinants of multiple myeloma patient sensitivity to proteasome
inhibitors


Several therapies are now approved for multiple myeloma treatment,
creating a pressing need to predict which drug or combination of drugs
will be most effective and safe for each patient. Proteasome inhibitors
(PrIs), including carfilzomib and bortezomib, are one such class of drugs
that has become a standard therapy across all lines of myeloma treatment.
Despite extensive study, the mechanism of selective tumor cell death
following proteasome inhibition is poorly understood. However, the
uniquely high sensitivity of myeloma cells to proteasome inhibition, the
high burden of protein (immunoglobulin) secretion these cells experience,
and the key role of the proteasome in maintaining protein homeostasis
together point toward a unifying model in which protein load drives tumor
sensitivity to PrIs.This simple model is supported by published studies
of myeloma cell lines.As part of company-sponsored Phase II & III
clinical trials of single-agent PrIs, CD138+ tumor cells collected during
patient screening were banked for comprehensive genomic analyses. Here,
examining our carfilzomib RNA-Seq data along with publically-available
bortezomib microarray-based RNA data, we find a strong association
between higher immunoglobulin (Ig) expression and sensitivity to both
carfilzomib (N = 60; P = 3x10-3) and bortezomib (N = 167; P = 2x10-4). In
fact, using IGH expression alone, we are able to classify carfilzomib
response with 56% sensitivity and 91% specificity. Median time to
progression for IGH-High carfilzomib patients was 5.4-fold longer than
for IGH-Low patients (7.3 vs. 1.3 months; P = 0.005). As expected for a
bona fide predictive biomarker of proteasome inhibition, no association
was found between IGH expression and response to single-agent, high-dose
dexamethasone (P = 0.82). Looking more comprehensively, we identified a
large set of associations between gene expression and carfilzomib
response (N = 361 at FDR Several therapies are now approved for multiple
myeloma treatment, creating a pressing need to predict which drug or
combination of drugs will be most effective and safe for each patient.
Proteasome inhibitors (PrIs), including carfilzomib and bortezomib, are
one such class of drugs that has become a standard therapy across all
lines of myeloma treatment. Despite extensive study, the mechanism of
selective tumor cell death following proteasome inhibition is poorly
understood. However, the uniquely high sensitivity of myeloma cells to
proteasome inhibition, the high burden of protein (immunoglobulin)
secretion these cells experience, and the key role of the proteasome in
maintaining protein homeostasis together point toward a unifying model in
which protein load drives tumor sensitivity to PrIs.This simple model is
supported by published studies of myeloma cell lines.As part of
company-sponsored Phase II & III clinical trials of single-agent PrIs,
CD138+ tumor cells collected during patient screening were banked for
comprehensive genomic analyses. Here, examining our carfilzomib RNA-Seq
data along with publically-available bortezomib microarray-based RNA
data, we find a strong association between higher immunoglobulin (Ig)
expression and sensitivity to both carfilzomib (N = 60; P = 3x10-3) and
bortezomib (N = 167; P = 2x10-4). In fact, using IGH expression alone, we
are able to classify carfilzomib response with 56% sensitivity and 91%
specificity. Median time to progression for IGH-High carfilzomib patients
was 5.4-fold longer than for IGH-Low patients (7.3 vs. 1.3 months; P =
0.005). As expected for a bona fide predictive biomarker of proteasome
inhibition, no association was found between IGH expression and response
to single-agent, high-dose dexamethasone (P = 0.82). Looking more
comprehensively, we identified a large set of associations between gene
expression and carfilzomib response (N = 361 at FDR < 15%). The set is
strongly enriched for genes encoding structural folds of the Ig
superfamily (P Several therapies are now approved for multiple myeloma
treatment, creating a pressing need to predict which drug or combination
of drugs will be most effective and safe for each patient. Proteasome
inhibitors (PrIs), including carfilzomib and bortezomib, are one such
class of drugs that has become a standard therapy across all lines of
myeloma treatment. Despite extensive study, the mechanism of selective
tumor cell death following proteasome inhibition is poorly understood.
However, the uniquely high sensitivity of myeloma cells to proteasome
inhibition, the high burden of protein (immunoglobulin) secretion these
cells experience, and the key role of the proteasome in maintaining
protein homeostasis together point toward a unifying model in which
protein load drives tumor sensitivity to PrIs.This simple model is
supported by published studies of myeloma cell lines.As part of
company-sponsored Phase II & III clinical trials of single-agent PrIs,
CD138+ tumor cells collected during patient screening were banked for
comprehensive genomic analyses. Here, examining our carfilzomib RNA-Seq
data along with publically-available bortezomib microarray-based RNA
data, we find a strong association between higher immunoglobulin (Ig)
expression and sensitivity to both carfilzomib (N = 60; P = 3x10-3) and
bortezomib (N = 167; P = 2x10-4). In fact, using IGH expression alone, we
are able to classify carfilzomib response with 56% sensitivity and 91%
specificity. Median time to progression for IGH-High carfilzomib patients
was 5.4-fold longer than for IGH-Low patients (7.3 vs. 1.3 months; P =
0.005). As expected for a bona fide predictive biomarker of proteasome
inhibition, no association was found between IGH expression and response
to single-agent, high-dose dexamethasone (P = 0.82). Looking more
comprehensively, we identified a large set of associations between gene
expression and carfilzomib response (N = 361 at FDR < 15%). The set is
strongly enriched for genes encoding structural folds of the Ig
superfamily (P < 10-13), implying that high expression of this class of
proteins sensitizes cells to PrIs. One such gene is Fc gamma receptor 2B
(FCGR2B), which binds Ig and down-modulates its production in B cells.
High FCGR2B expression, therefore, may demarcate a tumor that is
experiencing particularly high levels of proteotoxic stress from Ig
production. Combining FCGR2B and IGH expression, we are able to classify
carfilzomib response with 70% sensitivity and 94% specificity. Median
time to progression for IGH/FCGR2B+ patients was 7.3-fold longer than for
IGH/FCGR2B- patients (8.9 vs. 1.2 months; P = 3x10-5). IGH expression is,
to our knowledge, the first retrospectively validated biomarker for this
important class of anti-tumor agents and therefore represents a promising
basis for the development of a PrI companion diagnostic.

