Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SF3B1 mutations induce aberrant mRNA splicing in cancer and confer
sensitivity to spliceosome inhibition


Recurrent heterozygous mutations of the spliceosome protein SF3B1 have
been identified in myelodysplastic syndromes, chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL), breast, pancreatic and skin cancers. SF3B1 is a component
of the U2 snRNP complex which binds to the pre-mRNA branch point site and
is involved in recognition and stabilization of the spliceosome at the 3
splice site.To understand the impact of SF3B1 mutations, we compared
RNAseq profiles from tumor samples with SF3B1 hotspot mutations
(SF3B1-MUT) or wild-type SF3B1 (SF3B1-WT) in breast cancer, melanoma and
CLL. This analysis revealed significant increases in the usage of novel
alternative splice junctions in SF3B1-MUT samples including selection of
alternative 3 splice sites and less frequently exon skipping. These
events induce expression of alternative mRNAs that are translated into
novel proteins or aberrant mRNAs that are decayed by cells. A common
alternative splicing profile was shared across different hotspot
mutations and lineages (e.g. ZDHHC16 and COASY); however, unique
alternative splicing profiles were also observed suggesting lineage
specific effects. RNAseq analysis of several cell lines with endogenous
SF3B1 hotspot mutations confirmed the presence of the same spliced
isoforms as observed in tumor samples. To prove that SF3B1-MUT were
inducing alternative splicing, transient transfection of several SF3B1
hotspot mutations in 293FT cells induced the expression of the common
alternatively spliced genes suggesting functional similarity. Selective
shRNA depletion of mutant SF3B1 allele in SF3B1-MUT cells resulted in
downregulation of the same splice isoforms. Furthermore, isogenic B-cell
lines (NALM-6) expressing the most frequent SF3B1 mutation (K700E) were
generated and profiled by RNAseq. As expected, similar alternatively
spliced genes were observed in NALM-6 SF3B1-K700E cells exclusively. To
investigate the role of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) in eliminating
aberrant mRNAs induced by SF3B1-MUT, we treated NALM-6 SF3B1-K700E cells
with cycloheximide, a translation inhibitor known to inhibit NMD. In the
treated samples, expression of several aberrant mRNAs was revealed and
some of these transcripts were shown to be downregulated in patient
samples. Taken together, these results confirm the association between
different SF3B1 hotspot mutations and the presence of novel splice
isoforms.We demonstrated that E7107, a potent and selective inhibitor of
wild-type SF3B1, also binds and inhibits SF3B1-MUT protein. In addition,
E7107 represses the expression of several common aberrant splice mRNA
products in SF3B1-MUT cells in vitro and in vivo. When tested in a NALM-6
mouse model, E7107 induced tumor regression and increased the overall
survival of animals implanted with NALM-6 SF3B1-K700E cells. These data
suggest splicing inhibitors as a promising therapeutic approach for
cancer patients carrying SF3B1 mutations.

