Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inverse hormesis of cancer growth mediated by narrow ranges of
tumor-directed antibodies


Compelling evidence for naturally occurring immunosurveillance against
malignancies informs and justifies some current approaches towards cancer
immunotherapy. However, some types of immune reactions have also been
shown to facilitate tumor progression. For example, our previous studies
showed that experimental tumor growth in mice can be enhanced by low
levels of circulating antibodies directed against the non-human sialic
acid N-glycolyl-neuraminic acid (Neu5Gc, which accumulates in human
tumors from dietary sources). However, tumor growth could instead be
inhibited by anti-Neu5Gc antibodies from a different source, in a
different model. Thus, anti-Neu5Gc antibodies appeared to be showing
differential effects on tumor growth. However it remains generally
unclear whether the immune responses that mediate cancer
immunosurveillance versus those responsible for inflammatory facilitation
are qualitatively and/or quantitatively distinct. Here, we address this
question using multiple murine tumor growth models in which polyclonal
antibodies against tumor antigens such as Neu5Gc can alter tumor
progression. We found that while growth was stimulated at low antibody
doses it was inhibited by high doses, over a linear and remarkably narrow
range, defining an immune response curve (IRC), i.e., inverse hormesis.
Moreover, modulation of immune responses against the tumor by altering
antibody avidity or by enhancing innate immunity shifted the IRC in the
appropriate direction. Thus, the dualistic role of immunosurveillance
versus inflammation in modulating tumor progression can be quantitatively
distinguished in multiple model systems, and can occur over a remarkably
narrow range. We also reproduced the biphasic IRC in a model using the
monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody rituximab. Furthermore, depletion of
macrophages abrogated the growth promotion at low antibody concentrations
and depletion of NK cells reduced growth inhibition at high antibody
concentrations. These findings may have implications for the etiology and
prevention of cancer, and for immunotherapeutic approaches utilizing
antibodies.

