Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marizomib (NPI-0052) activity as a single agent in malignant glioma


Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly aggressive brain
tumor, which displays innate resistance to multiple treatment modalities.
Previous studies have shown that the proteasome plays a vital role in the
physiology of GBM, and that proteasome inhibition can be used as a
strategy for treating malignant gliomas. Marizomib (NPI-0052) is a second
generation irreversible proteasome inhibitor, which has a more lipophilic
structure and has a broader and more prolonged inhibition profile for 20S
proteasome activities compared to bortezomib and carfilzomib, two
proteasome inhibitors approved by FDA for treatment of multiple myeloma.
While bortezomib and carfilzomib have only modest activity as a treatment
of malignant gliomas, marizomib might potentially be a novel therapeutic
strategy for primary brain tumors. Unfortunately, to date, the number of
studies that have analyzed the effect of marizomib on glioma is
limited.Methods: In these studies, we investigated the in vitro
activities of marizomib in primary cell cultures derived from a multitude
of human brain tumors (high-grade and low-grade gliomas and meningiomas),
normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSC) and as well as in the
established human malignant glioma lines U251-MG and D54-MG. The effect
of marizomib on cell proliferation, proteasome activity, motility,
apoptosis and Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) were evaluated in glioma cell
lines. The inhibition of marizomib by the ROS quenching agent, N-acetyl
cysteine (NAC) was also tested.Results: The sensitivities varied in
function of the pathology of the tumor, with the malignant glioma
stem-like cells being the most severely affected, in contrast with the
low-grade glioma, meningioma and NSC-derived cultures. Marizomib
inhibited the proliferation of U251-MG and D54-MG cell lines with a half
maximal effective concentration (EC50) of 52nM and 20nM respectively,
along with a significant decrease in cell migration and invasion.
Treatment with marizomib at a concentration of 60nM for 4 hours inhibited
proteasome chymotrypsin-like (CT-L, 5) activity by 85% in U251-MG and
D54-MG cells. Marizomib treatment of human glioma cells was associated
with increased free radical production and apoptosis, along with
activation of caspase-3 and cleavage of PARP. Those effects of marizomib
can be suppressed by exposure to the ROS quenching agent N-acetyl
cysteine (NAC).Conclusion: These preclinical studies demonstrate a
significant anti-tumor effect of marizomib in malignant glioma cells.
Marizomib has relatively little effect on neural stem/progenitor cells
suggesting minimal neurotoxicity, while severely affecting both malignant
glioma stem cells and glioma cell lines. But importantly, unlike
bortezomib and carfilzomib, marizomib can cross the blood brain barrier.
Additional research into the use of marizomib as a potential treatment
for malignant gliomas as a single agent or in combination with SOC
therapies for glioma is warranted.

