Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of GnRH analogues and pharmacoperone IN3 treatment in
survival of prostatic cancer cells to radiation


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second cause of cancer related death in men.
Radiotherapy of localized tumours is highly effective and reduces the
risk of urinary incontinence and impotence compared with radical surgery.
Radiotherapy is more effective when associated with GnRH analogues (as
leuprolide), which has been related with decreased circulating androgens
due to hypophysis-testis axis blockade. We propose that GnRH analogues
increase the cytotoxic effect of radiotherapy in PCa cells, effect that
can be potentiated with IN3, a pharmacoperone that increases GnRH
receptor (GnRHR) expression in cell membrane.To demonstrate our
hypothesis, we stablished primary cell cultures from PCa samples from
patients of our Institutional Hospital (n=12). Cells were treated during
24 hr with 1 ug/ml IN3 (Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., USA,) and then with
different concentrations (20-80 ng/ml) of leuprolide (Sigma-Aldrich Co.,
USA) for 24 hr. Later, cells were irradiated at 3 Gy and we evaluated
cell survival at 24 hr (through MTT), changes in cell cycle at 24 hr and
apoptosis at 6 hr (through FACS). GnRHR expression in cell membrane after
24 hr of IN3 treatment was evaluated trough fluorescence microscopy.
Results were evaluated using Anova and Kruskal-Wallis tests, followed by
post-test of Dunn. P Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second cause of cancer
related death in men. Radiotherapy of localized tumours is highly
effective and reduces the risk of urinary incontinence and impotence
compared with radical surgery. Radiotherapy is more effective when
associated with GnRH analogues (as leuprolide), which has been related
with decreased circulating androgens due to hypophysis-testis axis
blockade. We propose that GnRH analogues increase the cytotoxic effect of
radiotherapy in PCa cells, effect that can be potentiated with IN3, a
pharmacoperone that increases GnRH receptor (GnRHR) expression in cell
membrane.To demonstrate our hypothesis, we stablished primary cell
cultures from PCa samples from patients of our Institutional Hospital
(n=12). Cells were treated during 24 hr with 1 ug/ml IN3 (Merck Sharp &
Dohme Corp., USA,) and then with different concentrations (20-80 ng/ml)
of leuprolide (Sigma-Aldrich Co., USA) for 24 hr. Later, cells were
irradiated at 3 Gy and we evaluated cell survival at 24 hr (through MTT),
changes in cell cycle at 24 hr and apoptosis at 6 hr (through FACS).
GnRHR expression in cell membrane after 24 hr of IN3 treatment was
evaluated trough fluorescence microscopy. Results were evaluated using
Anova and Kruskal-Wallis tests, followed by post-test of Dunn. P <0.05.As
we previously described, we observed that leuprolide decreased PCa cell
survival. When cells were pre-treated with IN3, GnRHR expression in cell
membrane increased in about 60% and the effect of leuprolide treatment
was higher. When cells were irradiated, cell survival decreased in 10%,
this effect was higher when cells were previously treated with leuprolide
(15%) and IN3/leuprolide (20%). This was related with an increase of 10%
in apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in G2. The effect was dependant of
leuprolide dose. At the dose used, IN3 had no effect in cell survival.We
concluded that leuprolide sensitizes cells from PCa to radiation, and
this effect was increased with pretreatment with IN3 due, at least in
part, for the increase of GnRHR expression in cell membrane, a receptor
that decreases its expression during PCa progression. In clinical
practice, leuprolide has direct effect over PCa cells, decreasing cancer
cell survival and improving the cytotoxic effect of radiation. The
utility of IN3 as a potential adjuvant therapy needs to be addressed.

