Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-angiogenic activity of MLN4924 suppresses the growth of
urothelial carcinoma via enhancing vascular normalization


Introduction:Cullin-RING ligases (CRLs), the cullin-scaffold RING-finger
domain containing E3, needs Nedd8 modification, neddylation, for the
complete E3 activity, which promote the ubiquitination of specific
substrate's degradation and regulate numerous biological processes.
MLN4924, a neddylation inhibitor, was repoted to interfere in the
neddylation of cullins and subsequently inactivate CRLs, leading to cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis of tumors. Thus, we hereby present the
detailed mechanism regarding the anti-angiogenesis of MLN4924 on
suppressing the growth of urothelial carcinoma (UC) via inducing vascular
normalization.Materials & methods:Human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) were used to investigate the anti-angiogenic functions of
MLN4924 in vitro, including WST-1 assay for evaluating proliferation,
Transwell with or without Matrigel-coating for testing invasion and
migration, gelatin zymography for assaying the matrix metalloproteinase
activity, propidium iodide (PI) staining for investigating cell cycle
progression, PI and annexin V co-staining for exploring cell death,
Matrigel tube formation for examining angiogenic activity, and Western
blotting for checking protein levels in cell cycle, apoptosis, and
angiogenesis-associated signaling pathways. Besides, Matrigel plug assay
was used to studying angiogenesis in vivo, and UC xenograft model was
applied to research the tumor growth and tumor vascularity.Results:Our
results showed that MLN4924 suppressed HUVEC's proliferation, migration,
invasion, MMP 2 activation, and angiogenic tube formation. MLN4924
decreased angiogenic receptor VEGFR 2 and Tie2 expressions and inhibited
VEGFR 2, ERK1/2, STAT 1 and 3, and AKT phosphorylations. MLN4924 induced
the G2/M cell cycle arrest, which increased p21 and p27 accumulations and
p53 phosphorylation but diminished histone 3 phosphorylation.
Additionally, MLN4924 enhanced PARP, caspase -3, and -7 cleavages, which
caused apoptosis. Furthermore, MLN4924 inhibited VEGF-induced
angiogenesis in Matrigel-plug assay and repressed UC growth. CD31 and
-SMA immuno-staining was used for revealing the tumor vascularity, which
showed that the microvessel density had no significantly difference
between MLN4924-treated tumors and control tumors. However, the higher
maturation vasculatures were found in MLN4924-treated tumors than control
tumors.Conclusion:Our data suggest that MLN4924 inhibits the angiogenic
phenotype of endothelial cells for enhancing tumor vascular
normalization, which alleviates the hypoxic stress for slowing tumor
growth. In addition, due to MLN4924 resulting in vascular normalization,
MLN4924 may be able to synergize with conventional chemotherapies for
treating UC. Therefore, exploring the function of MLN4924 in angiogenesis
may result in a new perspective on targeting tumors and
angiogenesis-dependent diseases.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

