Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of drug metabolizing enzyme and transporter gene
expression by dietary and chemopreventive phytochemicals in breast cancer


Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death among American
women. The etiology of majority of breast cancers is multifactorial, of
which 95% is environmental and hormonal. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) are commonly found in our environment and appear to be
carcinogenic by genotoxic mechanisms. The taxanes are the most unique and
successful chemotherapeutic agents used for the treatment of breast and
ovarian cancer. However, multi-drug resistance (MDR) is one of the
primary obstacles for successful chemotherapy. Drug metabolizing enzymes
(DMEs) and transporters play important roles in modulating drug
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination. The regulation of
gene expression of DMEs and transporters has potential impact on drug
interactions of many therapeutic agents. P-glycoprotein (P-gp), Pregnane
X receptor (PXR), and CYP3A are associated with MDR in breast cancer
chemotherapy. Taxanes induce CYP3A by activating PXR-mediated
transcription and enhance P-gp mediated drug clearance in human mammary
tumor cells. Recent studies involving drug-phytochemical interactions, in
addition to interactions among dietary micronutrients, indicate
possibilities for improved therapeutic strategies. It is estimated that
roughly 50% of cancer patients use some kind of dietary supplements.In
the present study, we evaluated the ability of dietary and
chemopreventive phytochemicals (curcumin and sulforaphane) on reversal of
MDR induced by taxanes (paclitaxel and docetaxel). We also assessed the
effects of dietary phytochemicals and taxanes, alone or in combination,
on the gene expression of various DMEs, transporters, and receptors in
female C57BL/6J mice exposed to the environmental PAH, 7,
12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA). The dietary phytochemicals
suppressed the hepatic and mammary gene expression of Phase 1 (CYP1A1,
1B1) DMEs and elevated the levels of Phase 2 (NQO1) DMEs. The hepatic
gene expression of CYP3A11, PXR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor and mammary
gene expression of P-gp were induced in female mice exposed to DMBA and
chemotherapeutic drugs (paclitaxel and docetaxel). Administration of
curcumin and sulforaphane inhibited the induced gene expression levels
significantly. Treatment of mice with a combination of curcumin and
sulforaphane was more effective compared to treatment with either
curcumin or sulforaphane alone. The differential regulation of gene
expression levels reveal the potential of phytochemicals to reverse MDR
in breast cancer chemotherapy.These studies will help in development of
effective pharmacotherapeutic based strategies for preventing and
treating human breast cancer. The studies will also lead to the
development of novel combination drugs that can be used for successful
chemotherapy of breast cancer in women.

