Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous down-regulation of WWOX and DOK1 genes in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients


Lung cancer is the main cause of cancer-related death worldwide and
genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors affect the outcome of the
disease. The WW domain-containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) gene is a
putative tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome 16q23.3-24.1. It is
composed of 9 exons and codes for a 414 amino acid protein. The WWOX gene
has been previously reported to lose its tumor suppressor effect in
several types of cancer including lung, ovarian, breast, stomach,
uroepithelial and nasopharyngeal carcinomas. Docking Protein 1 (DOK1) is
another putative tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome 2p13 and is
known to be down-regulated and hypermethylated in various types of cancer
including lung, breast or head and neck cancers and Burkitt lymphoma.
WWOX activates MEK2 (MAP2K2-mitogen activated protein kinase kinase 2)
which plays a crucial role in mitogen growth factor signal transduction.
This activation increases ERK signaling in the MAPK/ERK pathway leading
to transcription. The WWOX protein has two WW (tryptophan) domains which
recognize the proline-rich region of other proteins. The DOK1 protein has
a proline-rich region on its COOH terminal which may interact with the
WWOX protein. DOK1 activates the RAS-GAP (GTPase activating proteins)
signaling pathway leading to transcription when it is phosphorylated.
Both WWOX and DOK1 also play important roles in the wnt/beta-catenin
signaling pathway. The aim of this study was to investigate the
relationship between WWOX and DOK genes by analyzing the expression
levels of WWOX and DOK1 using RT-PCR in tumor tissue samples obtained
from patients with non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). When we analyzed
expression levels by Spearman's Rank Correlation Coefficient Test, we
observed down-regulation of the WWOX and DOK1 expression by 92.3% and
69.4% of the patients, respectively. Expression levels of WWOX and DOK
both decreased simultaneously in 66.7% of the patients. We found a
significant positive correlation between the expression levels of the
WWOX and DOK1 genes when analyzed using the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test
(p=0.033).

