Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive gene expression analysis identifies molecular
markers involved with the progression of ductal carcinoma in situ of the
breast


Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast is a heterogeneous entity
with diverse clinical and molecular manifestations. Although the majority
of the patients shows excellent outcome, a few of them experience
progression to invasive disease. The identification the earliest
molecular alterations that are crucial for the acquisition of the
invasive capability of the epithelial tumor cells may contribute to a
better understanding of the DCIS progression and, more importantly, can
lead to the development of molecular markers for distinguishing patients
that would benefit from minimal therapeutic interventions from patients
that require the traditional multidisciplinary approaches. In this sense,
we conducted a comprehensive gene expression profiling of in situ ductal
carcinoma by comparing epithelial cells from pure DCIS (9 samples) and
from in situ component of an invasive breast carcinoma lesion (17
samples). In order to asses gene expression differences we combined laser
capture microdissection with two custom cDNA microarray approaches, a
4.8K platform consisting of 4,608 human genes and a 2.3K platform
containing 390 genes belonging to WNT, P13K signaling pathways and EMT
process (Epithelial-mesenchymal transition). We identified 89 differently
expressed genes between pure DCIS and DCIS component of IBC lesions
considering both platforms, the majority of them being up-regulated in
pure DCIS lesions (83 genes). From this set of 89 genes, 22 were
confirmed as differently expressed in a partial independent cohort by
RT-qPCR assays. Interestingly all of them were up regulated in pure DCIS.
Based on the expression profile of the 22 validated genes we were able to
discriminate 100% of the samples from DCIS component of IBC tumors from
80% of the pure DCIS samples, by unsupervised hierarchical clustering,
suggesting that these genes are potential molecular markers for
predicting progression of pure DCIS. Finally, considering Ingenuity
pathway analysis of this 22 genes, we suggest that genes involved with
Cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, cell morphology and carbohydrate
metabolism are downregulated during DCIS progression. In conclusion, in
this work we have identified promising molecular markers that could
improve the identification of patients diagnosed with pure DCIS at a
higher risk of progression to the invasive disease.

