Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conditionally reprogrammed cells (CRCs): A new model for cancer
research and personalized medicine


Background: Current cancer cell lines often fail to reflect the genotypes
and phenotypes of the tumors from which they were derived due to the
accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations during passage in
vitro. This obviously limits the ability to use such cell lines for
predicting responses to drug-, radiation-, or immuno-therapies. Until
recently, it remained a challenge to rapidly and efficiently generate
cell cultures from individual patients in a time-limited manner that
allowed for choosing appropriate therapies. Last year we described the
use feeder cells and a ROCK inhibitor to induce the conditional
reprogramming of adult epithelial cells into a basal or stem-like (AJP,
2012, 2013; NEJM, 2012, PNAS 2012). Cultures generated from normal
tissue, referred to as conditionally reprogrammed cells (CRCs), do not
express high levels of proteins characteristic of iPSCs or ESCs such as
Sox2, Oct4, Nanog, or Klf4. More important, the induction of CRCs is
reversible, and the removal of feeders and ROCK inhibitor allows cells to
differentiate normally to tissue origin. The CRC technology can generate
2106 cells in 5 to 6 days from needle biopsies, and can generate cultures
from cryopreserved tissue and from fewer than four viable cells. Primary
goal: The clinical utility of CRCs for patient care needs to be
established. We therefore initiated studies to examine whether CRCs
established from tumors would reflect the biology and genotype of the
original tumor and whether the tumor CRCs could be used to predict
clinical responses. Procedures: We used CRC methods to generate matched
cultures from both tumor cells and adjacent normal cells from cancer
patients and relevant mouse models. We characterized these CRC lines for
their growth properties, induction of tumors in immunodeficient mice,
karyotype, differentiation, and transcriptome profile. We also compared
the sensitivity of the matched CRCs to commonly used chemotherapy drugs.
Results: The CRC technique efficiently established cell cultures from
human and rodent tumors. For example, we established matched normal and
tumor CRCs for a patient with a squamous carcinoma of the tongue. The
tumor CRC from this patient exhibited a highly abnormal karyotype and
harbored a mutation of the p53 gene. The matched normal CRC exhibited a
normal karyotype and wild p53. The tumor CRCs, but not the normal CRCs,
efficiently induced squamous cell carcinomas when injected subcutaneously
into nude mice. Similarly, we generated 4 cultures from pancreatic
cancers, 3 of which exhibited mutations in the Ras gene. We were also
able to utilize the CRC method to define an effective therapy for patient
with an aggressive lung papillomatosis. Finally, our studies indicate
that we are able to generate micro-heterogenous tumor CRCs from a small
biopsy. Conclusion: CRCs show promise for evaluating tumor responses to
selected therapies and for defining the functional heterogeneity of their
respective primary tumors.

