Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic deletion or pharmacologic blockade of the amino acid
transporter Slc6a14 in mice suppresses breast cancer induced by Polyoma
middle T oncogene


Tumor cells have an increased need for amino acids. Mammalian cells
cannot synthesize essential amino acids; they must obtain these amino
acids via specific transporters. Glutamine, though a non-essential amino
acid, is critical for tumor cells (glutamine addiction). Entry of amino
acids into tumor cells is enhanced by upregulation of specific
transporters. If we can interfere with the entry of amino acids into
tumor cells, we should be able to starve these cells to death. If the
transporters that are specifically induced in tumor cells are identified,
blockade of the induced transporters would constitute a logical strategy
for cancer treatment. Mammalian cells express 40 amino acid transporters,
expressed in different combinations and in a cell type-specific manner.
Among them, SLC6A14 is unique in that it transports all essential amino
acids as well as glutamine, and is expressed only at low levels in normal
tissues, but induced in colon cancer and in ER+ breast cancer. Tumor
cells in these cancers upregulate SLC6A14 to meet their increased demand
for essential amino acids and glutamine, indicating that SLC6A14 drives
their glutamine addiction. We have now established the potential of this
transporter as a drug target for breast cancer treatment using genetic
and pharmacologic approaches. For this, we first generated Slc6a14-/-
mouse. The Slc6a14 gene is located on X chromosome. Deletion of the gene
is not lethal and there is no overt phenotype in hemizygous males (-/y)
or in homozygous females (-/-). We then examined the progression of
breast cancer in Polyoma middle T antigen (Py-MT) Tg mouse on Slc6a14+/+
and Slc6a14-/- background. Deletion of Slc6a14 markedly suppressed breast
cancer and lung metastasis induced by the Py-MT oncogene. We have also
identified -methyl-L-tryptophan (-MLT) as a selective blocker of Slc6a14.
We investigated the consequences of pharmacologic blockade of Slc6a14 on
Py-MT-induced breast cancer with oral administration of -MLT (1 mg/ml in
drinking water). The blocker was able to suppress breast cancer to a
marked extent. Py-MT-induced breast tumors showed robust upregulation of
Slc6a14; however, the tumors also showed upregulation of Slc7a5/Slc3a2,
another amino acid transporter. Therefore, we examined the interaction of
-MLT with Slc7a5/Slc3a2 and found that while -MLT is a blocker of
Slc6a14, it is a transportable substrate for Slc7a5/Slc3a2, demonstrating
that only the function of Slc6a14 is selectively blocked by -MLT. We
conclude that blockade of Slc6a14 is a viable strategy for treatment of
certain specific subtypes of breast cancer (e.g., ER-positive) that are
associated with upregulation of the transporter.

