Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP-3 generates a novel PTHrP peptide that impacts osteoblast
behavior and contributes to metastatic tumor growth in bone


Prostate cancer commonly metastasizes to bone, generating incurable mixed
lesions that are both osteolytic and osteogenic. To identify new
therapeutic targets we performed gene expression analysis and found that
matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3), also known as stromelysin-1 was
highly expressed in the prostate tumor-bone microenvironment. In keeping
with the literature, immunohistochemical analysis of human bone
metastases revealed MMP-3 was largely localized to the stromal
compartment. To test whether stromal/host derived MMP-3 contributed to
prostate cancer progression in bone, we generated immunocompromized MMP-3
null mice.Using an in vivo intratibial model of prostate to bone
metastases (PaIII), we found that tumor growth, as measured by
luminescence, and tumor-induced bone remodeling (CT, histomorphometry)
were significantly mitigated (pProstate cancer commonly metastasizes to
bone, generating incurable mixed lesions that are both osteolytic and
osteogenic. To identify new therapeutic targets we performed gene
expression analysis and found that matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3),
also known as stromelysin-1 was highly expressed in the prostate
tumor-bone microenvironment. In keeping with the literature,
immunohistochemical analysis of human bone metastases revealed MMP-3 was
largely localized to the stromal compartment. To test whether
stromal/host derived MMP-3 contributed to prostate cancer progression in
bone, we generated immunocompromized MMP-3 null mice.Using an in vivo
intratibial model of prostate to bone metastases (PaIII), we found that
tumor growth, as measured by luminescence, and tumor-induced bone
remodeling (CT, histomorphometry) were significantly mitigated (p<0.05)
in MMP-3 null mice compared to wild type controls. Using a candidate
approach to examine potential mechanisms, we focused on parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP), a powerful regulator of osteoblast
behavior in the vicious cycle. We identified that MMP-3 processes mature
PTHrP1-36 to yield unique PTHrP1-17, PTHrP18-26, and PTHrP27-36 fragments
in vitro. To test the biological significance of the fragments we focused
on testing their impact on stromal cell behavior. Using Boyden chamber
migration assays, we observed a significant increase in migration of
murine MSCs and MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblasts in response to 10nM PTHrP1-17
compared to that of PTHrP1-36. Further analysis via confocal microscopy
revealed a reduction in actin stress fibers as well as variations in
lamellipodia and vinculin organization of pre-osteoblasts and primary
osteoblasts treated with PTHrP1-17, and live cell microscopy indicated
that these effects were transient with the cells reverting to the usual
phenotype in a 24-hour period. Reduced phosphorylation of Rho-associated
protein kinase (ROCK) substrates such as the myosin light chain suggest
that PTHrP1-17 may mediate pre-osteoblast migration by modulating ROCK
activity.Our data demonstrate that host MMP-3 contributes to prostate
tumor growth and tumor induced changes in bone remodeling in vivo.
Further, we have identified that mature PTHrP1-36 is subject to cleavage
by MMP-3 resulting in PTHrP1-17, PTHrP18-26, and PTHrP27-36 fragments of
which PTHrP1-17 significantly stimulates migration of murine MSCs and
MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblasts. Collectively, these data indicate that specific
inhibition of MMP-3 and/or targeting MMP generated neo-epitopes would be
efficacious for the treatment of prostate to bone metastases.

