Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deep computational analysis of human and mouse specific
next-generation sequencing data generated from PDX specimen


Patient derived xenograft (PDX) samples are powerful tools to analyze
tumor biology and drug sensitivity of primary tumors in animal models.
However, sequencing studies on those samples face the challenge of mouse
stromal contamination, which varies in each of the explanted tumor
specimen. Thus, without applying mouse and human specific filters on
sequencing data, species specific genomic alterations and differences in
expression are impossible to detect. To allow mouse and human specific
transcriptome/genome analyses, we adapted our NGS data analysis pipelines
to filter for mouse and human specific reads. By applying the analysis
algorithms on hybrid-capture and transcriptome sequencing data from 60
lung cancer PDX samples, we were able to generate a comprehensive
overview on tumor specific alterations, including point mutations,
deletions and insertions, copy number alterations, gene fusions and
isoform specific expression levels, as well as species specific genomic
alterations and transcriptome wide expression levels. From 5781
nonsynonymous substitutions which were detected by hybrid-capture
sequencing of 333 cancer relevant genes (CAGE-Rx Scanner), 863 human
specific nonsynonymous substitutions were detected after filtering for
mouse specific variations. The mean sequencing coverage of the CAGE
analysis across all targeted bases in all 60 samples was 662x. An
integrated analysis of this data set and corresponding transcriptome
sequencing data revealed TP53 and KRAS as the most frequently mutated
genes which were expressed. As expected, due to the relative high tumor
content in all samples (ranging from 30 to 90% with a median of 90% as
determined by pathological review), 80% of all mutations called from
transcriptome sequencing in an unfiltered fashion were human specific and
called after species specific filtering. In addition, the detection of
mouse specific transcriptome sequencing reads identified several growth
factors expressed by tumor surrounding tissue, which would have been
discarded as unmapped reads in the normal analysis setting. Thus, our
analysis alorithms not only enable to remove mouse specific false
positive single nucleotide variants (SNVs), but also a detailed analysis
of mouse specific expression patterns which might strongly influence
tumor growth via the tumor microenvironment.

