Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the estrogen pathway in a male mouse model of lung tumor
prevention


A hormonal role in the pathology of lung cancer is well documented. We
have shown that the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole and the anti-estrogen
fulvestrant effectively inhibited tobacco carcinogen-induced lung
tumorigenesis in a female mouse model of lung cancer prevention.
Additionally, we have shown that inflammatory cells that infiltrate the
lungs in response to carcinogens may be a source of estrogen synthesis,
and have confirmed aromatase and estrogen receptor expression in a pure
macrophage population of differentiated THP-1 cells. These results
suggest that targeting the estrogen pathway may be beneficial for both
treatment and prevention of lung cancer. There is no sex difference in
expression of estrogen-related markers or in relation of these markers to
survival in lung cancer patients, suggesting that both men and women may
benefit from hormonal therapy. We hypothesized that aromatase activity is
a factor in lung cancer development regardless of sex. Since testosterone
can serve as an estrogen precursor, we determined whether blocking
estrogen action is a feasible lung tumor prevention strategy in male
mice. To standardize the amount of estrogen in each animal,
orchiectomized male mice were utilized and exogenous testosterone was
administered via slow release pellets or daily androstendione injections.
Under these conditions, testosterone or androstendione is converted to
estrogen through aromatase. The tobacco carcinogen NNK (24mg) was
administered in weeks 1-4 followed by a holding period for preneoplasia
development. Placebo or anastrozole (0.1mg/kg; p.o. daily) treatment was
administered in weeks 9-21. Treatment group (10-11 mice per group)
differences were assessed by Poisson regression for number of tumors, and
by linear mixed models for tumor size. Anastrozole inhibited the mean
number of NNK induced lung tumors per animal by 23% in orchiectomized
male mice without hormonal supplementation (placebo treatment mean= 11;
range= 8-13 vs anastrozole mean= 8; range= 6-10; p=0.11), by 62.5% in
mice supplemented with testosterone (placebo treatment mean= 8; range=
6-11 vs anastrozole mean= 3; range= 2-4; pA hormonal role in the
pathology of lung cancer is well documented. We have shown that the
aromatase inhibitor anastrozole and the anti-estrogen fulvestrant
effectively inhibited tobacco carcinogen-induced lung tumorigenesis in a
female mouse model of lung cancer prevention. Additionally, we have shown
that inflammatory cells that infiltrate the lungs in response to
carcinogens may be a source of estrogen synthesis, and have confirmed
aromatase and estrogen receptor expression in a pure macrophage
population of differentiated THP-1 cells. These results suggest that
targeting the estrogen pathway may be beneficial for both treatment and
prevention of lung cancer. There is no sex difference in expression of
estrogen-related markers or in relation of these markers to survival in
lung cancer patients, suggesting that both men and women may benefit from
hormonal therapy. We hypothesized that aromatase activity is a factor in
lung cancer development regardless of sex. Since testosterone can serve
as an estrogen precursor, we determined whether blocking estrogen action
is a feasible lung tumor prevention strategy in male mice. To standardize
the amount of estrogen in each animal, orchiectomized male mice were
utilized and exogenous testosterone was administered via slow release
pellets or daily androstendione injections. Under these conditions,
testosterone or androstendione is converted to estrogen through
aromatase. The tobacco carcinogen NNK (24mg) was administered in weeks
1-4 followed by a holding period for preneoplasia development. Placebo or
anastrozole (0.1mg/kg; p.o. daily) treatment was administered in weeks
9-21. Treatment group (10-11 mice per group) differences were assessed by
Poisson regression for number of tumors, and by linear mixed models for
tumor size. Anastrozole inhibited the mean number of NNK induced lung
tumors per animal by 23% in orchiectomized male mice without hormonal
supplementation (placebo treatment mean= 11; range= 8-13 vs anastrozole
mean= 8; range= 6-10; p=0.11), by 62.5% in mice supplemented with
testosterone (placebo treatment mean= 8; range= 6-11 vs anastrozole mean=
3; range= 2-4; p<0.001) and by 55% in mice supplemented with
androstendione (placebo treatment mean= 12, range= 9-16 vs anastrozole
mean= 5; range= 4-7; pA hormonal role in the pathology of lung cancer is
well documented. We have shown that the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole
and the anti-estrogen fulvestrant effectively inhibited tobacco
carcinogen-induced lung tumorigenesis in a female mouse model of lung
cancer prevention. Additionally, we have shown that inflammatory cells
that infiltrate the lungs in response to carcinogens may be a source of
estrogen synthesis, and have confirmed aromatase and estrogen receptor
expression in a pure macrophage population of differentiated THP-1 cells.
These results suggest that targeting the estrogen pathway may be
beneficial for both treatment and prevention of lung cancer. There is no
sex difference in expression of estrogen-related markers or in relation
of these markers to survival in lung cancer patients, suggesting that
both men and women may benefit from hormonal therapy. We hypothesized
that aromatase activity is a factor in lung cancer development regardless
of sex. Since testosterone can serve as an estrogen precursor, we
determined whether blocking estrogen action is a feasible lung tumor
prevention strategy in male mice. To standardize the amount of estrogen
in each animal, orchiectomized male mice were utilized and exogenous
testosterone was administered via slow release pellets or daily
androstendione injections. Under these conditions, testosterone or
androstendione is converted to estrogen through aromatase. The tobacco
carcinogen NNK (24mg) was administered in weeks 1-4 followed by a holding
period for preneoplasia development. Placebo or anastrozole (0.1mg/kg;
p.o. daily) treatment was administered in weeks 9-21. Treatment group
(10-11 mice per group) differences were assessed by Poisson regression
for number of tumors, and by linear mixed models for tumor size.
Anastrozole inhibited the mean number of NNK induced lung tumors per
animal by 23% in orchiectomized male mice without hormonal
supplementation (placebo treatment mean= 11; range= 8-13 vs anastrozole
mean= 8; range= 6-10; p=0.11), by 62.5% in mice supplemented with
testosterone (placebo treatment mean= 8; range= 6-11 vs anastrozole mean=
3; range= 2-4; p<0.001) and by 55% in mice supplemented with
androstendione (placebo treatment mean= 12, range= 9-16 vs anastrozole
mean= 5; range= 4-7; p<0.001). In intact male mice with no hormonal
manipulation, anastrozole inhibited lung tumor formation by 33%
(p=0.001). Fulvestrant also showed a significant decrease in lung tumors
regardless of hormonal status. Tumor number was decreased in general by
testosterone suggesting that testosterone may have an inhibitory effect
on lung tumor formation. Tumor size was also decreased by anastrozole and
fulvestrant under all experimental conditions. Tumor Ki67 and serum
-estradiol levels at sacrifice were significantly decreased by
anastrozole. These results suggest that hormonal therapies may benefit
male lung cancer patients. Supported by P50CA090440 and the Lung Cancer
Research Foundation.

