Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumorigenesis: an investigation by network evolution and
perturbations of somatic mutations in cancer interactome


Cells govern biological actions through highly complex biological
networks. Perturbations to the complex molecular network due to driver
mutations may transit cells to new phenotypic states, e.g.,
tumorigenesis. Identifying how genetic lesions such as somatic mutations
perturb these networks is a fundamental challenge in cancer biology. The
recent TCGA studies revealed that a typical tumor contains two to as many
as eight of driver mutations while the numerous remaining somatic
mutations are passenger mutations. So far, it remains largely unknown
what evolutionary forces and how the genetic lesions disrupt cancer
interactome that leads to tumorigenesis. In this study, we systematically
investigated the relationship among the network topology, evolutionary
rates, and evolutionary origins of somatic and germline mutation driven
disease genes in the large context of the protein-protein interaction
(PPI) networks by utilizing recently released extensive somatic mutations
and gene annotation data. We aimed to address two fundamental questions.
(1) Whether cancer genes display a distinct network topology from
Mendelian disease genes, and why? (2) From a network biology perspective,
how the transition occurs from a normal cell to a tumor cell as initiated
by a few driver genetic mutations? We collected the largest ever cancer
gene list and five comprehensive networks. We found evolutionary origin
is the main determinant of the unique network centrality of cancer
proteins. We further investigated the perturbations of network topology
by somatic mutations that were identified from 3268 tumors across 12
cancer types in TCGA. We revealed that the network-attacking perturbation
of somatic mutations on central hubs of cancer interactome is a main
feature of tumor emergence and evolution. This finding elucidates the
high efficiency of the transition during tumorigenesis as initiated by a
few driver mutations. This work improves our understanding of dynamic
network-attacking perturbation by somatic mutations during tumorigenesis,
and, in turn, of the implications for both basic cancer biology and the
development of personalized antitumor therapy.

