Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulated expression of hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF)
reduces glioma cancer cell tumor growth and angiogenesis


Hepatoma derived growth factor (HDGF) is a mitogenic growth factor in the
progression of human glioma. In this paper, we study the gliomagenesis
role of HDGF in syngenic glioma rat model by Lenti-virus sh-HDGF
(LV-shHDGF) infection. The tumor inhibition of HDGF depletion in rat
glioma C6 cells was measured by MRI scanning. We found all glioma tumors
growth after implanting but only HDGF knock down tumors had a significant
reduction in the tumor size at the 4th-week MRI-scanning. After tumor
volume was quantified on serial brain section, we found a 10-folds of
reduction in the tumor size was observed in HDGF knock down tumors than
scrambles (pHepatoma derived growth factor (HDGF) is a mitogenic growth
factor in the progression of human glioma. In this paper, we study the
gliomagenesis role of HDGF in syngenic glioma rat model by Lenti-virus
sh-HDGF (LV-shHDGF) infection. The tumor inhibition of HDGF depletion in
rat glioma C6 cells was measured by MRI scanning. We found all glioma
tumors growth after implanting but only HDGF knock down tumors had a
significant reduction in the tumor size at the 4th-week MRI-scanning.
After tumor volume was quantified on serial brain section, we found a
10-folds of reduction in the tumor size was observed in HDGF knock down
tumors than scrambles (p<0.005). By survival analysis, rats with gliomas
had a less median survival of 25 days and the HDGF knock down group was
still alive from the time point of implanting. According to the
pathological analysis, the HDGF knock down tumors presented a significant
cell apoptosis and reduction in the Ki67 mitotic index, CD31 angiogenesis
index, and ANG-4 that exhibited markedly reduced tumor growth and blood
vessel formation than controls. In addition, Western blot analysis showed
exogenous HDGF increased the expression of PI3K, phospho-Akt,
phospho-FAK, phospho-MDM2, PCNA and transcription factors of I-B, NF-B,
cFos, ANG-4, and HIF- in a dose-dependent manner; however, these
tumorigenesis moleculars were significantly decreased in HDGF knock down
cells. We concluded that HDGF is a mitogenic growth factor in the
progression of glioma and it can be a useful therapeutic target for
clinical management of glioma in the future.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

