Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perivascular macrophages induce localized, transient blood vessel
permeability and tumor cell intravasation


Metastasis is a multistep process involving tumor and stromal cells. The
microanatomical site consisting of a perivascular macrophage interacting
with a Mena over-expressing tumor cell has been named the tumor
microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM). TMEM density predicts distant
metastatic recurrence in breast cancer patients making the study of TMEM
function essential. In spontaneous orthotopic mouse mammary tumors
(MMTV-PyMT), as the tumor progresses to malignancy tumor cells have
increased Mena expression and assemble TMEM. TMEM assembly is correlated
with elevated levels of circulating tumor cells and lung metastases,
indicating a functional role for TMEM in tumor cell dissemination.
High-resolution multiphoton-based microscopy at single cell resolution
has revealed transient blood vessel permeability events at TMEM, marked
by the extravasation of otherwise impermeable serum markers such as Qdots
and fluorescent 155 kDa dextran. In proximity to sites of permeability
there is increased tumor cell and macrophage motility towards the blood
vessel, and local intravasation of tumor cells. Blocking macrophage
function results in decreased blood vessel permeability and decreased
numbers of circulating tumor cells. TMEM-associated macrophages produce
VEGF-A, and blocking VEGF-A reduces blood vessel permeability and
circulating tumor cells. The observation that TMEM mediates tumor cell
intravasation through localized blood vessel permeability in live animals
demonstrates that TMEM is a key metastatic microenvironment in the
primary tumor, explains the prognostic value of TMEM density in
predicting distant metastatic recurrence in breast cancer patients and
suggests a potentially valuable re-tasking of existing anti-angiogenesis
drugs.This research is supported by the Department of Defense [Breast
Cancer Research Program)] under award number BC120227 (ASH).Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

