Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deficiencies in mismatch repair proteins induce elevated levels of
acrolein-derived 1,N2-propanodeoxyguanosine and apoptosis in human colon
cancer cells treated with acrolein


Acrolein-derived 1,N2-propanodeoxyguanosine (Acr-dG) is a ubiquitous DNA
modification in vivo that may play a role in carcinogenesis. It can be
formed when DNA reacts with acrolein in environmental pollutants, such as
cigarette smoking and oil combustion, and from endogenous source through
oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). We have previously
demonstrated that the formation of Acr-dG at a threshold level is linked
to apoptosis in cells treated with PUFAs under oxidative condition,
suggesting a potential role of Acr-dG in the apoptosis induced by PUFAs,
especially -3 PUFAs. Acr-dG can be repaired by the nucleotide excision
repair (NER) pathway. To examine whether mismatch repair (MMR) pathway is
also involved in the repair of Acr-dG, we treated MLH1-deficient HCT116
cell and its isogenic MLH1-proficient HCT116+ch3 cell with acrolein. The
Acr-dG levels and apoptosis both were higher in HCT116 cells compared to
HCT116+ch3 cells. To further study the role of MMR proteins in the repair
of Acr-dG, either MLH1 or MSH2 was knocked down in HCT116+ch3 cells. The
results showed that the levels of Acr-dG and apoptosis induction were
both significantly higher in the knockdown cells than the cells
transfected with control siRNA. The levels of p-ATM and -H2AX were also
increased to a greater extent in HCT116 cells than HCT116+ch3 cells, and
in the MLH1 and MSH2 knockdown cells than the control cells when treated
with acrolein at the doses that induce higher levels of Acr-dG. This
study shows that MMR proteins, MLH1 and MSH2, are involved in the repair
of Acr-dG. The results also suggest that Acr-dG may cause double-strand
breaks which lead to apoptosis. Whether MMR acts as an independent repair
pathway for Acr-dG or MMR proteins cross-talk and interact with other DNA
repair pathways, such as NER, is under investigation. (Supported by NCI
grant CA43159)

