Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modulation of microRNA-363 in human
papillomavirus-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


The incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) of the oropharynx has significantly
increased in recent decades, despite decreasing rates of tobacco and
alcohol-related HNSCC. HPV-positive HNSCC is often characterized as a
distinct malignancy due to unique epidemiological features and improved
prognoses compared with HPV-negative HNSCC. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small
non-coding RNAs that regulate mRNA translation and decay. Altered miRNA
signatures have been identified in numerous types of solid tumors,
including HNSCC, but their functional consequences are largely unknown.
Our studies show that miR-363 is significantly overexpressed in
HPV-positive compared to HPV-negative HNSCC patient tumors and cell lines
and that the HPV-16 E6 oncoprotein positively modulates miR-363
expression. We hypothesize that the HPV-16 E6 oncoprotein upregulates
miR-363 at the epigenetic level by decreasing miR-363 promoter
methylation. The Illumina Genome Analyzer miRNA Sequencing and Illumina
HiSeq 2000 miRNA Sequencing platforms were utilized to assess miRNA
levels in HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) database. miR-363 levels in HPV-positive and HPV-negative
tumors were compared to their respective paired normal tissue samples.
The Applied Biosystems Cells-to-CpG Bisulfite Conversion Kit was employed
to investigate the methylation status of the miR-363 promoter in HNSCC
cell lines. Our analysis of 280 (35 HPV-positive, 245 HPV-negative) TCGA
HNSCC patient tumors identified a 3.36-fold increase in miR-363 in
HPV-positive compared to HPV-negative tumors (pThe incidence of human
papillomavirus (HPV)-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) of the oropharynx has significantly increased in recent decades,
despite decreasing rates of tobacco and alcohol-related HNSCC.
HPV-positive HNSCC is often characterized as a distinct malignancy due to
unique epidemiological features and improved prognoses compared with
HPV-negative HNSCC. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that
regulate mRNA translation and decay. Altered miRNA signatures have been
identified in numerous types of solid tumors, including HNSCC, but their
functional consequences are largely unknown. Our studies show that
miR-363 is significantly overexpressed in HPV-positive compared to
HPV-negative HNSCC patient tumors and cell lines and that the HPV-16 E6
oncoprotein positively modulates miR-363 expression. We hypothesize that
the HPV-16 E6 oncoprotein upregulates miR-363 at the epigenetic level by
decreasing miR-363 promoter methylation. The Illumina Genome Analyzer
miRNA Sequencing and Illumina HiSeq 2000 miRNA Sequencing platforms were
utilized to assess miRNA levels in HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. miR-363 levels in
HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors were compared to their respective
paired normal tissue samples. The Applied Biosystems Cells-to-CpG
Bisulfite Conversion Kit was employed to investigate the methylation
status of the miR-363 promoter in HNSCC cell lines. Our analysis of 280
(35 HPV-positive, 245 HPV-negative) TCGA HNSCC patient tumors identified
a 3.36-fold increase in miR-363 in HPV-positive compared to HPV-negative
tumors (p<0.0001). While matched HPV-positive tumor and paired normal
samples indicate miR-363 overexpression in tumor tissues, additional
samples are necessary to increase the power and statistical significance
of the study. Bisulfite conversion methylation-specific PCR demonstrates
that HPV-positive cell lines are unmethylated at the miR-363 promoter
whereas HPV-negative cell lines generally possess methylated profiles.
Cell proliferation, soft agar colony formation, migration, and invasion
functional assays following transient and stable transfection with
premiR-363 or microRNA-363 inhibitor are in progress to assess
HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC phenotypes. Our overall goal is to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying HPV-associated cancers, to
identify specific pathways perturbed by HPV, and to develop improved
prognostic biomarkers and targeted therapies for HNSCC.

