Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: African American prostate cancer incidence rates inside and
outside of zinc zones


African American males experience disproportionately higher prostate
cancer incidence rates versus all other ethnic groups in the North
American continent. Data indicates a decreased expression of hZIP1 zinc
transporter in African American prostate tissue. Research demonstrates
zinc deficiency in-vitro promotes a pro-metastatic dis-regulation of cell
cycle and apoptotic processes. Research also demonstrates zinc
transporter over-expression in-vitro promotes decreased pro-metastatic
and anti-apoptotic activity and sensitization to ligand mediated cell
death. Starting from this molecular premise, we examined the relationship
between at risk populations proximity to zinc mines and incidence rates:
hypothesizing a correlation between decreased rates within proximity to
zinc mines.Data was requested from cancer registries where zinc mines
were located, though only Arizona data was used. Using a combination of
excel, basic image capture techniques and radius creating websites, a
100-mile radius was arbitrarily created around Ruby, Arizona where the
now abandoned Montana mine is located. Counties in the state of Arizona
were divided into those that fell within this radius, or outside of it.
Weighted age adjusted incidence rates were then determined for each
county for a given ethnic group. Averaged weighted age adjusted rates
were then determined for the counties within the radius and outside.
These rates were compared within each ethnic group, though one final
comparison was made for all ethnicities within and outside of the radius.
Maps containing additional zinc mines, locations of aquifers and main
streams and the radius were super-posed to visualize the topological
relationships of these elements.Our results show that every ethnic group
experienced the same decrease in averaged weighted age adjusted prostate
cancer incidence rates within the 100-mile radius of the zinc mine versus
outside. The same result occurred when all ethnic groups were used
simultaneously to compare rate differences on either side of the radius
boundary. As expected, African Americans experienced the highest
incidence rates within their at risk group. Asian / Pacific Islanders
experienced the lowest incidence rates within their at risk group.There
appears to be a correlation between the proximity of at risk populations
to zinc mines and decreased prostate cancer incidence rates. The
geological maps manipulated in this study provide reasonable insight into
the passage of zinc from abandoned mining operations into streams and
groundwater. It is from these resources that public and private wells (as
well as municipal systems) draw water for human use. This basic
epidemiological inquiry macroscopically mirrors the established molecular
premises and leads to a holistic perspective on the subject. More
rigorous statistical analyses need be performed on these data in order to
properly support these conclusions.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

