Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TERT promoter mutations are rare in uveal melanoma


Uveal melanoma is the most frequent primary tumor of the eye. It is
molecularly clearly distinct from cutaneous melanoma and shows a
different pattern of driver mutations. The influence of sunlight
UV-exposure on the etiology of uveal melanoma is matter of debate. The
recent identification of driver mutations in the promoter of the
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene with UV induced
cytidine-to-thymidine transitions in cutaneous melanoma prompted us to
investigate whether these mutations also occur in uveal melanoma. We also
analyzed the frequency of other recently discovered uveal melanoma
specific mutations in the genes GNAQ, GNA11, BAP1, SF3B1, and EIFAX1, and
we analyzed the association of these mutation with histopathological and
clinical features including progression free survival. Finally, we
analyzed TERT expression in these tumors.The mutation frequencies
observed confirmed the prevalence of GNAQ mutations in cases with disomy
of chromosome 3 that have a better prognosis whereas GNA11 was more
frequent in monosomic cases. Together these two mutations account for
more than 85% of the cases. BAP1 mutations are associated with chromosome
3 monosomy but not with progression free survival. SF3B1 and EIF1AX
mutations occur in 10.3 and 22.5% of uveal melanomas, in disomic cases
only. We detected a TERT mutation in only one case of a 57-year old white
male with clinical and histo-pathological features typical for uveal
melanoma. The tumor showed mutations in GNA11 and EIF1AX. No mutations
were detected in GNAQ, BAP1, and SF3B1. Both copies of chromosome 3 were
retained. Several tumors among which the one carrying the TERT promoter
mutation showed elevated TERT expression.These data indicate that TERT
mutations are rare in uveal melanoma, consistent with a reduced
etiological influence of sunlight. No conclusion can be drawn on the
potential influence of TERT mutations on tumor progression.

