Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hippo pathway effector Yes-associated protein and cisplatin
resistance in transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder


Background: Transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder (TCC) arises from
the cells lining the bladder and accounts for 90% of bladder cancers.
Current standard of care for muscle-invasive TCC is surgery with
perioperative cisplatin-based chemotherapy regimens. Some tumors are
quite sensitive to cisplatin but others either acquire resistance or are
refractory. A reduced drug availability, an increased efficacy of the DNA
damage repair machinery or defects in the apoptotic process are the main
mechanisms involved in cisplatin resistance. The Hippo tumor suppressor
pathway controls multiple cellular functions that are important for
tumorigenesis and drug-resistance, including proliferation, apoptosis and
oxidative stress regulation. Specifically, the overexpression of
Yes-associated protein (YAP), one of the two repressed-targets of this
pathway, prevents tumor necrosis factor-induced apoptosis in mouse liver
and protects cancer cells from chemotherapy-induced apoptosis.
Intriguingly, this transcriptional co-activator has been shown to be
involved in bladder cancer progression and to be a biomarker for poor
prognosis of patients with TCC. Furthermore, in ovarian cancer, YAP has
been shown to confer resistance to cisplatin. Thus, we hypothesized that
YAP may be involved in cisplatin resistance in bladder cancer and could
predict drug response in TCC patients. Methods: Cisplatin activity and
YAP protein expression and localization were analyzed in different in
vitro and in vivo models of TCC: 1) Collection of bladder cancer cell
lines, genetically manipulated by knocking-down or overexpressing YAP; 2)
Cell line models of cisplatin resistance, obtained by long term
continuous in vitro exposure to increasing drug concentrations; 3) Two
TCC patient derived xenograft (PDX) models and derived primary cells
(RP-B-01 and RP-B-02) with different intrinsic sensitivity to cisplatin.
Furthermore, by continuous in vivo cisplatin treatment (2.5 to 5 mg/Kg,
1x/week, i.p.), we are currently establishing a cisplatin resistant
RP-B-02 model. In vitro cisplatin effect was evaluated in apoptosis,
proliferation and colony formation assays. Results: YAP expression and
nuclear localization was inversely correlated with cisplatin sensitivity
in TCC cell lines. Cisplatin-resistant TCC cell lines expressed higher
YAP than parental counterparts. Cisplatin-induced apoptosis was
significantly increased by YAP knockdown in T24 cell line. In vivo
cisplatin treatment showed a greater anti-tumor effect in the low
YAP-expressing RP-B-02 model as compared to the high YAP-expressing
RP-B-01 tumors. Expression of YAP in human TCC specimens will be also
presented. Summary: Overall, these data suggest that YAP has a role in
bladder cancer response to cisplatin and highlights the potential
therapeutic application of YAP as a biomarker of cisplatin sensitivity in
TCC patients.

