Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-treatment with simvastatin and cetuximab in KRAS mutant LoVo
cells decreases PTK activity effectively and increases STK activity to
overcome the anti-EGFR resistance


Background:40% of colorectal cancer patients have mutations in the KRAS
gene, resulting in auto activation of KRAS and EGFR independent
proliferation. Those patients are excluded from therapy with anti-EGFR
antibodies. Activation of KRAS depends on its prenylation. The synthesis
of prenyl groups is reduced by statins that are used as cholesterol
lowering therapy by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase. We hypothesize that
KRAS mutated cell lines may become susceptible for cetuximab in the
presence of simvastatin. To further elucidate the effect of these drugs
on signal transduction we established kinase activity profiles using
dynamic peptide microarrays.Methods:The cell lines LoVo, A431 and HCT116
were incubated for 24 hours with vehicle, simvastatin, cetuximab or
combinations followed by lysis. Serine/threonine (STK) and tyrosine (PTK)
kinase activity profiles were determined for all lysates in vitro using
Pamgene's PTK and STK peptide microarrays comprising each 144 peptides
derived from human protein phosphorylation sites.Results:In the KRAS
mutant colorectal cancer cell line LoVo, the combination of simvastatin
and cetuximab resulted in a synergistic growth reduction of 50%. No
synergistic effects were observed in A431 (EGFR amplification) and only a
small effect in HTC116 (KRAS mutant, PI3K mutant)For LoVo, treatment with
cetuximab reduced the tyrosine kinase activity, whereas simvastatin had
no significant effect. The combination treatment reduced tyrosine kinase
activity even further. The treatment with either cetuximab or simvastatin
increased activity of serine/threonine kinases. The combination resulted
in an increase slightly less than for the single agent treatments.The
kinomic results from the reference cell lines A431 and HTC116 were
consistent with their proliferation responses as single agent or
combination treatment.Conclusions:In LoVo cells, the synergistic decrease
of growth by simvastatin and cetuximab could be explained by the block of
EGFR and downstream PTK signalling by cetuximab. This inhibition, by the
single agent is sufficient in A431, however, in case of LoVo cells,
insufficient to reduce cell proliferation probably because of the
constitutively active KRAS. By preventing KRAS prenylation by
simvastatin, cell proliferation in LoVo is effectively reduced. The STK
activity is increased in all treatment conditions and this could be due
to stress mechanisms or in case of the combination therapy due to
initiation of STK controlled apoptosis pathways leading to reduced cell
proliferation. From these results, we conclude that in KRAS mutated
cells, co-treatment with simvastatin and cetuximab decreases PTK activity
effectively and increases STK activity which provides a molecular
explanation for overcoming the anti-EGFR resistance.

