Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEF2 plays a critical role in RENCA macrobead-induced tumor cell
growth inhibition


Regulation of cell proliferation and cell death is often dependent on the
coupling of extracellular signals to the activation or repression of
specific intracellular signaling pathways. We have previously
demonstrated the capacity of mouse renal adenocarcinoma (RENCA) cells
encapsulated in agarose macrobeads to form numerous small tumor colonies
within the macrobeads over a period of several months. As the
encapsulated tumor colonies mature and reach a maximum size, the
macrobeads themselves, or conditioned media from cultured macrobeads,
markedly inhibit the in vitro and in vivo growth of epithelial-derived
tumor cells outside the macrobead microenvironment. Myocyte enhancer
factor 2 (MEF2) is a family of four transcription factors that have been
shown to play a central role in linking signaling pathways to the genes
responsible for cell division, differentiation and death. In this study,
we evaluated the expression and role of MEF2 in regulating cell
proliferation in mouse (RENCA) and human cell lines (J82, MCF7) in
response to RENCA macrobeads. Freely growing RENCA target cells
transiently transfected with a MEF2 transcriptional response element and
exposed to conditioned media from variously aged macrobeads demonstrated
increased response element activation in parallel with the increasing age
of the macrobeads. Similarly, growth inhibition of the freely growing
RENCA cells increased with older macrobeads. Suppression of the expressed
MEF2 isoforms in target RENCA cells, either individually (MEF2a, MEF2b,
and MEF2d) or in combination (MEF2pool) using synthetic small interfering
RNA (siRNA) markedly reduced the growth inhibitory effects of RENCA
macrobeads. In J82 and MCF7 cell lines, MEF2D expression was responsive
to replete media from RENCA macrobeads, increasing 2.0-fold and 2.7-fold
respectively. Degradation of MEF2D mRNA transcripts in the human cell
lines studied resulted in abatement of the growth inhibitory effect of
the RENCA macrobeads. These findings reveal an essential role for MEF2 in
RENCA macrobead-induced cancer cell growth inhibition and raise
interesting questions about the molecular basis of this response.

