Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing factors predictive of response to ADCs for companion
diagnostic strategies


One premise of antibody-drug conjugates (ADC) is that the bound
mAb-antigen complex on the cell surface will internalize and be
metabolized by lysosomal proteases to release the free drug. Thus, the
efficacy of an ADC is dependent not only on the presence of cell surface
antigens, but also in-tact delivery of the conjugated drug, and an active
pathway of receptor-mediated endocytosis. On a cellular level, the
biological mechanisms behind receptor internalization and turnover have
not been elucidated for novel therapeutic targets. On a tissue level,
vascularization and hypoxic profile will affect delivery of the antibody
into the tissue. Varying expression of the antibody target within the
tissue (antigen density) will also affect the uptake of the ADC.
Furthermore, the extracellular stability of the ADC may be affected by
the activity of the various proteases in the tumor microenvironment
(TME), outside of the lysozome. These concepts are critical for efficacy,
and thus are especially important for companion diagnostic approaches
(CDx) meant to predict response to ADCs. Thus, a predictive assay which
would account not only for the degree of cell surface expression of the
target, but also receptor internalization and potential effects of tumor
microenvironment is required. To answer this need, Flagship Biosciences
has invented several proprietary approaches for measuring critical
properties of the therapeutic target on the cell surface or inside the
cell, as well as properties of the TME which could be used to understand
and predict efficacy to an ADC using FFPE biopsies. These quantitative
pathology approaches are based on image analysis approaches which been
designed specifically for ADC CDx programs to answer these critical
questions: 1) Defining cell surface target expression independent of
cytoplasmic expression; 2) Estimating receptor flux (turnover,
internalization) based on staining profile; 3) Assessing critical factors
in the TME which may affect delivery of the in-tact drug to the
intracellular target; 4) Assaying vascular properties which may affect
delivery of the drug; and 5) Heterogeneity of the target within a tumor.
We are able to provide these as discrete evaluations or multiplex these
evaluations for an integrative answer which can be derived from a typical
clinical biopsy. Incorporation of these novel tools will enable ADC
developers to create efficacy and patient stratification paradigms which
incorporate the critical biological endpoints unique to ADCs.

