Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Deubiquitinase Usp9x in pancreatic cancers: Tumor promoter
or tumor suppressor


Deubiquitinase Usp9x has been shown to promote tumor cell survival and
resistance to chemo- and radiotherapy through effects on the Mcl-1
pro-survival protein. It is predicted that a small molecule Usp9x
inhibitor could have a major impact in cancer therapy. However, recent
data has raised caution about therapeutic targeting of Usp9X in cancer.
In a study to identify genes that reduce the latency of pancreatic tumor
formation in a mutant Kras model, Prez-Mancera et al. 2012 reported that
the Usp9x locus was frequently inactivated in pancreatic cancer cells,
resulting in protection from anoikis and enhanced transformation. In
order to clarify the role of Usp9X in pancreatic cancer, we used a newly
created cell line 4668 established from mouse pancreatic tumors with
doxycycline (DOX) inducible expression of KrasG12D and Tp53R172H. Stable
Usp9x knockdown (KD) in 4668 cells had no effect on their proliferation
or phenotype in 2D cultures. However, withdrawal of DOX from DOX-treated
Usp9x KD 4668 cells resulted in 4-fold increase in colony formation,
unlike DOX depleted control KD 4668 cells which undergo apoptosis
resulting in colony disintegration. DOX treated control KD and Usp9x KD
4668 cells did not show any difference in basal 3D colony formation.
These results suggest that Usp9x loss in the absence of continuous mutant
Kras/p53 expression is sufficient to sustain 3D cancer cell growth,
confirming a tumor suppressor role for Usp9x in a Kras mouse model of
pancreatic cancer. To determine if Usp9x also plays a tumor suppressor
role in human pancreatic tumors, we did Usp9x KD in three human
pancreatic cancer cell lines with varied Kras mutational status; BxPC3
(wild type), PANC1 (heterozygous) and MIA-PACA2 (homozygous) which
expressed high basal levels of Usp9x. MIA-PACA2-Usp9x KD cells undergo
apoptosis and caspase activation. In contrast, BxPC3-Usp9x KD cells
showed no effect on growth in 2D or in 3D culture. However, PANC1-Usp9x
KD cells showed more rapid (38% p=0.004) 2D growth, but 3D colony
formation was consistently reduced by >50%, (p=0.03). These results
suggest that the effect of Usp9x loss in established human pancreatic
tumor cells is distinct from that detected in a murine pancreatic tumor
model. Distinctions may be partially dependent on their Kras mutational
status or Usp9x substrate utilization in human vs. murine cells. To
further assess the clinical relevance of our observations, Usp9x KD was
evaluated in four recently established, low passage number human
pancreatic patient tumor cell lines (UM2, UM6, UM16, UM76). Usp9x KD did
not affect 2D growth but fully suppressed 3D colony growth. This activity
was phenocopied by our small molecule Usp9x inhibitor, EOAI3402143 (G9),
with nM efficacy. Together, these results suggest that possible species
distinctions exist in the tumorigenic functions of Usp9x and necessitate
further assessment of its role in pancreatic tumor development and
treatment.

