Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Demonstration of pharmacodynamic effects of Notch and PI3Kinase
inhibitors using robust immunohistochemical assays on human skin explant
models


Assessment of pharmacodynamic (PD) effect of novel therapeutic compounds
in human tissues is used to demonstrate target engagement and to
rationalize dosing strategy decisions for emerging targeted therapeutics
in clinical trials. Often, human skin biopsies, a readily accessible
surrogate tissue, are used for these purposes. Aberrant signaling in the
Notch cell surface receptor and the PI3K signal transduction pathways are
increasingly implicated in human cancers. In order to test the utility of
immunohistochemical (IHC) PD biomarker assays developed in our laboratory
for Notch and PI3K inhibitor development programs, we developed ex vivo
PD models using respective inhibitors on human skin biopsy explants.
Fresh human skin samples were obtained in the Operating-Room from
reduction mammoplasty specimens, serially sliced (1-2 mm) and incubated
at 37C in Williams E. media containing 1 M Notch (gamma-secretase)
inhibitor (15 h); and 50 M PI3K inhibitor (LY294002, 4 h). Specimens were
fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 hours, and processed into
FFPE blocks. Sections were stained for Notch1 intracellular domain
(N1ICD, rabbit monoclonal, D3B8) using DAB and for phospho-S6 (S240/S244,
rabbit polyclonal) using an alkaline phosphatase-based detection system.
N1ICD and phospho-S6 immunoreactivity in cells of the epidermis was
analyzed using positive pixel counting. Viability of epidermal cells
throughout ex vivo incubation was verified by Ki67 and histomorphologic
assessments of the epidermis. Nuclear N1ICD immunoreactivity, a marker of
Notch pathway activation, was decreased by 76% when treated with
gamma-secretase inhibitor. Similarly, treatment with PI3K inhibitor
decreased cytoplasmic phospho-S6 immunoreactivity by 98%. These ex vivo
models of human skin provide scientific evidence to support: 1) The N1ICD
and phospho-S6 IHC assays developed in our laboratory can demonstrate ex
vivo inhibition of these two pathways in human skin; and 2) Feasibility
to translate human skin explant findings to patient skin samples from
clinical trials. Our explant model systems are closer to real life PD
assessments on patient skin samples from clinical trials and can further
substantiate the PD data generated in animal models. In some cases, the
ex vivo model could replace animal models.

