Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZEB2 promotes cell motility and metastasis in ER+ breast cancer
cells


While the precise molecular mechanisms underlying metastasis remain
unclear, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), the loss of an
epithelial cell phenotype and acquisition of a mesenchymal cell
phenotype, has been implicated in cancer cell invasion and dissemination.
The ZEB family of transcription factors, which includes ZEB1 and ZEB2,
has been demonstrated to mediate this transition by downregulating the
expression of genes associated with an epithelial phenotype. We sought to
investigate the effects of direct ZEB family overexpression on EMT in
estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer cell systems. We
overexpressed ZEB1 or ZEB2 in the epithelial, ER+, luminal A breast
cancer cell lines MCF-7 and ZR75. Overexpression of individual ZEB1 and
ZEB2 levels were confirmed and localization of the ZEB factors to the
nucleus was confirmed by confocal microscopy in both cell lines. ZEB2
overexpressing cells, but not ZEB1 overexpressing cells, showed increased
migration and invasion in vitro compared to the vector control in both
MCF-7 and ZR75 cell lines, suggesting differential function of the two
ZEB family members. Additionally, MCF-7-ZEB2 xenografts exhibited
increased lung metastasis compared to MCF-7-vector cells. To elucidate
the effects of ZEB on our ER+ cell line we performed next generation deep
sequencing on MCF-7 -vector, ZEB1 and ZEB2 overexpressing cells. Analysis
of total gene regulation using the NCI Pathway Interaction Database
demonstrated an increase in genes associated with RhoA activity, an
important mediator of cell motility, in ZEB2 overexpressing cells.
However, the ZEB overexpressing cells show no change in morphology and
canonical EMT markers remained unchanged between cell lines, suggesting a
potential post-translational modification affecting ZEB1 and ZEB2
function. Together these results indicate that ZEB factors drive motility
in breast cancer cells but are incapable of promoting a complete EMT in
ER+ cells, warranting further investigation into the mechanisms involved
in ZEB action. Elucidating the pathways involved in ZEB family function
is an important step in understanding the mechanisms underlying
metastasis and has the potential to yield new therapeutic targets.

