Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-8 mediates resistance to anti-VEGF therapy in ovarian
cancer


Purpose:Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) families of ligands and
receptors are primary signaling pathways in tumor angiogenesis and have
been extensively targeted by cancer therapeutics. Ovarian tumors are
highly vascularized and high degrees of tumor angiogenesis and VEGF
expression in ovarian carcinomas correlate with poorer
survival.Encouraging results have been obtained with trials in ovarian
cancer that target the VEGF and its receptor. However, the clinical
benefits are short-lived, followed by a restoration of tumor progression.
Understanding the mechanisms of tumor escape from anti-VEGF therapy is
critical to find strategies to overcome the resistance. The purpose of
this study was to investigate the potential targets of ovarian cancer
resistance to anti-VEGF treatments using experimental phenotypic
resistance models.Methods:We generated SKOV3 ovarian cancer xenograft in
athymic nude mice and treated with sorafenib (10 mg/kg daily, PO) or
bevacizumab (10 mg/kg BIW, IP) over an 8-week period.
Treatment-resistance tumors were defined by a long-term trend toward
continued tumor progression (> 50% increase from the initial volume)
under bevacizumab or sorafenib treatment after an initial response
whereas treatment-sensitive tumors were defined by a long-term trend
toward stable disease or regression. We performed mouse and human
angiogenesis multiplex assay to identify the soluble factor differences
in the plasma of resistant and sensitive mice. To examine the role of
IL-8 mediated resistance, we disrupted IL-8 function of SKOV3 and HUVEC
using pharmacological inhibitors (e.g., anti-IL-8 antibody or IL-8
receptor CXCR2 inhibitor) for in vitro assays of cell growth inhibition,
spheroid formation, and cell migration. Further, we evaluated the
effectiveness of sorafenib and SB 225002 combination in vivo in SKOV3
xenograft mice. CXCR2 expression was evaluated in human ovarian cancer
tissue micro array (TMA).Results:In both sorafenib and bevacizumab
resistant mice, IL-8 levels were elevated by 2 to 4 folds compared to
their respective sensitive treatment groups in a time-dependent manner.
Growth inhibition was significantly higher in SKOV3 (32%, P = 0.002) and
HUVEC (25%, P = 0.015) cells when treated with a CXCR2 inhibitor SB
225002 (2 M) and sorafenib (4 M) compared to sorafenib alone. SB 225002
(2 M) disrupted the spheroid formation in SKOV3 cells. SB 225002 and
sorafenib combination treatment resulted in 40% less migration of SKOV3
cells when compared to treatment with sorafenib alone.Conclusion:Our
results suggest that IL-8 may serve as an important target for sorafenib
and bevacizumab resistance in ovarian cancer and disruption of IL-8
activity via CXCR2 inhibition could improve outcomes of anti-VEGF therapy.

