Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of RRx-001-induced oxidative stress in
Nrf2-luciferase expressing SCC VII tumors in mice


Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a redox-sensitive
master regulatory transcription factor that plays an important role in
the antioxidant response pathway against anticancer drug-induced
cytotoxic effects. Under normal conditions, Nrf2 is retained in the
cytoplasm and degraded by Keap1. Under oxidative stress, the Nrf2-Keap1
interaction is disrupted and Nrf2 is released and translocated from
cytoplasm to nucleus, where Nrf2 recruits sMaf, binds to the antioxidant
response element and initiates transcription of antioxidant genes.
Studies have reported that Nrf2 and its downstream target genes are
overexpressed in cancer cells, giving cancer cells an advantage for
survival and growth.RRx-001 (also known as ABDNAZ) is a new promising
anticancer agent (Cancer Res. 72:2600-08, 2012). RRx-001 generates
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO), modulates
intracellular redox status, and triggers caspase-independent apoptosis in
cancer cells. It was well tolerated and demonstrated anticancer efficacy
in a recent phase I clinical trial. Here, we describe a series of
molecular imaging studies showing that activation of Nrf2 may be a useful
biomarker of response to RRx-001 therapy in vivo. SCC VII tumor cells
were stably co-transfected with pcDNA-Nrf2-FLUC and pcDNA-RLUC-RFP
plasmids. Single clones of cells expressing both the reporter genes were
selected and evaluated by dual-luciferase reporter assay for reporter
activities. Then, cells were tested for Nrf2-FLUC response to RRx-001 and
to known Nrf2 activators. The results showed that RRx-001 induced a
significant level of activation in SCC VII cells in a dose- and
time-dependent manner, suggesting that RRx-001 is an effective activator
of the Nrf2 pathway. Next, mice bearing Nrf2-firefly
luciferase-Rluc-RFP-expressing SCC VII tumors were treated with RRx-001
and imaged for Nrf2 reporter gene expression using Bruker Xtreme and
Xenogen IVIS spectrum in vivo imaging systems. We found that treatment
with RRx-001 significantly upregulated expression of the Nrf2-FLUC
reporter gene in SCC VII tumors as early as 6 hours following RRx-001
administration, that was maintained at high levels until 24 hours, while
no activation was seen in the solvent-treated control mice. In separate
experiments, we found that RRx-001 treatment activated endogenous Nrf2
expression and nuclear translocation in SCC VII tumor cells in vitro and
in vivo in mice.These new findings support the concept that RRx-001
generates ROS in cancer cells, which in turn activate Nrf2 and downstream
antioxidant signaling pathways. These encouraging data indicate that Nrf2
might be useful as a molecular biomarker to monitor the response of
targeted cancer cells to RRx-001 treatment, and for selection of cancer
patients who would be most likely to respond and benefit from RRx-001
therapy.

