Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated expression of ZEB1 upregulates VEGF expression and
induces tumor angiogenesis in breast cancer


Background: Angiogenesis is essential for the growth and metastasis of
solid tumors, including breast cancer. Although the zinc
finger-homeodomain transcription factor ZEB1 is implied as a key
regulatory factor in multistep carcinogenesis of breast cancer, its
direct role in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis has not been well
elucidated. In this report, we extended our study to examine the
potential effect of ZEB1 in breast cancer angiogenesis and its molecular
mechanism using the in vitro and in vivo models.Materials and Methods:
Quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblotting, and ELISA were used to detect
ZEB1-induced expression and/or secretion of VEGF in the absence or
presence of the indicated signaling pathway inhibitors (the PI3K, NF-B,
and MAPKs pathways) in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Tube formation
assay was performed to detect ZEB1-driven angiogenesis using human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Luciferase and CHIP assays were
used to determine the transcriptional activity of the wild-type and
mutant VEGF promoters affected by ZEB1. A nude mouse tumor xenograft
model was used to examine ZEB1-driven angiogenesis in vivo. The
relationship between the expression of ZEB1 and VEGF protein in human
breast cancer specimens was assessed by immunohistochemistry.Results: We
found that ectopic expression of ZEB1 promotes the expression of VEGF at
both the mRNA and the protein levels in MDA-MB-231 cells, which effect is
specifically mediated through the p38 and PI3K pathways. The conditioned
medium derived from ZEB1-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells significantly
induces the tube formation of HUVEC compared with that from
control-overexpressing cells. Importantly, elevated expression of ZEB1
resulted in an increased angiogenesis in a nude mouse tumor xenograft
model. We further moved on to detect whether ZEB1 is a bona-fide
transcriptional regulator of VEGF. The results of luciferase and CHIP
assays showed that ZEB1 transcriptionally induces the promoter activity
of human VEGF by recruiting Sp1 to its biding sites on the VEGF promoter,
thus up-regulating VEGF expression in MDA-MB-231 cells. Through the study
of breast cancer specimens, we found a strong positive correlation
between ZEB1 and VEGF protein expression, further supporting the
contribution of ZEB1/VEGF cascade to tumor angiogenesis in breast
cancer.Conclusions: Our data demonstrated that ZEB1 up-regulates VEGF
expression and thus induces tumor angiogenesis in breast cancer. Thus,
inhibition of VEGF expression by down-regulating ZEB1 provides a
potential new strategy for overcoming tumor angiogenesis.

