Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-dose, intermittent sunitinib as an alternative treatment
strategy


Background: Increased exposure to sunitinib treatment is associated with
improved outcome indicative of the importance of dose intensity in the
efficacy/toxicity balance. The currently approved schedule (50 mg daily,
4 weeks on, 2 weeks off) precludes further dose intensification. We
hypothesized that high doses of sunitinib would improve tumor response
with limited toxicity, when applied intermittently.Methods: In vitro
proliferation was studied with MTT assays, one week after 3-9 hrs
exposure of a panel of cancer cell lines (786-0, HT29, MDA-MB231, HCC827,
A431) to high (5 and 20uM) concentrations of tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), namely sunitinib, sorafenib, erlotinib, pazopanib and axitinib.
Apo-ONETM Homogenous Caspase 3/7 Assay (Promega) was applied to detect
activation of apoptosis. The chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane (CAM)
in vivo model was employed to further test the efficacy of the new
scheduling, where sunitinib was topically administered on HT29 tumors
growing on the CAM either daily at the commonly used dose of 40 mg/kg or
once weekly at 200 mg/kg. Microvessel density (MVD) was determined by
CD31 immunohistochemical staining. Plasma sunitinib concentrations were
determined by LC-MS-MS from refractory patients with solid tumors
participating in a phase I clinical trial (classical 3+3 design, EudraCT
No: 2012-005756-41) in which high-dose, intermittent sunitinib treatment
is being studied.Results: Sunitinib was identified as one of the most
potent inhibitors of cell growth from the panel of TKIs; 6 hrs exposure
to 20 uM of sunitinib resulted in tumor cell death. This effect was tumor
cell line-independent and mediated via activation of caspase 3/7 pathway.
High dose treatment of CAM tumors resulted in significant decrease in
tumor growth compared to the control (mean 0.17 mg vs. 0.23 mg
respectively, p=0.04), irrespective of angiogenesis inhibition as denoted
by lack of inhibitory effect on MVD. It also led to higher intratumoral
sunitinib concentrations compared to the daily schedule (14.3 vs. 8 ng/mg
tissue, respectively), while blood concentrations were identical between
the two schedules, averaging at 170 ng/ml. Patients enrolled in the first
cohort of the clinical trial received 200 mg sunitinib orally weekly.
This schedule was well tolerated and no dose limiting toxicities
occurred. Overall, sunitinib exhibited moderate interpatient variability.
Maximum plasma concentrations on Day 1 averaged on 161 ng/ml (range
118-239.5 ng/ml) and were reached approximately 6 hours after
administration. Plasma drug concentrations decreased to undetectable from
one cycle to the other. We have proceeded to escalate the dose for the
next cohort of patients.Conclusion: Optimization of therapy with targeted
agents remains an unmet challenge. Thus far, high-dose, intermittent
sunitinib is well tolerated. These findings open new avenues that might
contribute to improved treatment with sunitinib.

