Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of aggressive breast cancer in a unique
patient population from Kenya


Breast cancer rates of incidence and mortality vary significantly between
different nations and racial groups. African nations have the highest
breast cancer mortality rates in the world, even though the incidence
rates are below those of many other nations. In Kenya, breast cancer
tumors are often highly aggressive at presentation and occur at a
significantly earlier age (as early as the teens and 20s), relative to
North American women. In the United States, non-Hispanic white women have
the highest incidence of breast cancer, but African-American women have
the highest mortality. These striking racial disparities are due not only
to inequities in screening and treatment but also to variations in the
rates of aggressive breast cancer. Differences in disease progression
suggest that aggressive breast cancer tumors may harbor components of a
unique molecular signature that result in racial disparities. We aim to
identify drivers of poor prognosis breast cancer growth by identifying
molecular signatures with high prognostic value from tumor samples of
patients with aggressive disease. We hypothesize that changes in the DNA,
RNA, and post-translational protein regulation contribute to aggressive
disease. To characterize the tumors from this patient population, we used
samples from >100 Kenyan breast tumor tissue samples. We stained tissue
microarray sections for clinical breast cancer markers including
lymphocyte markers. Using DNA and RNA that we isolated from these
patient-derived breast tumors, we are characterizing these tumors by
analyzing them for gene expression, genome sequencing, proteomics, and
pathology analysis coupled with bioinformatics to develop signatures of
aggressive breast cancer growth and metastasis. Our data will be
foundational in understanding how aggressive, lethal breast tumors of
Kenyan breast cancer patients differ from less aggressive tumors and will
enhance our ability to diagnose and eliminate outcome disparities in
breast cancer patients.

