Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of p16 in colon cancer and cyclin D1 in gastric cancer
predicts response to CDK4/6 inhibition in vitro


Background: Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) play a significant role in
regulating cell cycle progression through association with cyclins. CDK4
and CDK6 interact with cyclin D1 to mediate hyperphosphorylation of
retinoblastoma (Rb) during early G1 phase. Palbociclib is a highly
selective inhibitor of CDK4 and CDK6 which functions by blocking pRb
phosphorylation resulting in G1 arrest in sensitive cell lines. We
evaluated the effect of palbociclib in gastric and colon cancer cell
lines to explore potential biomarkers of response and to guide patient
selection in colon and gastric cancer.Methods: Panels of 17 gastric and
27 colon cancer cell lines were exposed in vitro to palbociclib over
various concentrations to generate dose response curves. Analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was used to identify differentially expressed genes
between sensitive and resistant cell lines. Genes identified by ANOVA and
effects of palbociclib on pRB were analyzed via western blot.Results:
Palbociclib was found to have potent anti-proliferative activity in the
low nanomolar range (Background: Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) play a
significant role in regulating cell cycle progression through association
with cyclins. CDK4 and CDK6 interact with cyclin D1 to mediate
hyperphosphorylation of retinoblastoma (Rb) during early G1 phase.
Palbociclib is a highly selective inhibitor of CDK4 and CDK6 which
functions by blocking pRb phosphorylation resulting in G1 arrest in
sensitive cell lines. We evaluated the effect of palbociclib in gastric
and colon cancer cell lines to explore potential biomarkers of response
and to guide patient selection in colon and gastric cancer.Methods:
Panels of 17 gastric and 27 colon cancer cell lines were exposed in vitro
to palbociclib over various concentrations to generate dose response
curves. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to identify differentially
expressed genes between sensitive and resistant cell lines. Genes
identified by ANOVA and effects of palbociclib on pRB were analyzed via
western blot.Results: Palbociclib was found to have potent
anti-proliferative activity in the low nanomolar range (< 150 nM) for 14
of the 44 gastric and colon cancer cell lines tested. In gastric cancer,
cyclin D1-amplified cells cells expressed greater sensitivity to the
compound when compared to cyclin D1-negative cells. HER2 amplified cell
lines were also statistically more sensitive than HER2 negative cells.
Combination studies with palbociclib and trastuzumab demonstrated
significant synergy in HER2 amplified gastric cancer models. Furthermore,
cyclin E emerged as a biomarker for resistance to the compound in gastric
cancers. Contrary to observations made in other cancers, expression
levels of p16 (CDK4 inhibitor) and p21 (CDK2 inhibitor) in colon cancer
indicated that p16 loss and p21 gain predict for resistance rather than
sensitivity to CDK4 and CDK6 inhibition.Conclusions: Palbociclib
demonstrates anti-proliferative activity in several gastric and colon
cancer cell lines. Molecular markers found to predict for sensitivity to
this agent enhance patient selection for future clinical studies of
palbociclib.

