Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer: An integrated evaluation of metabolomics,
transcriptomics, and proteomics expression data


BackgroundMetabolite profiling research offers a deeper insight into
biochemical changes in cancer metabolism. Moreover the integrated
analysis of transcription, metabolomics and proteomics data can improve
the understanding of the underlying biological processes.Material and
MethodsA set of 254 metabolites was determined by gas
chromatography/liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry in matched
malignant and non-malignant prostatectomy samples from 95 prostate cancer
(PCa) patients. Transcription profiling data obtained from 15 PCa
patients by means of Affymetrix U133 arrays was analysed together with
public GEO expression data. Expression levels of selected proteins were
determined by means of immunohistochemistry and tissue micro array
technology in 41 matched frozen tissue samples.The association with
clinicopathological variables and clinical outcome was tested.
Transcription and metabolomics data were statistically analysed (ANOVA,
Mann-Whitney U test) and significant differentially regulated
metabolites/genes/proteins were selected.ResultsDifferentially regulated
metabolites/genes discrimination between malignant and non-malignant
tissues was used for network analysis. Enriched pathways which are
involved in PCa progression or recurrence such as carbohydrate and fatty
acid metabolism were identified. The role of fatty acid metabolism in PCa
was analysed in more detail. Several fatty acids such as cerebronic acid,
2-hydroxybehenic acid, tricosanoic acid showed higher concentrations in
malignant than in non-malignant tissues. This finding is in concordance
to the observed higher mRNA and protein expression level of fatty acid
synthase (FASN) in PCa. In contrast to normal prostate tissue, where
protein expression level of FASN was correlated to the level of measured
metabolites we found in malignant tissues a deregulation of the
corresponding pathway. ConclusionOur integrated analysis of
transcription, metabolite and proteomics data confirms and extends the
role of several biological pathways which are involved in PCa progression

