Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors synergize with
folate-hapten mediated immunotherapy in folate receptor positive cancers


The folate receptor (FR) which binds the vitamin folic acid with high
affinity is overexpressed by a variety of human cancers including
ovarian, endometrial, renal, and lung cancers. Consequently, the receptor
has been exploited for the delivery of imaging agents and highly potent
drugs exclusively to FR expressing tumors while avoiding uptake by the
surrounding healthy tissue. This targeting mechanism can also be utilized
for immunotherapy by vaccinating mice against a particular hapten in
order to induce the production of anti-hapten antibodies and subsequently
treating tumor bearing mice with a folate-hapten conjugate. The resulting
reduction in tumor burden is achieved by antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC). However, hapten mediated immunotherapy alone has
been ineffective at controlling tumor progression over longer periods of
time and requires supplementation with immunomodulatory cytokines for
optimum therapeutic results. Several multitargeted receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) inhibitors have recently shown promising synergy in a
variety of different cancers when combined with other immunotherapies.
Therefore, we examined the effect of combining the RTK inhibitors
sunitinib and axitinib with folate-fluorescein therapy in tumor bearing
mice that had previously been immunized against fluorescein. We report
here that sunitinib synergizes with folate-fluorescein in both the L1210A
lymphoma and the M109 lung cancer models resulting in slowed tumor
progression, inhibition of tumor vasculature, and increased levels of
circulating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. The combination of axitinib with
folate-fluorescein was only evaluated in mice bearing L1210A tumors and
these mice have also demonstrated lower average tumor volumes than mice
treated with either drug alone or not treated at all. These results
suggest that RTK inhibitors play an important role in modulating the
anti-tumor immunity of tumor bearing mice and could be a potent addition
to ADCC mediated therapeutic approaches for cancers.

