Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extensive genomic profiling of a rare extranodal-follicular
dendritic cell sarcoma: Implications for future individualized therapy


Background: Extranodal follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDCS) is an
exceedingly rare tumor type that is limited to few cases in the
literature. Given the rarity of this tumor, there is a lack of genetic
understanding of this disease resulting in a non-individualized plan of
care for patients with this disease. Herein, we are the first to describe
extensively molecularly the DNA and RNA of this tumor.Methods: Under an
IRB approved protocol, the patient's tumor and whole blood was freshly
frozen for molecular analysis. We performed Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) genomic profiling including exome capture, mate pair and mRNA
sequencing on this tumor. Exome and mRNA data were processed through
Mayo's Bioinformatics Core standard pipelines, GENOME GPS 1.2.1 and
MAPRSeq v1.2.1. Mutations and indels were prioritized depending on
whether or not they belonged to known cancer associated genes. Copy
number variations (CNVs) in Exome and Mate Pair data was found through
PatternCNV v 1.0.1 and fusion transcripts were found using SNOWSHOES-FTD
and Tophat-Fusion 2.0.6.Results: At the genomic level large scale genomic
rearrangements were detected, including chr19 and chr20 trisomy, chr15q
and chr17q segmental duplications result in two intra-chromosomal fusion
genes, and translocations leading to four inter-chromosomal fusion genes
between chr15 and chr17.Of particular interest is a stop codon gain in
the CLTC1 (chr22) gene, which is involved in the mitotic spindle
organization which has been associated with meningiomas and breast
tumorigenesis. The new stop codon is before the site required for the
recruitment of the proteins to the spindle. The large scale genomic
rearrangement described above is consistent with this defective spindle
assembly hypothesis.Another intriguing mutation detected in the VEGFR1
(chr13) gene leads to a 45% mis-spliced transcript. VEGFR1 is thought to
modulate VEGFR2 which plays an essential role in angiogenesis, by acting
as a decoy receptor. Therefore the loss of function of VEGFR1 might lead
to hyper-activity of VEGFR2 pathway and a potential therapeutic strategy
is to directly inhibit the VEGFR2 pathway.Furthermore missense mutations
in the ATM (chr11) and TP53 (chr17) genes were found. PARP inhibitors
have been used with success for cancer with defects in the ATM gene.
Finally a novel fusion transcript of HDGRFP3 (chr15) and SHC4 (chr15) was
identified. Such fusion results in an overexpressed SHC4 gene which has
been associated with metastatic melanomas.Conclusions: In summary,
genomic profiling of a rare thyroid FDCS identified drug targetable genes
as well as changes related to tumor etiology. Future work is necessary to
determine the functional significance of these molecular findings and
whether they will predict benefit to targeted therapies.

