Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a spontaneous in vivo cachexia model using the
Champions TumorGraft platform


Cachexia is present in the majority of patients with advanced cancer
progression and is not reversible through nutritional supplementation,
leading to loss of skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. There are a lack
of quality pre-clinical models for cachexia research. Previously,
Champions Oncology reported a mouse cachexia model derived from a primary
human renal cell carcinoma tumor implanted in immunocompromised mice.
This model, CTG-0804, was developed using the innovative Champions
TumorGraft platform, which preserves the biological properties of the
original human tumor. The Champions TumorGraft platform demonstrated
dramatic weight loss in these mice as the tumor grew. Plasma from these
mice also showed elevated levels of human IL-6. We have now further
characterized this TumorGraft model by evaluating standard of care (SOC)
agents for renal cell carcinoma and anti-IL-6 compounds to determine the
mechanism of cachexia. The SOC evaluation revealed that sorafenib,
sunitinib, temsirolimus and bevacizumab as single agents provided a
survival advantage by inhibiting tumor growth and preventing weight loss
in these mice. Blockade of human IL-6 with tocilizumab or ALD518 did not
inhibit tumor growth and weight loss still occurred, demonstrating the
possibility of other pathways involved in the cachexia mechanism. In
addition, the SOC data for sunitinib showed significant tumor growth
inhibition, but no regression at the study end point. This correlated
with the clinical profile, where sunitinib could not prevent metastasis
and the patient eventually progressed. The TumorGraft model was
molecularly characterized and mutation analysis revealed a KIT V530I
mutation. This mutation has been reported in extra-abdominal aggressive
fibromatosis (desmoid tumor) and acute myeloid leukemia patients that
have responded to c-kit targeting therapies, such as imatanib and
dasatinib. Further characterization of this TumorGraft is ongoing to
include additional bioinformatics using gene expression and mutation
pathway analyses. In summary, we have continued development of this
cachexia model using the Champions TumorGraft platform, along with
molecular evaluation, to produce a robust and well-characterized approach
for cachexia investigation which can also be applied to other areas of
drug development and cancer research.

