Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The c-Myc oncogene over-activates dormant replication origins and
sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy drugs


Several clinical studies have shown a correlation between elevated c-Myc
levels and a better response to chemotherapy. Although elevated c-Myc
might indirectly cause such chemosensitivity, it is possible that a
direct effect is occurring due to underlying molecular mechanisms. The
purpose of the current study was to determine whether c-Myc
overexpression could acutely cause chemosensitivity. The c-Myc protein is
known to activate DNA replication origins, but the mechanism for this is
unknown. Origins are regulated by the loading of MCM2-7 hexamers, which
form the core of the helicase that starts the initiation of replication.
Mammalian cells load more MCM complexes than are necessary to complete
one round of replication. The excess MCM complexes function as backups to
allow recovery of replication when forks stall during drug treatment.
Consistent with this, we found that loss of Mcm4 or Mcm7 sensitizes PDAC
cell lines to 5-FU and Gemcitabine, two S phase stress drugs that are
used to treat PDAC patients but are not highly effective on their own.
Similar to depletion of backup MCM complexes via loss of Mcm4 or Mcm7,
elevated c-Myc expression over-activates backup MCMs, leaving fewer
available to recover from drug treatment. Cells containing overexpressed
c-Myc display increased chemosensitivity to Gemcitabine that is not seen
in cells containing normal c-Myc levels or a non-functional c-Myc mutant.
These results demonstrate that reduction in backup MCM complexes, either
by direct downregulation or by oncogene driven over-activation (via
c-Myc), render cells sensitive to chemotherapy drugs. These results
suggest that development of drugs that target MCM functionality may be
useful in combination with S-phase stress drugs currently used in the
clinic. These results also demonstrate that c-Myc has the ability to
acutely cause chemosensitivity and c-Myc elevated tumors may respond
better to chemotherapy due to the c-Myc effects on MCM complexes.

