Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Etirinotecan pegol accumulates in breast cancer brain metastases
and prolongs survival in an experimental model of brain metastases of
human triple negative breast cancer


Background: Breast cancer brain metastases (BCBM) remain a challenging
consequence of advanced breast cancer. The blood-brain barrier prevents
many chemotherapeutic agents used to control systemic disease from
reaching effective concentration in brain metastases. Etirinotecan pegol
(EP) is the first long acting topoisomerase 1 inhibitor that provides
continuous exposure to SN38 with reduced peak concentrations, which
results in a better efficacy and safety profile than irinotecan (IRN). EP
resulted in a RECIST response rate of 39% (7/18) in patients with
metastatic TNBC. Here we present encouraging brain metastases
distribution and survival results for EP in an experimental mouse model
of TNBC brain metastasis using IRN as a control.Methods: For efficacy,
mice with established MDA-MB-231Br BCBM (treatment started 21 days after
intracardiac injection of MDA-MB-231Br Luc cells) were treated IV with
vehicle, 50 mg/kg IRN, or 50 mg/kg EP q7d. Efficacy was assessed using
bioluminescent imaging and survival. After reaching the study endpoint,
brain samples were harvested, sectioned, and analyzed for size and number
of metastases. For brain metastases distribution, mice with established
MDA-MB-231 brain metastases received 50 mg/kg 14C-EP or 14C-IRN. At
planned times, animals were sacrificed and brain was harvested,
sectioned, and mounted on slides for quantitation of radioactivity in
brain metastases and brain tumor distant tissue (BDT).Results: In the
efficacy study, tumor bioluminescence in vehicle and IRN treated animals
steadily increased. Vehicle animals died on days 16-23 post start of
treatment and IRN animals died on day 21, leading to a median survival of
21 days in both groups. In contrast, bioluminescence decreased in EP
treated animals over time, and 50% of animals survived to the end of
study on day 70. Based on microscopic assessment of brain sections, EP
treated animals had significantly reduced number of tumors per brain
slice (0.5 for EP vs. 14.5 for IRN), and significantly smaller lesion
size (0.04 mm2 for EP vs. 0.25 mm2 for IRN). Radiographic quantitation of
brain sections confirmed that EP preferentially distributes into brain
metastases compared to BDT. Brain metastases concentrations after EP were
>4-fold higher compared to IRN treatment.Conclusions: EP shows promising
efficacy in an experimental model of breast cancer brain metastases. EP
selectively penetrates the compromised blood-brain barrier at the
metastatic lesion, reduces the size and number of metastatic lesions, and
prolongs survival. Plasma SN38 trough concentrations observed in this
study are achieved clinically with the 145 mg/m2 q21d EP regimen used in
the Phase 3 BEACON study in patients with metastatic BC. Assessment of
the clinical relevance of these data is planned in the subset of BEACON
patients with brain metastases.

