Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolite profiling reveals druggable metabolic distinctions
between basal-like and non-basal-like triple-negative breast cancers


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer that represents about 15-20% of all breast cancers. Because TNBC
tumors do not express the estrogen or progesterone receptor and lack HER2
amplification, the disease is not responsive to current targeted
therapies. The development of therapeutic approaches specific for TNBC is
hindered by genetic heterogeneity, and significant efforts are being made
to subtype the disease. To this end, we performed metabolite profiling
(metabolomics) to characterize metabolic fingerprints within TNBC in
order to define metabolic subtypes, and identify molecular drivers for
the development of targeted therapies. We profiled twelve
well-characterized TNBC-derived cell lines as well as a non-transformed,
immortalized breast cell line and two primary human mammary epithelial
cell lines. Those cancer cell lines recapitulate all 7 genetic subtypes
of TNBC which were proposed recently based on mRNA gene expression
profiles (1). Our approaches used and data generated have implications
for drug target discovery. Hierarchical clustering based on high quality
intracellular metabolites clearly and reproducibly segregated the TNBC
cell lines from the non-transformed lines. Alterations in energy
utilization, lipid metabolism, and other pathways of importance to highly
proliferative cells differed significantly from the control cell line
MCF-10A. In addition, TNBC cell lines segregated into two discrete
groups, suggesting the existence of two major metabolic subtypes of TNBC,
which correlated with basal-like vs. non-basal-like gene expression.
Metabolites like glutamate and glutamine, serine, glycine,
trans-4-hydroxyproline, 5-oxoproline, several complex lipids
(phosphatidylcholines and sphingomyelins), myo-inositol, polyamines
spermidine and putrescine represented metabolites differing significantly
between TNBC metabolic subtypes. Ongoing studies are evaluating whether
these differences represent dependencies with therapeutic relevance.
Metabolite profiling was also used to identify potential metabolic
liabilities generated by treatment with clinical kinase inhibitors.
Response of the metabolome to treatment with rapamycin, sorafenib,
imatinib, and lapatinib in four genetically diverse TNBC cell lines and
MCF-10A control cell lines revealed specific drug-induced metabolic
alterations. Co-targeting kinases and metabolic targets may offer an
approach to synthetic lethality with a reduced likelihood for the
development of drug resistance.(1) (Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders
ME, Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y, et al. Identification of human
triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models for
selection of targeted therapies. J Clin Invest. 2011;121)

