Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crizotinib inhibits tumor growth and metabolic inactivation of
gemcitabine in new patient derived orthotopic pancreatic tumors with
c-Met overexpression: A step toward personalized treatment in pancreatic
cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains a major unsolved health
problem.Most drugs that pass preclinical tests fail in patient,
emphasizing the need of improved preclinical models. This study aimed to
(1) develop orthotopic models employing primary PDAC cells genetically
engineered to express Firefly- and Gaussia- luciferase (Fluc/Gluc),
enabling monitoring of tumor growth, and (2) evaluate the therapeutic
potential of c-Met inhibitors.Four primary PDAC-cultures were
successfully transduced with lentiviral vectors containing Fluc and Gluc,
and then injected orthotopically into pancreas. The bioluminescence
intensities increased overtime in all the models. Histopathological and
immunohistochemical analyses were carried out on paraffin-embedded slices
of pancreas, as well as on metastatic lesions in liver, lungs and lymph
nodes, showing that the xenografts recapitulated the phenotype of human
PDAC. Genetic characteristics of the xenografts were similar to their
originator tumor/cells, as assessed by array-CGH. Genomic and
immunohistochemical analysis revealed c-Met increased copy-number and
overexpression in one of our models (PDAC3). Therefore we explored
several c-Met inhibitors in vitro and in vivo.Crizotinib emerged as the
most active inhibitor of cell growth, with an IC50 of 0.5 M in the PDAC3.
Median drug-effect analysis revealed strong synergistic interaction of
crizotinib with gemcitabine. The mice receiving this combination had
significantly lower BLI signals compared to mice receiving either
gemcitabine or crizotinib alone (e.g., at day 30, Fluc was 7x108 vs.
1x108 photon/second/cm2 in gemcitabine and combination group,
respectively), which was reflected in a significant longer survival of
mice treated with combination. Importantly, we observed a significant
increase of gemcitabine in the combination group with respect to the mice
treated with gemcitabine alone (6.3 vs. 2.5nm/mg, as measured by
LC/MS-MS). Correspondingly, crizotinib reduced the activity of cytidine
deaminase both in tissue specimens, and blood samples. Since intact c-Met
signaling is a critical factor in the protection against excessive
generation of endogenous ROS, we demonstrated that ROS induction caused
c-Met inhibition was responsible for CDA degradation after exposure to
crizotinib, resulting in the increased stabilization of gemcitabine in
the PDAC-3 cells. Our orthotopic imaging models showed genetic,
histopathological and metastatic features similar to their originator
tumors and enabled the identification of c-Met as a potential therapeutic
target. Crizotinib and gemcitabine are a promising drug combination
against this target, acting synergistically also through the increase of
drug delivery by CDA modulation, and warranting further investigation for
the treatment of PDAC patients.

