Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of primary non-small cell lung cancer model: Stable
isotope-resolved metabolomics (SIRM) reveals functional biochemistry


Stable isotope-resolved metabolomics (SIRM) provides a comprehensive and
functional readout of cellular activity and is therefore a useful tool
both for biomarker discovery and fundamental cancer biology. We have
established a primary lung squamous cell carcinoma line (PSLC1), isolated
from the lung tumor tissue of a non-small cell lung cancer patient, for
which the metabolic profile has been established. We used SIRM to
characterize the metabolic activity of the cells in mouse xenografts and
in cell culture. Here we report the metabolic activities of the cell line
in culture using two different tracers to evaluate central metabolism.
PSLC1 cells were grown in either [U-13C]-glucose or [U-13C,15N]-glutamine
labeled medium. Cell extracts and medium were prepared and analyzed by
1H-NMR, HSQC, TOCSY, GC-MS, and FTICR-MS. Cells exhibited linear glucose
consumption that persisted even as proliferation plateaued. The
conversion of glucose to lactate occurred at a strikingly high 89%.
Anaplerotic pathways involving pyruvate carboxylation and glutaminolysis
were active and appeared to be dependent on cellular proliferation.
Glutamine represented an important contributor for biosynthetic and
bioenergetic cellular needs, including de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis
and glucose-independent TCA cycling. In addition, glutamine served as the
major precursor in proline and glutathione biosynthesis. Distinct
glutamine utilization and labeling patterns indicated that this cancer
might be driven by C-MYC overexpression. C-MYC overexpression was
observed by targeted protein analysis guided by metabolomics-edited
transcriptomics analysis (Pro-META). The ability of SIRM to generate
hypotheses about protein expression demonstrates its potential use as a
first line biomarker detection method. Comparison with upstream in situ
and xenograft data will allow us to assess model validity and the effects
of tumor microenvironment. In turn, the in vitro data will help us
interpret human in situ data more robustly. Supported by grant
R25-CA-134283 and 1P01CA163223-01A1 from the National Cancer Institute

