Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to rapamycin and mTOR kinase inhibitors is
mediated by non-overlapping mutations in distinct sites in the mTOR
protein


The prevalence of mTOR activation in cancer has led to the development of
two classes of inhibitors of the protein as therapeutics: the natural
product rapamycin and its analogs as well as direct inhibitors of mTOR
kinase. mTOR exists in at least two multi-protein complexes. The mTORC1
complex phosphorylates S6K and 4EBP and stimulates protein translation,
metabolism as well as other processes. The mTORC2 complex phosphorylates
and activates AKT. Rapamycin binds to the immunophillin FKBP12.
Drug-bound FKBP12 complex binds to mTOR FRB domain and selectively
inhibits the activity of mTORC1. However, rapalogs preferentially inhibit
S6K phosphorylation compared to 4EBP phosphorylation. Rapalogs have
undergone extensive clinical testing and have significant antitumor
activity in renal cell and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors and, in
combination with aromatase inhibitors, in resistant, ER positive breast
cancers. In contrast, mTOR kinase inhibitors suppress both mTORC1 and
mTORC2 functions and potently inhibit S6K, 4EBP and AKT S473
phosphorylation, these drugs are in early clinical testing.In order to
better understand the mechanism of action of these drugs and potential
mechanisms of tumor escape from mTOR inhibition, we selected breast tumor
cells for resistance to growth inhibition in cell culture by treatment
with either rapamycin or an mTOR kinase inhibitor. In rapamycin resistant
cells, phosphorylation of S6K and S6 were insensitive to the drug, but
remained sensitive to mTOR kinase inhibitors. Conversely, in clones
resistant to mTOR kinase inhibitors, mTORC1 and mTORC2 substrates were
insensitive to the drugs, but S6K and S6 phosphorylation remained
sensitive to rapamycin. Deep sequencing results explained these findings:
rapamycin resistant clones harbored mutations in the FRB domain of mTOR,
in the sites shown to interact with the FKBP12-rapamycin complex; mTOR
kinase resistant clones harbored mutations in the mTOR catalytic domain.
These mutations were not observed in the parental cells. It is likely
that the mutations identified in each domain prevent binding of the
drug.Consistent with these data, growth of rapamycin resistant cells
retain sensitivity to mTOR kinase inhibitors and mTOR kinase resistant
cells retain sensitivity to rapalogs, both in tissue culture and in vivo.
The results suggest that tumor cells with acquired resistance to mTOR
inhibitors retain a requirement for mTOR signaling for proliferation.
Furthermore, tumors resistant to either class of drug may not be
cross-resistant to the other and combined therapy with both might delay
the onset of resistance. Further studies on the genetics of human tumors
with acquired resistance to these agents will determine the clinical
importance of these findings.

