Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor CHD5 is an epigenetic regulator of neuronal
cell fate


Genomic lesions affecting the 1p36 chromosomal region are prevalent in
variety of human malignancies, yet the tumor suppressor in this region
had not been identified. We used chromosome engineering to create a
series of mouse models with lesions spanning the 1p36-analagous region.
These gain and loss-of-function models allowed us to pinpoint a potent
tumor suppressive interval that when deleted predisposes to cancer and
when duplicated causes excessive tumor suppression. We identified
Chromodomain Helicase DNA-binding domain protein 5 (CHD5) as the
causative gene in the region, defined CHD5 as an inducer of the tumor
suppressive network encoded at the Cdkn2 locus, and demonstrated that
CHD5 is frequently deleted in human glioma. It is now appreciated that
CHD5 is mutated in cancers of the breast, ovary, colon, and prostate, as
well as in melanoma, glioma, and neuroblastoma, and furthermore, that
robust CHD5 expression is a favorable indicator of patient survival
following anti-cancer therapy.Although ample evidence from human studies
indicates that CHD5 plays a pivotal role in cancer, the mechanism
responsible for tumor suppression is not well understood. CHD5 belongs to
the CHD family of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling proteins, yet CHD5's
role in modulating chromatin and the consequence of CHD5 deficiency in
vivo was unknown. We discovered that CHD5's tumor suppressive function is
dependent on its dual plant homeodomains (PHDs)_motifs that bind
specifically marked histones. The PHDs of CHD5 preferentially bind
unmodified histone 3 (H3), an interaction essential for CHD5's ability to
inhibit proliferation, to modulate transcription, and to suppress
tumorigenesis in vivo. We recently defined CHD5 as a regulator of
chromatin-mediated dynamics essential for neuronal differentiation.
Whereas neural stem cells (NSCs) normally have the capacity to
differentiate into neurons, NSCs from Chd5-deficient mice retain
stem-like characteristics and differentiate into astrocytes at the
expense of neurons. We discovered that H3K27me3_a repressive chromatin
mark implicated in cancer_is depleted by CHD5 deficiency. We show that
CHD5 rescues the de-differentiated phenotype of CHD5 deficient NSCs,
while re-establishing global levels of H3K27me3.Our findings define CHD5
as a dosage-sensitive tumor suppressor, identify CHD5 as a member of a
newly appreciated class of H3-binding PHD-containing proteins, and reveal
a critical role for CHD5 in dictating stem cell fate. This provides new
insight into the epigenetic mechanisms responsible for CHD5's tumor
suppressive role that when perturbed, set the stage for cancer.

