Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-culture of 3D tumor spheroids with fibroblasts as an in vitro
model for drug resistance study


Purpose. Chemotherapeutic failure of human solid tumor is attributed to
tumor microenvironmental (TME) factors associated with drug resistance.
Three dimensional (3D) tumor spheroid (TS) model is known to be in vivo
mimic and has demonstrated its clinical relevancy. Fibroblasts in TME
have been shown to play a significant role in drug resistance. The
present study was to develop and characterize a co-culture of 3D TS with
fibroblasts for human colorectal tumor model.Methods. TS of human
colorectal cancer cells (HT-29) was prepared by using liquid overlay
method and co-cultured in collagen-coated 24-well plates with colon
fibroblasts (CCD-18co) grown in Transwell inserts. Differentail
expression of extracellular matrix (ECM), growth signaling molecules, and
microRNAs was analyzed using IHC, ELISA, western blot and qRT-PCR. For
miRNA transfection study, changes in motility and drug sensitivity were
measured by wound healing assays and APH or MTS assay,
respectively.Results. Significant resistance to 5-FU was shown in TS
either with or without fibroblasts compared to monolayers. Compared to
single culture of TS, co-culture with fibroblast showed 1.3-fold
increased outgrowth on collagen gel, indicating increased motility.
Cell-to-cell adhesion structures, expression of ECM and active form TGF1
were higher in TS-fibroblast co-culture. Expression of several growth-
and TME-related factors, such as fibronectin, EGFR, -catenin and CTGF,
was higher in fibroblast co-culture up to the level of HT-29 xenograft
tissues. Among miRNAs showing differential expressions, miR-96 showed
down-regulation in TS. HT-29 cells transfected with miR-96 showed
increase in cell motility, proliferation, and sensitivity to 5-FU,
suggesting its potential role in regulation of genes associated with 5-FU
resistance.Conclusions. Co-culture of 3D TS-fibroblasts was successfully
established and demonstrated in vivo mimic characteristics with respect
to presence of adhesion microstructures, expression of ECM and growth
signaling molecules, and resistance to 5-FU. MiR-96 showed its potential
role in 3D drug resistance which warrants further studies.

