Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) expressing stemness
and EMT phenotypes with immunosuppressive cells in metastatic breast
cancer patients


Background: The detection of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in peripheral
blood (PB) of breast cancer (BC) patients is an unfavourable prognostic
factor; however further characterization of these cells is required to
understand their biological role. The presence of stemness and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers in CTCs could be an
important marker of enhanced metastatic capacity. On the other hand,
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and T regulatory cells (Tregs)
play an essential role in tumor-immune evasion, by suppressing the normal
function of both CD4+and CD8+ T cells. Increased levels of MDSCs and
Tregs have been correlated with advanced disease and poor prognosis.
Recent findings in preclinical models and primary tumours indicate that
immune cells can induce EMT and stemness characteristics of cancer cells;
however this has not been demonstrated in circulation. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the correlation of CTCs expressing stemness
and EMT phenotypes with immunosuppressive cells in BC patients.Patients
and Methods: PB was obtained from 38 metastatic BC patients prior to
treatment. Triple immunofluorescence was performed on PBMCs cytospin
preparations using antibodies against putative markers for epithelial
cells (anti-pancytokeratin, A45-B/B3), stemness (anti-ALDH1) and EMT
(anti-TWIST) phenotypes. Quantification of ALDH1 expression levels and
characterization of TWIST subcellular localization was performed using
the ARIOL system. The frequency of different immune cell subpopulations
was also evaluated in PB using flow cytometry and was correlated to the
presence of distinct CTC phenotypes.Results: Cytokeratin+ CTCs were
detected in 16/38 (42%)patients. Patients with detectable CTCs had a
higher percentage of CD4+ Tregs compared to those without CTCs (p=0.022).
Moreover, elevated levels of CD4+ Tregs were associated with detectable
stem cell-like CTCs (ALDH1high) (p=0.023), while in patients with
non-stem CTCs (ALDH1low/-) an increased frequency of MDSCs
[CD15+CD14-HLA-DR-Lin-CD33+CD11b+] occurred (p=0.020). The detection of
EMT-like CTCs was not associated with the incidence of MDSCs and
Tregs.Conclusions: The detection of CTCs using ARIOL system was
associated with a higher incidence of CD4+ Tregs and MDSCs in metastatic
BC patients. However, different immunosuppressive cell subpopulations
were correlated with phenotypically different CTCs according to EMT and
stemness characteristics. These findings indicate that the immune system
may be differentially involved in regulating CTCs with different
biological behaviour or reversely, CTCs with different characteristics
might induce specific subpopulations of immunosuppressive cells.

