Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the mechanistic basis of Apo2L/TRAIL-AMG
655-dr5 interactions and cooperative signaling in cancer cells


Clinical studies with multiple death receptor (DR) agonists targeting DR4
and/or DR5 s have failed to advance beyond phase 2 due to limited
efficacy. Unexpectedly, treatment with DR5 agonist antibody AMG 655
markedly enhanced Apo2L/TRAIL-induced killing in cancer cells. Strong
synergism observed between AMG 655 and Apo2L/TRAIL in multiple cancer
cell lines suggests that additional cross-linking provided by AMG 655 can
enhance the ability of soluble ligand to initiate an apoptotic signal.
Since the Apo2L/TRAIL related TNF family members FasL and TNF are more
potent apoptotic agonists in their membrane-bound forms, the synergy
observed between soluble Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG 655 suggests that the
combination may mimic a membrane bound form of the ligand. In this study,
we used biochemical approaches to characterize the Apo2L/TRAIL-AMG
655-DR5 interactions and cooperative signaling.We found membrane-bound
Apo2L/TRAIL induced potent apoptotic signaling against cancer cell lines
that are resistant to soluble Apo2L/TRAIL. Cooperativity between
Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG 655 but not single agent alone promotes caspase 8
activation and DISC complex assembly, suggesting that the combination
represents a qualitative change in apoptotic signaling. To better
understand the molecular interactions between Apo2L/TRAIL, DR5 and AMG
655, we determined the crystal structure of the ternary complex of
Apo2L/TRAIL, the DR5 ectodomain, and the Fab fragment of AMG 655 at 3.3
resolution. The Apo2L/TRAIL-DR5-AMG 655-Fab complex is composed of an
Apo2L/TRAIL homotrimer with three DR5 monomers bound diagonally along the
crevices between two neighboring Apo2L/TRAIL molecules, and three AMG 655
Fabs bound to the three DR5 monomers individually. We then modeled the
positioning of additional ternary complexes, which results in an array of
DR5 molecules on the cell surface in a hexagonal honeycomb pattern, with
three DR5 molecules in each node. Using different AMG 655 fragments, we
demonstrated that AMG 655-Fab'2 but not AMG 655-Fab fragment is
sufficient to cooperate with Apo2L/TRAIL suggesting that the two DR5
binding moieties of AMG 655 mediate the effect. These observations
illustrate how co-administration of trimeric Apo2L/TRAIL and bivalent AMG
655 may promote super-clustering of DR5, thereby leading to efficient
DISC assembly and enhanced apoptotic signaling. The enhanced agonism
generated by combining Apo2L/TRAIL and AMG 655 provides insight into the
limited efficacy observed in previous clinical trials and suggests
testable hypotheses to reconsider death receptor agonism as a therapeutic
strategy.

