Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association of smoking before first childbirth with breast
cancer risk is independent from alcohol use and does not seem to differ
across ethnic groups: the multiethnic cohort study


Background; The association of smoking with breast cancer is still the
subject of scientific inquiry. In early studies, women often reported
starting to smoke after their first live childbirth, while in the most
recent cohort studies the women started before giving birth. In the
former studies smokers had no increased risk of breast cancer, while the
latter studies report that smokers have an increased risk of breast
cancer. The purpose of the present study was to prospectively examine
whether active smoking increases the risk of breast cancer overall and
among non-drinkers of alcohol, as well as according to onset of smoking
in relation to first childbirth, and according to race/ ethnicity in the
MEC, a mature cohort study that enrolled older women of five ethnic
groups who are predominately non-drinkers of alcohol.Methods: We followed
88,374 women, enrolled at age 45-75 years as part of the Multiethnic
Cohort Study. Breast cancer was ascertained by linkage to the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program cancer
registries covering the states of Hawaii and California through December
2007. We used Cox proportional hazards models to estimate hazard ratios
(HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) while adjusting for relevant
confounders.Results: During a mean follow-up of 12 years, 3,821 women
developed invasive breast cancer. Compared with never smokers, smoking
characteristics showed consistent dose-response associations with breast
cancer risk [age at smoking initiation (ptrend =0.002), smoking duration
(ptrend =0.03), number of cigarettes smoked daily (ptrend=0.01) and
pack-years (ptrend=0.003)]. The patterns for non-drinkers were quite
similar to those for women overall, although with the smaller sample
sizes, only the test for trend for total lifetime use (pack-years) was
statistically significant (ptrend =0.02). Among parous women, those who
had smoked three or more years before their first live childbirth had an
increased risk of breast cancer of 20% overall (95% CI 1.07-1.36) and
among non-drinkers only ( 95% CI 1.01-1.43), compared with never smokers.
For parous women, both Native Hawaiians (ptrend =0.02) and whites (ptrend
=0.03) showed a positive dose-response relationship between duration of
smoking before the first childbirth and breast cancer risk. The test for
heterogeneity for the association between ever /never smoking and breast
cancer risk by ethnic groups was not significant (p=0.49).Conclusions: We
found that the smoking-related increase in breast cancer risk is similar
for drinkers and non-drinkers of alcohol. Our data do not support any
difference for the smoking and breast cancer association for the five
examined racial/ethnic groups although this may be due to lack of power.

