Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thyroid cancer cells with low proteasome activity have therapeutic
resistance


BackgroundThyroid cancer is the most frequent endocrine malignancy with a
global increasing incidence. Papillary, follicular, and anaplastic
thyroid carcinomas arise from endodermal-derived follicular cells, which
represent the most abundant cellular population of the thyroid gland. The
recent discovery of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in a variety of tumors has
changed the view of carcinogenesis and therapeutic resistance. Therefore,
the identification of CSCs in thyroid cancer represents a crucial step to
elucidate the mechanism of therapeutic resistance, and develop effective
therapies. It was previously reported that low intrinsic proteasome
activity in glioma, pancreas, prostate, and breast cancer cells
correlated with therapeutic resistance and CSCs properties. We
hypothesized that a therapeutic resistant cell population with
intrinsically low 26S proteasome activity can also be found in thyroid
cancer.Materials and MethodsWe engineered human thyroid cancer cell lines
(TPC-1, FRO, and WRO) to express a green fluorescent molecule fused to
the degron of ornithine decarboxylase from a retroviral vector. The green
fluorescence accumulates in a small population of these cells as a result
of low activity of the 26S proteasome.ResultWe identified a small
population of cells with intrinsically low 26S proteasome activity in all
thyroid cell lines. These populations have cisplatin, 5-FU, and
radio-resistance. To further investigate differences between thyroid
cancer cells with high and low proteasome activity, we studied their
self-renewal capacity and tumorigenicity using an in vitro sphere-forming
assay and an in vivo xenograft transplantation assay.ConclusionWe
conclude that established thyroid cancer cell lines are heterogeneous
with regard to their intrinsic proteasome activity and that they contain
a therapeutic resistant subpopulation of cells that can be identified by
low proteasome activity. Further studies are needed to elucidate the
mechanism that thyroid cancer cells with low proteasome activity have
these properties.Learning ObjectiveWe identified thyroid cancer cells
with low proteasome activity have therapeutic resistance and CSCs
properties.

