Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing anti-angiogenic therapies for human hepatocellular
cancer (HCC)- studies of suntinib in the woodchuck model of hepatitis B
related HCC


Introduction: Better animal models that recapitulate the liver milieu of
human HCC are needed. The eastern woodchuck is an established model of
human hepatitis B viral infection and spontaneously develops HCC in the
context of chronic woodchuck hepatitis viral infection (WHV). The
translational relevance of this model for developing anti-angiogenic
therapies was evaluated using sunitinib (S), a potent oral,
anti-angiogenic agent.Methods: Woodchucks were bred and inoculated at
birth with titered infectious WHV pools obtained from chronic WHV
carriers. By 12 months of age, the rate of chronic WHV infection was
>60%. Carriers were followed by USG, upon developing HCC, 12 animals were
randomized 1:1 to S or placebo (P) given once orally daily for 30 days.
From a single treatment S PK study at 4 dose levels, n=3/group,
simulations showed 12mg/kg daily was expected to be optimal for achieving
steady state serum concentrations between 50- 100 ng/ml in woodchucks.
Tumor size and blood flow were assessed using dynamic contrast enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) before treatment and on day 28 using
standardized protocols. At study completion or when animals were humanely
euthanized, tumors and any other small nodules were fixed overnight in
10% buffered formalin. After standard processing and embedding in
paraffin, 4 m sections were prepared, deparaffinized, stained with
hematoxylin-eosin (H&E), studied with a Zeiss Axio Imager A1 microscope
by a pathologist blinded to the treatment arm. Morphometric study of
areas of necrosis were compared to the size of the tumor sections by
counting view fields at medium objective magnification, and differences
in percentages between the groups were compared by the Excel student's
two tailed, two-sample unequal variance t-test.Results: The median age
was 30 months. Four animals died during the course of the study (1P, 3 S)
and were replaced. Median therapy duration was 28 days. Morphologically,
portal hepatitis and pre-neoplastic lesions (foci of altered hepatocytes
[FAH]) and larger areas of altered hepatocytes (AAH) were seen in all
livers. Areas of tumor necrosis of varying size (20-100%) adjacent to
terminal hepatic venules seen in both high grade and in rare, low grade
tumor sections of S treated woodchucks were rare in P animals. The
difference was highly significant (p= 6.0 E-13) between the two groups.
By DCE-MRI, median tumor volume change was + 17% and -13% and necrotic
tumor volume change was +22% and +190% in P and S treated animals
respectively. However all MRI parameters (k trans, AUC90, median tumor
volume) were not statistically significantly different between the
groups.Conclusions: Angiogenic response across different stages of
hepatocarcinogenesis can be studied in woodchucks. Histological necrosis
in S treated woodchucks without significant DCE-MRI change and the
toxicities seen with S have translational significance to human HCC.

