Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver-detargeted Ad5/48 chimaeric hexon based oncolytic adenovirus
targeting TGF signaling: A safe and effective approach for the treatment
of prostate cancer bone metastases


Background: We have previously shown that systemic delivery of oncolytic
Adenovirus 5 (Ad5) expressing soluble transforming growth factor
receptorII-Fc protein (Ad.sTRFc) produced anti-tumor responses in a mouse
model of prostate cancer bone metastases. However, the majority of the
Ad.sTRFc was taken up by the liver causing hepatic and systemic
toxicities. Since Ad5 uptake in the liver is primarily due to its binding
with blood factor X (FX), and that Ad48 has much reduced binding with FX,
to prevent the adenoviral-induced liver and systemic toxicity, a
chimaeric Ad5/48 adenovirus mHAd.sTRFc was created. Our objective is to
examine the safety and efficacy of mHAd.sTRFc in a mouse model of
prostate cancer bone metastases.Methods: Liver toxicity studies.
Following intravenous delivery of adenoviruses, H&E staining of the liver
tissues were performed to evaluate liver necrosis. Plasma liver alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels were
measured. Bone metastasis studies. PC3-luc2 cells were injected in left
heart ventricle of nude mice. In mice bearing skeletal tumors, vectors
were injected via tail vein. Bone metastases were examined by
bioluminescence imaging (BLI) and X-ray radiography. Tumor burden was
analyzed by H&E staining; osteoclasts were measured by tartarate
resistant acid phosphatase staining, plasma calcium levels were
determined, and microCT analyses of the bones were performed.Results:
Systemic delivery of Ad5 based Ad.sTRFc showed that a low dose (2.5x1010
viral particles (VPs)/mouse or a high dose (1011 VPs/mouse ) produced
significant liver necrosis and a transient increase in ALT and AST
levels; the high dose (1011 VPs/mouse) killed all the mice by day 3. On
the other hand, intravenous delivery of low or high dose of Ad5/48
chimaeric mHAd.sTRFc virus did not produce liver damage or increased
plasma ALT and AST levels; even the higher doses (up to 2x1011 VPs/mouse)
did not cause any animal deaths. There was a much reduced liver uptake of
mHAd.sTRFc compared to Ad.sTRFc. Intravenous delivery of Ad.sTRFc and
mHAd.sTRFc (5x1010 viral particles (VPs)/mouse) exhibited a significant
inhibition of bone metastases as revealed by BLI and X-ray analyses. The
higher doses of mHAd.sTRFc (2x1011 VPs/mouse or 4x1011 VPs/mouse) were
more effective than the lower dose (5x1010 VPs/mouse) of Ad.sTRFc or
mHAd.sTRFc in inhibiting bone metastases, and produced a significant
reduction in the tumor burden, hypercalcemia and osteoclast numbers, and
produced normal bone architect as revealed by the microCT scan
analyses.Conclusion: Ad5/48 chimaeric hexon based oncolytic adenoviruses
produce much reduced liver and systemic toxicity, and can be administered
in much larger amounts to produce superior anti-tumor responses, and
should be tested in the future clinical trials in prostate cancer
patients.

