Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioconjugation of near infrared dyes by PEGylation improves
pharmacokinetics and allows for better labeling and imaging of human
gastrointestinal cancers


NIR dyes are becoming increasingly popular due to their good tissue
penetration, low tissue autofluorescence and resistance to hemoglobin
quenching. However, they are still limited by lower hydrophilicity and
poor chemical and photo-stability in-vivo. We aimed to try to improve
these properties by covalent modification of these dyes by addition of
polyethylene glycol (PEG) chains. We studied 2 commercially-available NIR
dyes, DyLight 650 and 750, to evaluate how PEGylation affects the
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution and imaging. PEGylated and
non-PEGylated DyLight 650 and 750 dyes were conjugated to a chimeric
anti-CEA antibody and were injected intravenously into nude mice. Serum
samples were collected at various time points to determine serum
concentrations and clearance kinetics. Biodistribution was determined by
tissue sonication and analyzing tissue concentration profiles over time.
PEGylated dyes had significantly higher serum concentrations than
non-PEGylated dyes with p=0.005 for the 650 dyes and pNIR dyes are
becoming increasingly popular due to their good tissue penetration, low
tissue autofluorescence and resistance to hemoglobin quenching. However,
they are still limited by lower hydrophilicity and poor chemical and
photo-stability in-vivo. We aimed to try to improve these properties by
covalent modification of these dyes by addition of polyethylene glycol
(PEG) chains. We studied 2 commercially-available NIR dyes, DyLight 650
and 750, to evaluate how PEGylation affects the pharmacokinetics,
biodistribution and imaging. PEGylated and non-PEGylated DyLight 650 and
750 dyes were conjugated to a chimeric anti-CEA antibody and were
injected intravenously into nude mice. Serum samples were collected at
various time points to determine serum concentrations and clearance
kinetics. Biodistribution was determined by tissue sonication and
analyzing tissue concentration profiles over time. PEGylated dyes had
significantly higher serum concentrations than non-PEGylated dyes with
p=0.005 for the 650 dyes and p<0.001 for the 750 dyes. PEGylated dyes had
significantly lower liver concentrations (p=0.03 for the 650 dyes;
p=0.002 for the 750 dyes) and higher renal concentrations (p=0.003 for
the 650 dyes and pNIR dyes are becoming increasingly popular due to their
good tissue penetration, low tissue autofluorescence and resistance to
hemoglobin quenching. However, they are still limited by lower
hydrophilicity and poor chemical and photo-stability in-vivo. We aimed to
try to improve these properties by covalent modification of these dyes by
addition of polyethylene glycol (PEG) chains. We studied 2
commercially-available NIR dyes, DyLight 650 and 750, to evaluate how
PEGylation affects the pharmacokinetics, biodistribution and imaging.
PEGylated and non-PEGylated DyLight 650 and 750 dyes were conjugated to a
chimeric anti-CEA antibody and were injected intravenously into nude
mice. Serum samples were collected at various time points to determine
serum concentrations and clearance kinetics. Biodistribution was
determined by tissue sonication and analyzing tissue concentration
profiles over time. PEGylated dyes had significantly higher serum
concentrations than non-PEGylated dyes with p=0.005 for the 650 dyes and
p<0.001 for the 750 dyes. PEGylated dyes had significantly lower liver
concentrations (p=0.03 for the 650 dyes; p=0.002 for the 750 dyes) and
higher renal concentrations (p=0.003 for the 650 dyes and p<0.001 for the
750 dyes) compared to non-PEGylated dyes. Human pancreatic tumors
subcutaneously implanted into nude mice were labeled with antibody-dye
conjugates and serially imaged. Labeling with PEGylated dyes resulted in
significantly brighter tumors compared to the non-PEGylated dyes (pNIR
dyes are becoming increasingly popular due to their good tissue
penetration, low tissue autofluorescence and resistance to hemoglobin
quenching. However, they are still limited by lower hydrophilicity and
poor chemical and photo-stability in-vivo. We aimed to try to improve
these properties by covalent modification of these dyes by addition of
polyethylene glycol (PEG) chains. We studied 2 commercially-available NIR
dyes, DyLight 650 and 750, to evaluate how PEGylation affects the
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution and imaging. PEGylated and
non-PEGylated DyLight 650 and 750 dyes were conjugated to a chimeric
anti-CEA antibody and were injected intravenously into nude mice. Serum
samples were collected at various time points to determine serum
concentrations and clearance kinetics. Biodistribution was determined by
tissue sonication and analyzing tissue concentration profiles over time.
PEGylated dyes had significantly higher serum concentrations than
non-PEGylated dyes with p=0.005 for the 650 dyes and p<0.001 for the 750
dyes. PEGylated dyes had significantly lower liver concentrations (p=0.03
for the 650 dyes; p=0.002 for the 750 dyes) and higher renal
concentrations (p=0.003 for the 650 dyes and p<0.001 for the 750 dyes)
compared to non-PEGylated dyes. Human pancreatic tumors subcutaneously
implanted into nude mice were labeled with antibody-dye conjugates and
serially imaged. Labeling with PEGylated dyes resulted in significantly
brighter tumors compared to the non-PEGylated dyes (p<0.001 for the 650
dyes; p=0.01 for 750 dyes). In a liver metastasis model of colon cancer,
PEGylated dyes showed bright labeling of metastatic tissue with good
contrast between normal and malignant tissue. PEGylation of the NIR dyes
DyLight 650 and 750 significantly changes their pharmacokinetics and
biodistribution, allowing higher serum concentrations, longer half-life,
brighter tissue labeling and decreased accumulation in lymphoid organs.
This allows for high fidelity imaging of metastatic disease to any
lymphoid or hemoglobin dense organ such as the liver.

