Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of selective and broad glucose transporter (GLUT)
inhibition on glucose distribution in tumor bearing mice


Malignant cells are known for their accelerated metabolism, high energy
requirements, and increased glucose uptake. Transport of glucose across
the plasma membrane is the first and rate-limiting step for glucose
metabolism and is mediated by facilitative glucose transporter (GLUT)
proteins. Increased glucose uptake in malignant cells has been associated
with upregulated expression of glucose transporters, mainly
overexpression of GLUT1 and/or GLUT3. There is limited knowledge about
how selective (e.g. GLUT1) versus broad (multi-) GLUT inhibition affects
glucose homeostasis in tumor bearing mice. Using potent small molecule
inhibitors, we compared [14C]-2-Deoxy-D-Glucose (2-DG) distribution after
selective GLUT1 versus GLUT1, 3 and 4 [multi-GLUT] inhibition and versus
control in human NSCLC NCI-H460 tumor bearing mice. A single dose of a
GLUT1 selective and a multi-GLUT inhibitor were administered to NCI-H460
tumor bearing NMRI nu/nu mice. At the respective Cmax concentrations, a
bolus of 2-DG was rapidly injected intra-peritoneally and the
distribution of metabolically stable 2-DG was obtained using whole-body
autoradiography after 15 min and 120 min. With the multi-GLUT inhibitor
only a very short inhibition of 2-DG uptake was observed in the NCI-H460
tumors while a long-lasting inhibition was detected in heart, brain and
brown fat tissue. In contrast, a long-lasting inhibition of 2-DG uptake
was observed in NCI-H460 tumors for the selective GLUT1 inhibitor. 2-DG
concentrations were reduced in the brain following administration of the
selective GLUT1 inhibitor at 15 min and returned to normal levels at 120
min while the tumor 2-DG concentration stayed low. The 2-DG findings go
in parallel with the histopathological findings present in the brain and
heart after treatment with the multi-GLUT inhibitor. However, similar
histopathological findings have not been observed in the brain and heart
after treatment with the selective GLUT-1 inhibitor.Therefore, selective
GLUT1 inhibition is associated with a sustained low 2-DG concentration in
the NCI-H460 tumors while only minor changes in glucose homeostasis were
observed in other organ systems.

