Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Platycodin D induces growth arrest and cell cycle arrest by
activating MDM2 and interacting with FOXO3a in prostate cancer


Purpose: The present study was designed to evaluate the anti-tumor
activity and possible mechanism of action of Platycodin D (PD), a major
saponin derived from Platycodin grandiflorum, in human prostate
cancer.Experimental Design: Human prostate cancer cells with different
p53 status (p53 wildtype LNCaP cells, p53 null PC3 cells and p53 mutant
DU145 cells), and the normal human prostate cell line, RWPE-1, were
exposed to various concentrations of PD to compare its cytotoxicity in
vitro (via the MTT assay). Detailed invitro and invivo studies on the
anti-tumor effects of PD were then performed.Results: PD exerted
cytotoxicity against all three prostate cancer cell lines, with
half-maximal inhibitory concentrations in the range of 11.16 to
26.13mol/L. The PC3 cells were the most sensitive to PD, whereas RWPE-1
cells were not sensitive to PD.A further study in these cell lines showed
that PD could potently affect the cell proliferation (indicated by the
bromodeoxyuridine assay), induce cell apoptosis (by Annexin V-FITC flow
cytometry) and cause cell cycle arrest (PI staining). After being treated
with PD for 48 hours,the DU145 and LNCaP cells were arrested in the G0
/G1 phase, and the PC3 cells were arrested in the G2/M phase. A Western
blot analysis indicated that PD decreased the expression of MDM2 and
increased the expression levels of FOXO3a, p21 and p27 in the three cell
lines. In PC3 cells, PD exposure decreased the levels of cell
cycle-related proteins, including E2F1, cdk2, cdk4, cdk6, cyclin D1 and
cdc2. PD exposure increased apoptosis-related proteins, Bax, caspase9 and
caspase3, and downregulated Bcl-2, PARP, and caspase8. Real-time PCR
indicated that the same changes had occurred at the transcriptional level
for all of these targets. Moreover, PD dose-dependently inhibited the
growth of PC3 xenograft tumors in BALB/c nude mice. A Western blot
analysis of the xenograft tumors indicated that similar changes in
protein expression also occurred in vivo.Conclusion: PD exhibits
significant activity against prostate cancer cells in a p53-independent
manner. MDM2 and the FOXO3a transcription factor appear to be involved in
the mechanism of action of PD, which provides a basis for future
development of this agent for human prostate cancer therapy.

