Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased Ret signalling and impact of vandetanib in acquired
tamoxifen resistant breast cancer


Deregulation of the tyrosine kinase Ret and its coreceptors (GFR) has
been implicated in neoplasia, and Ret is of interest as a therapeutic
target in endocrine-treated breast cancer. This study evaluated in vitro
impact of vandetanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor able to target Ret in
addition to EGFR and VEGFR2, in ER+ breast cancer cells that have
acquired resistance to tamoxifen treatment.Tamoxifen resistant TAMR and
endocrine responsive MCF7 cells were grown in vitro for 7 days +/-
vandetanib (0.5-5M) +/- exogenous growth factors (10-50ng/ml), and also
in continuous culture with vandetanib (1M), to monitor growth impact and
emergence of vandetanib resistance. For Western blotting or
immunoprecipitation, log phase cells were transferred for 24hr to
serum-free medium and pre-treated for 1hr +/- vandetanib followed by Ret
ligands GDNF or artemin for 5mins. Immunohistochemistry for Ret activity
was performed on an ER+ tamoxifen-treated clinical breast cancer TMA
sample series using Y1062 Ret phospho-antibody with HScore staining
assessment.Growth of TAMR cells was substantially inhibited by vandetanib
(pDeregulation of the tyrosine kinase Ret and its coreceptors (GFR) has
been implicated in neoplasia, and Ret is of interest as a therapeutic
target in endocrine-treated breast cancer. This study evaluated in vitro
impact of vandetanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor able to target Ret in
addition to EGFR and VEGFR2, in ER+ breast cancer cells that have
acquired resistance to tamoxifen treatment.Tamoxifen resistant TAMR and
endocrine responsive MCF7 cells were grown in vitro for 7 days +/-
vandetanib (0.5-5M) +/- exogenous growth factors (10-50ng/ml), and also
in continuous culture with vandetanib (1M), to monitor growth impact and
emergence of vandetanib resistance. For Western blotting or
immunoprecipitation, log phase cells were transferred for 24hr to
serum-free medium and pre-treated for 1hr +/- vandetanib followed by Ret
ligands GDNF or artemin for 5mins. Immunohistochemistry for Ret activity
was performed on an ER+ tamoxifen-treated clinical breast cancer TMA
sample series using Y1062 Ret phospho-antibody with HScore staining
assessment.Growth of TAMR cells was substantially inhibited by vandetanib
(p<0.001, IC50 0.6M) with complete cell loss by 17weeks, contrasting
rapid emergence of resistance in endocrine responsive MCF7 cells. TAMR
cells were more sensitive to vandetanib vs. gefitinib (pDeregulation of
the tyrosine kinase Ret and its coreceptors (GFR) has been implicated in
neoplasia, and Ret is of interest as a therapeutic target in
endocrine-treated breast cancer. This study evaluated in vitro impact of
vandetanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor able to target Ret in addition to
EGFR and VEGFR2, in ER+ breast cancer cells that have acquired resistance
to tamoxifen treatment.Tamoxifen resistant TAMR and endocrine responsive
MCF7 cells were grown in vitro for 7 days +/- vandetanib (0.5-5M) +/-
exogenous growth factors (10-50ng/ml), and also in continuous culture
with vandetanib (1M), to monitor growth impact and emergence of
vandetanib resistance. For Western blotting or immunoprecipitation, log
phase cells were transferred for 24hr to serum-free medium and
pre-treated for 1hr +/- vandetanib followed by Ret ligands GDNF or
artemin for 5mins. Immunohistochemistry for Ret activity was performed on
an ER+ tamoxifen-treated clinical breast cancer TMA sample series using
Y1062 Ret phospho-antibody with HScore staining assessment.Growth of TAMR
cells was substantially inhibited by vandetanib (p<0.001, IC50 0.6M) with
complete cell loss by 17weeks, contrasting rapid emergence of resistance
in endocrine responsive MCF7 cells. TAMR cells were more sensitive to
vandetanib vs. gefitinib (p<0.001; 1M each agent), indicating mitogenic
signalling in addition to EGFR contributed to TAMR growth. TAMR cells had
elevated basal Ret expression, activity and interaction with elevated
GFR3 coreceptor expression; mature VEGFR2 was not detected in TAMR cells.
Exogenous GFR3 ligands artemin or GDNF modestly stimulated TAMR cell
growth and hyperactivated Ret, downstream kinases (including MAPK, AKT)
and ER Ser167, confirming functional GFR/Ret signalling and its
cross-talk with ER. Increased phospho-Ret immunostaining was also
associated with shortened DFI (p=0.036) and survival (p=0.011) in
tamoxifen-treated clinical ER+ breast cancers. Vandetanib (0.5-1M)
depleted GFR3/Ret activity and decreased phospho-EGFR in TAMR cells under
basal and Ret ligand-stimulated conditions, inhibited MAPK, p70S6K and
S6RP phosphorylation, and partially-reduced levels of phospho-AKT and
phospho-ER. However, vandetanib failed to consistently impact on HER2, 3
or 4 activity; moreover, hyperactivation of all erbB receptors by
exogenous heregulin B1 (10ng/ml) recovered AKT, MAPK, p70S6K and ER AF-1
phosphorylation in the presence of vandetanib and was able to overcome
the basal growth-inhibitory impact of this agent in TAMR cells.These
findings demonstrate a central importance for increased Ret signalling
and its cross-talk with ER in tamoxifen resistant breast cancer that can
be targeted in vitro by vandetanib. Further studies are required to
determine optimal combination treatments with vandetanib to circumvent
potential intrinsic resistance in clinical breast cancers that exhibit
heregulin B1 enrichment.

