Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel imaging-based high-throughput assay identifies Niclosamide
as inhibitor of lysosome anterograde trafficking and tumor invasion


Background: Tumor cell invasion and metastasis are key factors
contributing to morbidity and mortality in cancer. Previous studies from
our laboratory have demonstrated that the outward movement of lysosomes
stimulated by certain growth factors or acidic media is accompanied by
increased cathepsin B secretion and consequently tumor cell invasion.
Troglitazone and 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)-amiloride (EIPA) stimulate
inward movement of lysosomes in prostate cancer cells resulting in
reduced cathepsin B secretion and tumor cell invasion. We propose to
screen for repurposed drugs that block lysosome trafficking and lower
tumor invasiveness.Materials and Methods: DU 145 prostate cancer cells
seeded in 96-wells plates were treated with the compounds overnight, then
immunostained for lysosomal-associated membrane protein-1 (LAMP-1).
Acidic media and EIPA were used as negative and positive control
respectively. An imaging-based automated system was used to measure the
position of lysosomes relatively to the nucleus. A variety of biochemical
and cell biological approaches were used to further characterize the
properties of the lead compound. Effect on lysosomal protease secretion
was conducted using a fluorometric-based cathepsin B assay. Motility and
Invasion studies were conducted using Incucyte system acquiring real-time
pictures of cells covered with matrigel.Results: A total of 2240
repurposed drugs were screened. We identified 18 hits and further
explored Niclosamide, a drug that inhibits lysosome trafficking. A dose
of Niclosamide below 1 microM was not toxic on DU145 cells, normal
myofibroblasts or epithelial cells. Niclosamide blocked acidic-induced
lysosome redistribution at a dose of 625 nanomolar (nM) and above, and
blocked HGF and EGF-induced lysosome redistribution at a dose of 312 nM
and above. Niclosamide altered lysosomal positioning beginning at 2-4
hours of exposure. At a dose of 1 microM and exposure time of 4 hours or
below, Niclosamide exhibited no significant effect on ATP level,
microtubules or actin. The effect of Niclosamide on lysosome positioning
was not affected by disruption of actin, or microtubules, neither by
inhibition of PI3K or MAPK pathways. Cathepsin B secretion induced by
extracellular acidic pH was blocked by Niclosamide. HGF and EGF-induced
cancer cell invasion and motility were both reduced by Niclosamide. A
decrease in extracellular matrix degradation was noticed when cells grown
on DQ collagen gel were treated with Niclosamide.Conclusion: We have
developed a valid high-content screening approach to identify drugs that
inhibit lysosome trafficking and reduce tumor invasion. Further
characterization of the other hit, including drugs that are used for
neurological indications, are ongoing on glioma cells. Our findings
represent a novel approach in cancer research that could potentially
bring effective drugs that inhibits tumor invasion.

