Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation and furin-mediated processing are critical
posttranslational modifications of the KISS1 metastasis suppressor


Originally discovered as a metastasis suppressor, KISS1 has since been
defined as a neurotransmittor and regulator of diverse cellular functions
and has been implicated in pathologies such as hypogonadism and
Alzheimer's disease. Several laboratories are actively developing
therapies based upon KISS1 biology. KISS1 is secreted and processed into
small peptides (called kisspeptins (KP)) in the extracellular milieu.
However, the enzyme(s) responsible for generation of KP from nascent
KISS1 is unknown, although sequence analysis (cleavage at KR or RR
dibasic sites) suggests that proprotein convertases (PC) are responsible.
We hypothesized that enzyme(s) belonging to the PC family processes KISS1
to generate KP. KISS1 processing was completely inhibited by treatment
with PC inhibitors Dec-RVKR-CMK and a1-PDX in these cells multiple tumor
cell lines. Further, mRNA expression of the seven members of the PC
family showed consistent expression of only three proteases - furin,
PCSK5 and PCSK7 narrowing the candidate proteases. Only shRNA-mediated
knockdown of furin (i.e., not PCSK5 or PCSK7) blocked KISS1 processing.
Thus furin is the essential enzyme responsible for KP generation. Even
when cells were exposed to Dec-RVKR-CMK or shRNA targeting furin, two
bands (Mr15.9 kDa and Mr 17 kDa) were consistently detected in SDS-PAGE
of conditioned medium. This observation suggested KISS1 could either be
alternatively post-translationally modified or that another protease
(family) might also cleave KISS1. To investigate the possibility that
KISS1 may be post-translationally modified, potential sites of
O-glycosylation (NetOGlyc 4.0) or serine/threonine phosphorylation
(NetPhos 2.0) were analyzed in silico. Three amino acid residues (T69,
S70, and S72)of the native KISS1 protein showed highest scores as being
either O-glycosylated or phosphorylated. Further, mutation of these three
residues to alanine resulted in the loss of the higher molecular weight
band which was co-localized to a band detected using anti-phospho Ser/Thr
strongly suggesting that KISS1 is indeed phosphorylated. This is the
first report of phosphorylation of KISS1. Studies are underway to
identify the kinase(s) and phosphatase(s) involved as well as the
functional significance of the phosphorylation. Support: CA134981,
National Foundation for Cancer Research, Steiner Family Fellowship in
Metastasis Research, Susan G. Komen for the Cure SAC110037.

