Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GATA3 mutations in breast cancer


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in women worldwide,
resulting in over 400,000 deaths per year. Approximately 90% of breast
cancers occur in women who have no family history of breast cancer,
indicating that most breast cancers occur following spontaneous mutations
resulting from the aging process or the action of environmental agents.
Breast cancers can be divided into several subtypes base on gene
expression profiles. Luminal breast cancer, the most common subtype, is
characterized by expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha). The
zinc finger transcription factor GATA3, which is known as a regulator of
mammary gland development, is frequently expressed in luminal breast
cancer cells, and its expression is highly correlated with ER-alpha. In
breast cancers, the expression levels of GATA3 directly correlate with
favorable prognosis, and its ectopic expression leads to the suppression
of tumor metastasis. Comprehensive genomic analysis of breast tumors has
revealed frequent somatic mutations of GATA3 in luminal breast cancers.
However it is unclear how these GATA3 mutations affect the biological
properties of breast cancer. These mutations are located at exclusively
in exons 5 and 6 that encode the carboxyl terminus of the protein. Exon 5
contains the second of two zinc finger domains (ZnF2), which is important
for the DNA binding activity of GATA3. Exon 6 has no previously described
biochemical function.In this study, we focus on two mutations found in
cancer patients - a frame shift at tyrosine 345 (Y345fs) and a frame
shift at arginine 330 (R330fs). These two mutants are of particular
interest as they produce truncated proteins, and both mutants lack exon
6. Y345fs preserves ZnF2, while R330fs interrupts ZnF2. These two mutants
permit dissection of the molecular outcomes flowing from loss of exon 6
(Y345fs) versus the combination of loss of ZnF2 and exon 6 (R330fs). To
assess the impact of these mutations, we established breast cancer cells
expressing Y345fs and R330fs respectively, and analyzed their phenotype
at the cellular and molecular levels. These studies begin to address the
biochemical and functional outcomes of commonly occurring mutations in
breast cancer.

