Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Everolimus-induced hyperglycemia: Dual efficacy of metformin


The anti-cancer drug and mTOR inhibitor everolimus often causes
hyperglycemia in patients. This side-effect potentially reduces its
efficacy and may cause complications in the long term. The diabetes drug
metformin, a mitochondrial complex 1 inhibitor, may counteract
hyperglycemia while enhancing the anti-tumor efficacy of everolimus.
Here, we investigated the growth inhibitory properties of both drugs and
their combination in vitro with an emphasis on their effects on glucose
metabolism.The breast cancer cell lines MCF-7, T47D and MDA-MB-231 were
cultured in media containing 11 mM (high), 5.5 mM or 2.75 mM (low)
glucose and treated with 1-10 mM metformin or 1-10 nM everolimus for 2 or
4 days. Proliferation, colony formation and apoptosis were measured.
Intracellular effects were analyzed using glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4)
staining. The Seahorse XF analyzer was used to measure mitochondrial
respiration and glycolysis.Metformin (5 mM) added to high glucose medium
reduced proliferation by 40-60%, depending on the cell line. Under low
glucose conditions metformin reduced proliferation by 70-80%. The
efficacy of everolimus in high glucose conditions was comparable to its
efficacy in low glucose conditions. Combining metformin and everolimus
resulted in at least 40% growth inhibition of the three cell lines under
all glucose conditions. After 48h of treatment with 5 mM metformin basal
mitochondrial respiration of all cell lines decreased to 20-40% of
control. Simultaneously, glycolysis rate increased to 150-270% of
control. Everolimus treatment (10 nM) for 48 h decreased mitochondrial
respiration to the same extent, but did not affect glycolysis rate.
Decreased GLUT4 membrane expression by at least 40% compared to the
untreated control may explain this observation. The effects of metformin
and everolimus on glucose metabolism were independent of glucose
concentration.Since metformin strongly increased glycolysis rate, the
effect of glucose depletion and replenishment on metformin induced cell
death and proliferation inhibition was determined. 5 mM metformin
treatment in high glucose medium for 4 days did not induce cell death in
any cell line. However, the same treatment in low glucose media resulted
in up to 50% apoptotic cells. Daily renewal of low glucose media reversed
this effect. Metformin-induced growth inhibition in high or low glucose
concentrations was not affected by medium replenishment in short term
survival assays and clonogenic assays.Our study provides evidence that
everolimus anti-tumor efficacy is not affected by high glucose
concentrations. Metformin, however, was more effective at low glucose
concentrations due to its glycolysis inducing capacity. Addition of
metformin to everolimus treatment may be beneficial, especially under low
glucose conditions as found within tumours. Moreover, this combination is
appealing because of their complementary effects on cellular metabolism.

