Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C alpha (PKC) signaling in endometrial cancer


Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecological malignancy in the US
and the fourth most common cancer in women. Despite its high incidence,
there is limited knowledge of the molecular etiology of this disease.
With obesity being a major risk factor, the incidence of endometrial
cancer has been on a steady incline and is expected to become an
increasing cause of cancer mortality in future years. Thus, improved
understanding of endometrial tumorigenesis is of critical importance. Our
analysis of human endometrial tumors identified loss of the signaling
molecule PKC in approximately 60% of endometrioid (Type I) tumors. Loss
of PKC trends with increasing tumor grade and is associated with
aggressive disease features such as lymphovascular involvement and
myometrial invasion, pointing to an important role for this molecule in
regulating endometrial cancer progression. Inactivation of the tumor
suppressor PTEN and deregulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway are key drivers
of Type I endometrial cancer. Thus, mice with allele-specific knock-in of
cancer-related Pten mutants (i.e., Pten4-5, PtenC124R, and PtenG120E)
offer unique models for the disease. Precancerous endometrial
hyperplasias arising in these mice show loss of PTEN and increased AKT
activity. While PKC is expressed in the normal murine endometrial
epithelium at all phases of the estrus cycle, the enzyme is uniformly
lost in these precancerous lesions. Thus, disruption of PKC signaling can
occur early in endometrial tumorigenesis. In human endometrial cancer
cell lines, low PKC levels also correlate with PTEN loss; however,
shRNA-mediated knockdown of PTEN in PTEN expressing cells did not affect
PKC expression indicating that downregulation of the kinase is not the
direct result of changes in PTEN activity. Notably, PKC agonists suppress
AKT activity in cells expressing high levels PKC (HEC-1-A, HEC-50) but
not in PKC-low cells (Ishikawa, RL95-2). Collectively, these data suggest
that, in addition to PTEN inactivation, loss of PKC is required for full
activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway during endometrial
carcinogenesis. Analysis of the molecular basis for loss of PKC
expression in endometrial tumors identified multiple regulatory
mechanisms. PKC protein expression in tumors generally parallels that of
its mRNA and promoter activity assays point to transcriptional mechanisms
for PKC downregulation. Differential mRNA and protein stability were
identified as additional levels of regulation of PKC expression in
endometrial cancer. Taken together, our findings indicate that 1) PKC
signaling regulates the PI3K/AKT pathway in the endometrial epithelium;
2) concomitant loss of PKC and PTEN may act in a co-operative manner in
regulation of endometrial turmorigenesis; and 3) loss of PKC can occur by
multiple mechanisms, as often seen with tumor suppressive molecules
during neoplastic progression. Supported by NIH grants CA036727,
CA016056, and DK60632.

