Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Platelet interaction induces Tissue Factor and a pro-metastatic
phenotype in ovarian cancer cells


Introduction: An increase in circulating platelets, or thrombocytosis, is
recognized as an independent risk factor correlated with bad prognosis
and metastasis, however the exact role that platelets play in tumor
progression has not been fully elucidated. The expression of Tissue
Factor (TF) protein by cancer cells has been shown to correlate with
Hypercoagulable state and metastasis. It is speculated that cancer cells
need to acquire a Metastasis Initiating Cell (MIC) phenotype. To achieve
this, cells may suffer an Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT)
coupled with stem-like protein expression in which E-cadherin is lowered,
while CD44 and N-cadherin are increased. Ovarian cancer patients develop
ascitis, a build up of peritoneal fluid that contains cancerous and serum
derived cells. After the surgical removal of the primary and visible
tumors, these ascitic borne cells form peritoneal tumors and thus make a
good model to study platelet/cancer cells interaction in metastasis. The
aim of this work was determine the effect of platelet-cancer cell
interaction on TF and EMT marker levels and cancer cell migration in
ascites-derived cancer cells. Material and Methods: Ovarian
ascitic-isolated cancer cells and cell lines were co-cultivated with
human washed platelets (from healthy donors). TF and EMT marker levels
were determined by Western blotting. Cancer cell migration was determined
by Boyden chambers and the scratch assay. Results: The co-culture of
ovarian cancer cells with platelets causes: 1) a phenotypic change in
cancer cells, 2) increases TF protein levels and activity, 3) induces EMT
markers, 3) promotes chemoattraction and cancer cell migration.
Conclusion: We present evidence that platelet-cancer cell interaction
promotes a Metastasis Initiating Cell phenotype and enhanced migration.
We speculate that platelet-cancer cell interaction may promote the
formation of metastatic foci worsening the patient prognosis.Fundings:
FONDECYT 1120292, 3120003, 1100870, CORFO 13IDL2-18608, BMRC
13CTI-21526-P6

