Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the KRAS signaling naocluster protein CNKSR1 provides
antitumor activity against mutant KRAS xenografts


KRAS, the predominant form of mutated RAS (mut-KRAS) is found in 25% of
patient tumors across many cancer types and plays a critical role in
driving tumor growth and resistance to therapy. Its effects are so
powerful that it overrides the activity of many molecularly targeted
signaling drugs being developed for cancer today such that they cannot be
used in patients with mut-KRAS. We have identified genes that when
inhibited block the growth of mut-KRAS cancer cells without affecting
wild type-KRAS (wt-KRAS) cell growth using a global siRNA screen. A top
hit was CNKSR1 (connector enhancer of kinase suppressor of Ras 1), a
protein associated with KRAS in the RAS membrane signaling nanocluster.
siRNA knockdown of CNKSR1 shows selective inhibition of the growth of
mut-KRAS versus wilt type non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines.
CNKSR1 is a multidomain protein with a pleckstrin homology (PH)-domain, a
100 to 120 amino acid, highly conserved but low sequence identity 3D
superfold. This domain is found in a number of signaling proteins, and is
responsible for binding to membrane phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphates
(PIP2/3). Over expression of the PH-domain of CNKSR1 in H1373 mut-KRAS
NSCLC cells inhibits cell growth suggesting a dominant negative activity,
and that the PH-domain of CNKSR1 is necessary for the effects on mut-KRAS
activity. PHusis is developing PH-domain inhibitors of signaling proteins
through use of its in silico computational modeling platform PhuDock, and
has used this approach to identify inhibitors that bind to the PH-domain
of CNKSR1. Through rounds of compound refinement we have been optimizing
the activity of leads using surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy (SPR),
in vitro cell line screening and in vivo xenograft evaluation. Micromolar
binders have been improved to nanomolar inhibitors (SPR) that also
demonstrate in vitro cytotoxicity. The initial lead PHT-782 (Kd1.8 M)
inhibited mut-KRAS signaling and growth of mut-KRAS isogenic NSCLC cell
lines (IC50 30 M) as effectively as siRNA knockdown of KRAS. Importantly,
PHT-782 did not block the growth of wt-KRAS cell lines at concentrations
up to 100 M. In mice PHT-782 exhibited oral bioavailability and had
moderate antitumor activity against a mut-KRAS xenograft model without
observable toxicity. Refinement has provided PHT-7571 and PHT-7327 with
improved PH-domain binding. Additionally, PHT-7327 displays more potent
in vivo antitumor activity, both as a single agent in mut-KRAS xenografts
and in combination with chemotherapy or EGRF inhibitors. Thus, our
studies have shown that the PH-domain of CNKSR1 can be targeted by small
molecule inhibitors, selectively blocking mut-KRAS signaling and cell
growth, thus creating a novel therapeutic potential for patients with
oncogenic KRAS for which there is currently no effective therapy.

