Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pan-cancer proteomic analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
project


Protein levels and function are predicted poorly by genomic and
transcriptomic analysis of patient tumors. Direct proteomic study can
provide a wealth of information that complements those analysis in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) projects. We used reverse-phase protein arrays
to analyze 3,467 patient samples from 11 TCGA Pan-Cancer diseases, using
181 high-quality antibodies that target 128 total proteins and 53
phospho-proteins. The resultant proteomic data were used for identifying
commonalities, differences, emergent pathway properties, and novel
network biology within and across tumor lineages.In general, tumor type
and subtype were the dominant determinants of protein levels. However, we
were able to identify several potentially targetable markers. E.g.
luminal breast cancers demonstrated selective elevation of AR, BCL2,
FASN, and pACC. SRC was activated in all but the hormone-responsive and
bladder cancers, offering another potential therapeutic opportunity.
Similarly, HER3 suggested itself as a potential target in renal cancer.
EGFR activity, in general, paralleled SRC activity, but in GBM it was
associated with NOTCH1 and HER3 activation, suggesting an opportunity for
combination therapy. pSRC was highly expressed in a subset of head and
neck tumors, suggesting that those may be more sensitive to EGFR
targeting strategies. HER2 levels were elevated in a subset of
endometrial, bladder, breast, and colorectal cancers. MYC was selectively
amplified and expressed in high-grade serous ovarian cancers.We
implemented a computational approach, MC, to decrease the effect of
tissue-specific protein expression. MC allowed us to identify processes
that drive cell behavior across tumor type and made it possible to find
new therapeutic opportunities. We found 7 cross-tumor clusters, each
driven by different markers and pathways. We found pan-cancer clusters
with elevated HER2 and EGFR, elevated hormone signaling pathways,
enriched MAPK and PI3K pathway activity, elevated EMT signatures, and
cell cycle signatures. We also saw strong links between MYH11 and Rictor
and between ETS1 and pPEA15 across tumor types. Those findings can
provide useful clues for developing targeted, cross-tumor
therapies.Pathway analysis of the data revealed several expected
cross-tumor type associations, including pMEK with pERK, beta-catenin
with E-cadherin and pPKCdelta with pPKCalpha and pPKCbeta. The findings
support the ability of RPPA analysis to yield high-quality information
from TCGA samples. A number of other links such as MYH11 with Rictor,
cyclinB1 with FOXM1, and pACC with FASN were not expected and warrant
further exploration, as does a negative link between p85 and claudin7 in
lung squamous. Analysis of key nodes (e.g., CDK1) revealed other
unexpected links to a wide range of protein pathways.Overall, those
findings demonstrate the power of pan-cancer proteomic analysis,
identifying several novel single-tumor and cross-tumor targets and
pathways.

