Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A downregulates tubulins and covalently binds -tubulin
at cysteine-303 in human breast cancer cells


We have shown previously that withaferin A (WA), a C5,C6-epoxy steroidal
lactone derived from an Ayurvedic medicine plant (Withania somnifera),
not only inhibits growth of human breast cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo but also prevents mammary cancer development in a transgenic mouse
model without any toxicity. However, the mechanisms underlying cancer
preventive effect of WA are not fully understood. Herein, we report that
tubulin is a novel target of WA in human breast cancer cells. WA
treatment resulted in G2 and mitotic arrest in MCF-7 (estrogen-receptor
positive), SK-BR-3 (estrogen-receptor negative), and SUM159
(triple-negative) cells in association with a marked decrease in protein
level of -tubulin. These effects were not observed with the
naturally-occurring C6,C7-epoxy analogs of WA (withanone and withanolide
A). In addition, a non-tumorigenic normal human mammary epithelial cell
line (MCF-10A) was markedly more resistant to mitotic arrest and tubulin
downregulation by WA treatment compared with breast cancer cells.
Downregulation of tubulin protein in WA-treated cells was due to
transcriptional repression as well as proteasomal degradation.
Vehicle-treated control breast cancer cells exhibited a normal bi-polar
spindle with chromosomes aligned along the metaphase plate. In contrast,
WA treatment led to a severe disruption of the normal spindle morphology
in breast cancer cells. Unlike breast cancer cells, WA-treated MCF-10A
cells exhibited aggregation of tubulin around nucleus. NMR analyses
revealed that the A-ring enone in WA, but not in withanone or withanolide
A, was highly reactive with cysteamine and rapidly succumbed to
irreversible nucleophilic addition. Mass spectrometry demonstrated direct
covalent binding of WA at cysteine-303 of -tubulin in MCF-7 cells.
Molecular docking studies indicated that the WA-binding pocket was
located on the surface of the -tubulin and characterized by a hydrophobic
floor, a hydrophobic wall, and a charge-balanced hydrophilic entrance.
These results provide novel insights into the mechanism of anticancer
effect of WA. This work was supported by the grants RO1 CA142604 and P30
CA047904 awarded by the National Cancer Institute.

