Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting c-Met and VEGFR2 in the stromal compartment of prostate
cancer bone metastasis


Advanced-stage prostate cancer patients commonly develop bone metastasis,
accounting for significant morbidity and mortality. Metastatic prostate
cancer cells characteristically induce osteoblastic reactions, for which
no targeted therapies are currently available. Recent clinical and
experimental data showed that dual inhibition of c-Met and VEGF receptor
(VEGFR)-2 kinase activity reduced prostate cancer growth in bone with
indications for suppressing osteoblastic activities, while the specific
functions of c-Met and VEGFR2 in osteoblasts remain unclear. In our in
vitro studies using three types of osteoblasts (MC3T3-E1 subclone 4,
hFOB1.19 and murine calvarial osteoblasts), hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF, a ligand for c-Met) and VEGFA increased expression of receptor
activator of nuclear factor B ligand (RANKL) and macrophage colony
stimulating factor (M-CSF), two essential factors for osteoclastogenesis.
In addition, siRNA-mediated knockdown of c-Met or VEGFR2 in osteoblasts
suppressed HGF- or VEGFA-dependent gene expression, respectively. We
demonstrate that insulin growth factor (IGF) increased RANKL and M-CSF
expression in osteoblasts via c-Met transactivation. Furthermore, the
conditioned media from IGF-, HGF-, or VEGFA-treated osteoblasts promoted
in vitro osteoclastogenesis that was suppressed by inhibition of c-Met
and VEGFR2 in osteoblasts. Subsequently, we examined whether
cabozantinib, a dual kinase inhibitor of c-Met and VEGFR2 currently in
clinical trials for metastatic prostate cancer, could suppress prostate
cancer bone metastasis via inhibition of osteoblasts. To examine the
effects of cabozantinib specifically in osteoblasts,
cabozantinib-resistant PC-3 prostate cancer cells were generated and
implanted in the tibiae of male nude mice. Cabozantinib (60mg/kg) or
control diluent was administered via daily oral gavage for 3 weeks. In
agreement with our in vitro data, cabozantinib suppressed tumor growth in
bone (determined by in vivo bioluminescence) and tumor-induced osteolysis
(determined by X-ray). Tumor cells were isolated and in vitro cultured to
demonstrate that cabozantinib resistance was maintained during 3-week in
vivo growth. Osteoblasts and osteoclasts numbers were reduced in the
bones of cabozantinib-treated mice, and these histological changes were
accompanied by significantly lower levels of RANKL and M-CSF levels in
bone. Collectively, inhibition of c-Met and VEGFR2 in osteoblasts reduces
RANKL and M-CSF expression, associated with decreased osteoclastogenesis
and tumor-induced osteolysis. Therefore, we conclude that c-Met and
VEGFR2 are promising therapeutic targets in the stromal compartment of
prostate cancer bone metastasis, suggesting hat the effects of
cabozantinib on skeletal-related events of prostate cancer are, at least
in part, mediated by suppression of osteoblast function.

