Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C3: A small molecule that reverses chemoresistance by inhibition
of cell cycle arrest


Emergence of chemoresistance is the major cause of death in patients with
cancer. To discover compounds that might reverse chemoresistance, we
undertook a compound screen to identify molecules that would convert a
resistance cell into one that is sensitive. We performed this screen in
WTK1, a lymphoblastoid cell line with mutant p53 known to be resistant to
chemotherapy. We conducted a high-throughput screen using 83,745 small
molecules in the presence or absence of daunorubicin at an IC25 to
identify novel compounds that prime cells for chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis. We identified C3 as a hit, defined as a compound that did not
significantly alter viability of cells alone, but significantly increased
daunorubicin-induced cell death. We confirmed the effects C3 in a variety
of cell types including leukemia, colon, neuroblastoma, breast and
ovarian. To determine whether this effect was specific to daunorubicin,
we assessed C3's ability to synergize with a wide variety of other
genotoxic agents and found that it was highly synergistic with
platinating agents. Because cisplatin resistance is the major obstacle in
ovarian cancer treatment, we used ovarian cancer lines in our mechanistic
studies. We found that C3 synergizes with cisplatin and daunorubicin in a
caspase-3 dependent manner, but the mechanism by which C3 primes cells
for death did not involve mismatch repair or mitochondrial membrane
permeability. Because cisplatin and daunorubicin induce cell cycle
arrest, we hypothesized that C3 might alter the regulation of progression
of the cell cycle. We found that while cisplatin and daunorubicin have
arrested cell cycle profiles on their own, the profiles appear normal
when combined with C3 before the cells die. These observations suggest a
novel mechanism in which C3 induces apoptosis by forcing cells with
damaged genomes through the cell cycle, resulting in apoptosis.

