Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of novel regulators of
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells


TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a member of the tumor
necrosis factor super family and can induce apoptotic cell death upon
binding to its cognate receptors, TRAIL Receptor 1 (TRAIL-R1) and TRAIL
Receptor 2 (TRAIL-R2). TRAIL has been found to induce selectively cell
death in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines (so called
because the breast cancer cells lack estrogen and progesterone receptor
expression and Her-2 amplification). Other subtypes of breast cancer are
relatively resistant to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. However, the mechanisms
that underlie the sensitivity of TNBCs to TRAIL-induced apoptosis are not
yet understood.To identify regulators of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in the
TNBC/mesenchymal cell line MB231, an siRNA screen of the kinome,
phosphatome, and other potential regulators (1,300 genes) of the TRAIL
pathway was carried out to measure the effects of loss of function of
these genes on TRAIL-induced caspase-3/7 activation, capase-8 activation,
and cell death. One hundred fifty negative regulators of the TRAIL
pathway were identified, including 83 kinases, 4 phosphatases, and 63
non-kinases. The identified regulators were involved in diverse cell
processes, including apoptosis, transcriptional regulation, growth factor
receptor signaling, DNA repair, cell metabolism, and cell cycle
regulation. Interestingly, no positive regulators were identified. A
subset of the 150 candidates were rescreened in MB231 and three
additional cell lines representative of other subytpes of breast cancer,
including MB468 (TNBC/basal), SKBR3 (Her-2 amplified), and T47D (estrogen
receptor positive). Interestingly, the TNBC/basal cell line MB468 was
sensitized to TRAIL-induced caspase-3/7 activation by all of the
candidates, whereas T47D and SKBR3 were sensitized to TRAIL by only two
and three of the candidates, respectively. These findings demonstrate
that breast cancer cell lines are varyingly sensitized to the effects of
TRAIL. The anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL and the tyrosine kinase Src were
also identified as negative regulators of TRAIL-induced apoptosis. We
have further shown that pharmacologic inhibition of Bcl-xL or Src
sensitize a wide range of breast cancer cell lines to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. These findings lend further support to the screen.Overall, the
siRNA screen has identified many regulators of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in
the TNBC cell line MB231 and a smaller subset of regulators in breast
cancer cell lines representative of other subtypes. These findings
suggest targets for the rational development of combination therapy in
breast cancer treatment.

