Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disulfiram targets glioblsatoma stem like cells by modulating
aldehyde dehydrogenase and hypoxia-NF-B pathway


Introduction:Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the most common lethal
brain tumor associated with dismal survival rate. It is widely accepted
that GBM contains a small population of cancer cells (1%) expressing CSC
markers that promotes therapeutic resistance. High levels of aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity, a characteristic feature of CSCs, play a
significant role in chemoresistance.Many recent studies have elucidated
that intra-tumoral hypoxia induces CSC phenotypes in tumour via
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Hypoxia inducible factors
(HIFs) are master transcriptional regulators under hypoxic conditions.
However NF-B, another key transcription factor, is also highly
up-regulated in hypoxia induced CSCs. There are no clear insights on how
HIFs and NF-B together orchestrates the anti-apoptotic signalling,
chemo-radiation resistance and maintenance of stemness in CSC
phenotypes.Disulfiram (DS), an anti-alcoholism drug, in combination with
copper (Cu) effectively reverses chemoresistance in many cancers. DS/Cu
is a strong inhibitor of NF-B and ALDH and induces apoptosis. In this
study we used an in vitro GBM CSC model and NF-B-p65 and HIFs transfected
GBM cell lines to investigate the relationship between hypoxia induced
HIFs, NF-B activation and ALDH activity and their role in
chemoresistance. We also examined the cytotoxicity of DS/Cu on GBM CSCs
and its effect on the above pathways.ResultsIn comparison with adhered
cells, the GBM cellsgrown as spheres in specialized neurosphere medium
(NS) or normal DMEM (SUS) showed high proportion of hypoxic cells and
elevated levels of CSC and EMT markers (ALDH, CD133, CD44, OCT4, SOX2,
NANOG, E-cadherin to N-cadherin switch) suggesting hypoxia induced EMT
phenotypes inCSCs. Increased levels of HIFs, ALDH (1A3 and 3A1) and NF-B
activity were detected in CSCs. CSCs are highly resistant to conventional
anticancer drugs like temozolomide, paclitaxel, vincristine and
doxorubicin.GBM cells transfected with NF-B-p65 displayed CSC markers,
chemoresistance and nuclear translocation of HIFs. Although transfection
of HIFs induced expression of CSC markers, the cells did not show NF-B
activation and are not resistant to anticancer drugs. These results
indicate the pivotal role of NF-B in maintaining CSC characteristics and
chemoresistance.DS is cytotoxic to both GBM cell lines and the CSCs
derived from them in a Cu-dependent manner.DS/Cu inhibits NF-B and ALDH
activity and triggers intrinsic apoptotic pathway. After short exposure
(2 hours) to low concentration of DS/Cu, the CSCs are completely
eradicated in the cell culture.Conclusions:NF-B plays pivotal role in
chemoresistance. DS/Cu inhibits NF-B, eradicates CSCs and reverses
resistance in GBM.DS is an FDA approved drug with low/no toxicity to
normal tissues and can freely pass through the BBB. Further study may
lead to quick translation of DS into clinical trials.

