Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot proteomic analysis to identify biomarker proteins in human
pancreatic cancer using reverse phase protein array


Background: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death
in the U.S, and with an overall 5-year survival rate less than 4%. The
high mortality rate of patients with pancreatic cancer is primarily due
to the difficulty of early diagnosis and a lack of effective therapies.
There is an urgent need to discover novel molecular targets for early
diagnosis and new therapeutic approaches to improve the clinical outcome
of this deadly disease. Reverse-phase protein assay (RPPA), a high
throughput proteomic approach, provides us a platform to identify
differentially expressed proteins and characterize posttranslational
protein modifications involved in tumorigenesis.Methods: In the present
study here, we carried out proteomic analysis of pancreatic cancer
specimens with matched adjacent, normal-appearing tissue samples from 15
pancreatic cancer patients to evaluate the differentially expressed
biomarker proteins. The antibody panel used for RPPA included 132 key
proteins involved in various cancer-related pathways. The paired t test
was used to determine the significant differences between matched pairs,
and the false discovery rate-adjusted p values (q values) were calculated
to take into account the effect of multiple comparisons.Result: Out of
the panel of 132 proteins included in RPPA, we found 19 of them had
statistically significant differences in expression between matched pairs
(q Background: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer
death in the U.S, and with an overall 5-year survival rate less than 4%.
The high mortality rate of patients with pancreatic cancer is primarily
due to the difficulty of early diagnosis and a lack of effective
therapies. There is an urgent need to discover novel molecular targets
for early diagnosis and new therapeutic approaches to improve the
clinical outcome of this deadly disease. Reverse-phase protein assay
(RPPA), a high throughput proteomic approach, provides us a platform to
identify differentially expressed proteins and characterize
posttranslational protein modifications involved in
tumorigenesis.Methods: In the present study here, we carried out
proteomic analysis of pancreatic cancer specimens with matched adjacent,
normal-appearing tissue samples from 15 pancreatic cancer patients to
evaluate the differentially expressed biomarker proteins. The antibody
panel used for RPPA included 132 key proteins involved in various
cancer-related pathways. The paired t test was used to determine the
significant differences between matched pairs, and the false discovery
rate-adjusted p values (q values) were calculated to take into account
the effect of multiple comparisons.Result: Out of the panel of 132
proteins included in RPPA, we found 19 of them had statistically
significant differences in expression between matched pairs (q <0.05).
Among these 19 proteins, AKT, -catenin, GAB2, and PAI-1 were identified
as differentially overexpressed in the pancreatic tumor (a fold change of
T/N 1.5). In addition, overexpression of AKT, -catenin, and GAB2 in
pancreatic cancer tissue identified in RPPA has been confirmed by western
blot analysis. Further analysis identified several significantly
associated canonical pathways and overrepresented network functions using
the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) tool.Conclusion: In conclusion,
among the three proteins identified in RPPA and validated by western
blot, overexpression of GAB2 has not been reported previously in
pancreatic cancer. Considering the essential role of GAB2 in two major
signaling pathways in cancer (the PI3-AKT and the ERK signaling
pathways), identification of GAB2 in pancreatic cancer may provide
additional insight into this cancer's pathogenesis.

