Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter alterations in human
bladder cancer


The telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene encodes the catalytic
subunit of the enzyme telomerase, (aka telomere terminal transferase),
which contains both protein and RNA subunits. TERT is a RNA-dependent
polymerase which increases the length of telomeres at the ends of each
chromosome by adding TTAGGG repeats. TERT polymerase uses RNA as a
complementary primer to elongate telomeric G-rich repeat sequences in the
5 to 3 direction. TERT is essential and active in germ cells, stem cells,
primary tumors, and immortalized cells and acts to maintain adequate
telomeres. However, in somatic cells, TERT expression is reduced or
absent and telomeres gradually shorten during the S phase of each cell
cycle due to replication-dependent loss of telomere terminal sequences.
Adequate telomere length is important for preserving genome stability,
regulating cell replication, and preventing cell death. Somatic TERT
promoter alterations were recently reported in melanoma, glioma, and in
small sample sets from other cancers including bladder cancer. These are
thought to drive re-expression of TERT in cancer cells. In this study,
given recent reports of somatic TERT promoter alterations in bladder
cancer, polymerase chain reaction and Sanger sequencing were performed to
examine a region of the TERT promoter in 58 bladder tumors. The TERT
promoter was altered in 90% of 58 tumors by 44 germline (21 unique, 20
novel) and 53 somatic variants (11 unique, 4 novel). Somatic alterations
were observed in 67% of tumors. The majority of variants were C>T DNA
changes, three variants occurred as both germline and somatic, and a
subset of variants created or altered transcription factor binding sites
and promoter CpGs. Analyses of telomere length showed significantly
shorter telomeres in tumor tissue versus adjacent normal tissue from the
same patient (p=0.004) indicating TERT may not sufficiently lengthen
telomeres in rapidly proliferating cancer cells. Interestingly, somatic
TERT promoter alterations were not associated with stage, grade, or
alterations in other bladder cancer genes identified by exome sequencing.
We speculate that TERT promoter alterations are frequent and early events
in bladder cancer and identification of TERT alterations in urine may
provide a biomarker for early diagnosis and monitoring of bladder
cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

