Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signature of aneuploidy in acute myeloid leukemia


Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous malignancy characterized
by the expansion of myeloid precursor cells with limited or abnormal
differentiation capacity. A relatively common event in AML is represented
by chromosome gain or loss. Numerical chromosome abnormalities, which
define the aneuploid condition, have a detrimental effect in primary
non-malignant cells, since they dramatically reduce cellular fitness.
However evidence suggests that they have a causative role in
tumorigenesis and that they are well tolerated in transformed cells
belonging to the myeloid lineage.Aim of the study is to elucidate the
pathogenic mechanisms that sustain and contribute to aneuploidy in AML.We
have performed gene expression profile (GEP) analysis of bone marrow
cells from 42 AML patients, including 19 aneuploid cases and 23 cases
with normal karyotype. All samples contained more than 80% blast cells.
The aneuploid cohort included AML cases carrying one (or more) monosomy,
trisomy or a monosomal karyotype. Our analysis covered more than 245,000
and 40,000 coding and non-coding transcripts, respectively (the latter
comprising microRNAs), and a significant number of exon-exon junctions,
which allow the analysis of multiple splicing isoforms. Quality controls
confirmed that the data show comparable signal values.The gene expression
signature of aneuploid samples have been compared to normal karyotype
ones. We have identified a set of coding and non-coding transcripts which
are differentially expressed between the two groups (p0.05, including
more than 20 genes with a fold difference 2) and defined a gene signature
that allows the discrimination between aneuploid and euploid samples in
our dataset. The analysis of an increased number of cases will confirm
the results and allow the sub-stratification of aneuploid samples
according to their GEP. Our data will be further validated by comparing
them with published GEP datasets and the gene signature will be
characterized by pathway analysis.This study provides novel insights into
the molecular mechanism that sustain aneuploidy in AML. The biological
validation of genes which are commonly and specifically deregulated in
aneuploid AML patients will guide the design of future therapeutic
strategies targeting key players in the disease.Acknowledgements:
European LeukemiaNet, AIRC, AIL, Prin 2010-2011, FP7 NGS-PTL project.

