Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel drug-eluting platform for localized treatment of
pancreatic cancer


INTRODUCTION. The majority of patients with pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) succumb to the disease within 12-24 months from
their diagnosis mainly due to the intrinsic chemorefractory behavior of
this cancer. Chemoresistance is a multifactorial phenomenon, but it is
thought that tumor hypovascularity and an excessive desmoplastic stroma
reaction are the main contributors in PDAC. To overcome this inherent
barrier to therapy, a pancreatobiliary drug-eluting device was built to
provide a therapeutic platform for the localized delivery of high doses
of anti-tumoral agents for effective cancer cell cytotoxicity.MATERIALS
AND METHODS. With the final goal of developing a pancreatobiliary
drug-eluting stent, we designed a drug-delivery platform utilizing a 20%
biodegradable polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) scaffold in which 400 g
of paclitaxel was embedded. This mixture was placed onto a 316 stainless
steel disc as a uniform layer as verified by a scanning electron
microscope that confirmed a homogeneous deposition (88.1 1.9 m) with
minimal imperfections such as cracks or bubbles. This delivery system
allowed us to tune precise dosing and release kinetics of paclitaxel.
After an initial latency period of 12 days without significant paclitaxel
release the device was able to deliver up to 85% of the encapsulated drug
(360 38 g) in a linear fashion over the course of 40 days. The
anti-tumoral effects of this new paclitaxel-eluting device (PED) were
compared to systemic intravenous (IV) dosing of paclitaxel measuring the
relative growth of two luciferase-transfected PDAC patient-derived cell
lines, PDAC-3 and PDAC-6, orthotopically xenografted in NOD/SCID/gamma-c
mice. Tumor were monitored by in vivo luciferase imaging and values
obtained in relative light units (RLU). A multilevel mixed-effect models
(two-way anova) was used to determine statistical significance.RESULTS.
For each cell line, PDAC-3 and PDAC-6, 100,000 cells were othotopically
injected in 12 mice and mice were divided into two equal groups based on
their preoperative tumor burden. All animals tolerated the insertion of
paclitaxel-eluting devices without any evidence of postoperative
complications, injuries to any abdominal organs, or postoperative device
displacement inside the peritoneal cavity. Mice treated with the
paclitaxel-eluting device compared to systemic therapy demonstrated a
signiifcant reduction of relative tumor growth (%= day30 RLU/day 0 RLU)
in PDAC-3 (12 fold reduction, IV= 343% 339%, PED= 29% 38%, p=0.02) and
PDAC-6 (2 fold reduction, IV=14% 6%, PED = 7% 4%, p=0.003),
respectively.CONCLUSIONS. These results indicate that the
paclitaxel-eluting device is safe and effective in overcoming the
drug-delivery impairment observed with systemic chemotherapies and has
relevant implications as a novel therapeutic platform to release current
and future anti-tumoral agents to combat this deadly disease.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

