Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effective therapy for advanced renal cell carcinoma using
triptolide and TRAIL receptor agonists


Metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is incurable. IFN or IL-2
immunotherapy has been used for RCC for more than 20 years, but response
rates remain low and these cytokines can generate toxic. More recently,
administration of multikinase inhibitors or anti-VEGF receptor mAb has
become popular, but these agents are largely palliative and tumor
regression is common. The shortcomings in current therapeutic options for
patients with metastatic RCC provide the rationale for the development of
novel treatment protocols. Triptolide, a diterpene triepoxide from the
medicinal herb Tripterygium wilfordii, can suppress cell growth and
induce apoptosis in a range of human tumor cells. Further, triptolide
also sensitizes tumor cells to TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL). The objective of this study was to determine the effectiveness
of combining triptolide with TRAIL receptor agonists against RCC. In
vitro, the combination of triptolide and recombinant human TRAIL protein
decreased cell viability in the human RCC cell line ACHN cells compared
with either treatment alone. This decrease in viability correlated with
increased induction of apoptosis (positive Annexin V staining) and
caspase activation. The triptolide-induced sensitization was accompanied
by decreased HSP70, HSP27, and HSF1 expression, as well as increased
surface expression of TRAIL-R2. Similar in vitro treatment of the mouse
renal cell adenocarcinoma cell line, Renca, demonstrated that triptolide
enhanced the killing of these cells by membrane-bound TRAIL or agonistic
anti-DR5 mAb. In vivo treatment of mice bearing orthotopic and metastatic
Renca tumors showed that combination therapy consisting of minnelide (a
water soluble version of triptolide) and agonistic anti-DR5 mAb resulted
in significantly decreased tumor burden and increased animal survival
compared to either therapy alone. Collectively, our data suggest that
triptolide sensitizes RCC cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, which is
accompanied by decreased heat shock protein expression and altered TRAIL
receptor expression. These data also suggest that the combination of
TRAIL receptor agonists and triptolide may prove to be an effective
treatment for metastatic RCC, especially at doses that show suboptimal
tumoricidal activity when used individually.

