Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D receptor Fok1 gene polymorphisms may be associated with
CRC among African American and Hispanic participants


Background: The vitamin D pathway plays a significant role through the
vitamin D receptor (VDR) in cancer tumorogenesis. Interestingly, although
African Americans have the lowest levels of vitamin D serum levels,
vitamin D supplementation has not yielded significant improvement in
cancer risk and outcome. Gene polymorphisms in VDR may play a role. There
is lack of information on VDR gene polymorphisms and colorectal cancer
(CRC) among underrepresented ethnic groups. Hence, this study is among
the first to examine whether VDR SNPs,
single-nucleotide-gene-polymorphisms, are associated with CRC in
predominately African American and Hispanic study participants.Methods: A
total of 378 participants were included in the study with 78 CRC patients
and 300 non-CRC participants. Forty percent of participants were African
American, 56% were Hispanic/Latino, and the remainder of participants
self-identified as Caucasian or Asian. The four polymorphic SNPs in VDR -
FokI (rs2228570), BsmI (rs1544410), TaqI (rs731236) and ApaI (rs7975232)
- were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment
length polymorphism methods. Statistical Analysis was performed by using
SPSS software.Results: There was a significant difference in the
distribution of the VDR-Fok1 and VDR-Apa1polymorphisms between African
American and Hispanic participants (P=0.006 and 0.009, respectively).
Furthermore, the VDR-Fok1 FF genotype was associated with CRC (OR=2.9;
P=0.036) when compared with Controls without polyps. Upon breakdown by
ethnicity, the FF genotype was most common in African American
participants (61%), and the Ff genotype was most common in
Hispanic/Latino participants (49%). When the association was assessed in
a multivariate model, there was no significant association with any VDR
polymorphism and CRC Cases (P>0.05). The other three polymorphic variants
of VDR (BsmI, TaqI and ApaI) were not associated with CRC in any of the
analyses.Conclusions: This study suggests that genetic variation of the
VDR-FokI SNPs may influence CRC risk, particularly in African American
cohorts. These findings suggest the potential need to screen for VDR
polymorphisms in conjunction with screening vitamin D serum levels. As a
potentially modifiable risk factor, vitamin D and the VDR mediated axis
may be a point of significant interventional opportunity to effectively
reduce CRC risk, with the overarching goal to reduce cancer health
disparities.

