Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated expression of HDAC9 in B cells leads to the
development of lymphoproliferative disease and lymphoma


Aberrant epigenetics leading to changes in chromatin structure and
patterns of gene expression is an important factor in cancer
pathogenesis. Histone Deacetylase 9 (HDAC9) is a class IIa
chromatin-modifying enzyme that, within the haematopoietic system, is
preferentially expressed in the B-cell lineage. Furthermore, HDAC9
expression is deregulated in B-lymphoid malignancies. To examine the role
of HDAC9 in malignant B-cell transformation, we generated an in vivo
mouse model that constitutively expresses human HDAC9 from early stages
of B-cell development under the control of the immunoglobulin heavy chain
(IgH) enhancer (E). In this study, we demonstrate that from an average of
six months of age, E-HDAC9 transgenic mice displayed splenomegaly and
immunophenotypic features that resemble lymphoproliferative disease (LPD)
in spleen. Later on in life, up to twenty-three months of age, 24% (19
out of 78) of E-HDAC9 mice developed mature B-cell neoplasms such as
splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) and aggressive diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) that could represent a progression stage of the observed
lymphoproliferative disease (LPD) and monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis
(MBL). In contrast, a low background incidence of these malignancies was
observed in control mice, 2% (1 out of 46) (p = 0.0008). The molecular
pathogenesis of the E-HDAC9 B-cell tumors seems to involve
activation-deactivation of the BCL6-p53 axis by HDAC9 influenced
deacetylation thus affecting DNA repair and cell cyle progression in
germinal centre (GC) during immune response. Consistently, ZFN-mediated
HDAC9-knockout results in cell cycle changes leading to strong inhibition
of cell growth in vitro. In summary, aberrant expression of HDAC9 leads
to the development of lymphoproliferative disorders, including GC and
post-GC lymphomas, demonstrating an oncogenic role for HDAC9 in B-cells
and highlighting its importance as a therapeutic target.

