Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluctuating antibody response and CD4-positive T-cells in a
small-cell lung cancer mouse model


Patients with small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), a highly metastatic type of
lung cancer, show a dismal 5-year survival of only 5%. Effective
therapies are urgently needed. Notably, about fifteen-percent of
SCLC-patients harbor anti-Hu autoantibodies, which are associated with
improved survival. This suggests that the anti-Hu response might be
harnessed for immunotherapy. A conditional SCLC mouse model with floxed
Rb1 and p53 alleles, in which the cancer is induced by instilling
Cre-recombinase into the lungs via intratracheal intubation, offers a
unique opportunity to study the immune response in detail. We have
previously shown that, just like human SCLC patients, a fraction of these
SCLC-carrying mice show an anti-Hu autoantibody response. Here we examine
the presence of anti-Hu reactive T-cells using a prospective cohort
(n=45) of SCLC-induced mice. All mice develop SCLC, showing systemic
disease in 4-7 months following inactivation of floxed Rb1 and p53
alleles. Monthly autoantibody analysis by western blotting revealed an
antibody response in a subset of mice, sometimes as early as 1 month
after induction. Reactivity usually peaked approximately 3-4 months after
induction and declined as disease progressed. This suggests an immune
escape mechanism and/or antibody adsorption by the rapidly proliferating
tumors. T-cells were isolated at euthanasia from the spleens of moribund
mice. Proliferating anti-HuD CD4-positive T-cells were detected in
fifty-one-percent of mice (eighteen out of thirty-five) by flow
cytometry. Anti-HuD T-cell proliferation from spleen cells was validated
in a subsequent prospective cohort (n=45) of SCLC-induced mice using
thymidine incorporation. Stratifying for antibody positive and negative
mice using an stringent cutoff, there was no significant difference in T
cell response between the two groups (p=0.11), however four mice in the
antibody positive group showed the most elevated anti-HuD T-cell
response. Our observations warrant a much larger study, in which in-depth
characterization of the humoral and cellular the anti-HuD immune response
is carried out at multiple time points and correlated with a detailed
analysis of the stage of tumor development and mestastasis. Preliminary
data hints at a negative correlation between the anti-HuD antibody and
T-cell response on one hand and tumor size and metastasis on the other.
The observation that the Hu antigen in mice with SCLC is a target for
both humoral and cellular immune responses underscores the utility of
this mouse model in the preclinical evaluation the anti-Hu immune
response for therapy and clinical translation.

