Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Point of care PK quantitation device for pharmacokinetic guided
dosing of paclitaxel as a companion diagnostic device


Study Purpose: Paclitaxel chemotherapy is the cornerstone of most
anti-cancer regimens due to its potent cytoxic activity against tumor
cells. The variability of paclitaxel dosing can be as high as 10X across
patients, therefore, dosing at a fixed dose even when adjusted for body
weight will leave a significant portion of the patients underdosed -
getting no benefit from the treatment- and another portion overdosed-
getting undue toxicity. Therefore, paclitaxel therapy would benefit from
TDM guided dosing. A full pharmacokinetic (PK) study is required to
determine whether patients are getting the appropriate and efficient
dosage. However, at the current state, a full pharmacokinetic requires
not only multiple high-volume blood draws and extended stays in the
hospital but also testing method by LC/MS/MS, which are both
time-consuming and expensive. Here we describe the development of Point
of Care TDM (Therapeutic Drug Monitoring) device for PK guided dosing of
paclitaxel as a companion diagnostic device.Methods: The 8A10 and 3C6
mAbs (mAbs against paclitaxel) were purified from the antibody-rich
harvested medium using MabSelect (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA).
Commercial antibodies (29B7B3C and 69E4A8E; Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Inc.) were also tested. To synthesize BSA-paclitaxel, we used the method
of J-G Leu et al. as described in Cancer Res. (1993) 53:1388-1391.
BSA-paclitaxel and mAbs were labeled with colloidal gold using the gold
labeling kit from BioAssay Works, LLC, Ijamsville, MD.Results: Rapid test
for paclitaxel based on the lateral flow system was developed. Of the
mAbs tested, only 8A10 and 3C6 were useful. The assay requires the unique
configuration of immobilizing the mAb against paclitaxel onto the
membrane followed by flowing the BSA-paclitaxel-colloidal gold through in
presence of test analyte. This configuration seems more effective than
the traditional configuration where BSA-paclitaxel is immobilized on the
membrane and colloidal-gold labeled anti-paclitaxel mAb as flow through.
This resulted in a competitive assay for paclitaxel where the signal
decreased as the concentration of paclitaxel analyte in blood increased.
Coupled with the current lateral reader technology - especially the one
developed by Qiagen- a rapid quantitative assay for paclitaxel is
possible. The assay demonstrated good linearity and range suitable for
paclitaxel TDM. The application of this assay in a preclinical
pharmacokinetic study yield reasonably comparable result to LC/MS
method.Conclusions: A quantitative lateral flow platform coupled to a
reader was developed to easily detect the paclitaxel concentrations in
small amount of blood samples. Individual pharmacokinetic profiles can be
obtained and used to determine the suitable treatments. In addition, the
lateral flow PK quantitative assay can be deployed at point-of care (in
home, doctor's office or central lab).

