Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-4/IL-13 induce Duox2/DuoxA2 expression and reactive oxygen
production in human pancreatic and colon cancer cells


NADPH oxidase (NOX)-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS) contribute
significantly to inflammation-associated carcinogenesis. Expression of
dual oxidase 2 (Duox2), one of seven members of the NOX gene family, is
up-regulated in inflammatory bowel disease, chronic pancreatitis, and in
many human malignancies including carcinomas of the prostate, lung, and
breast. Previously, we demonstrated that Stat1 and/or NF-B play a
critical role in modulating the enhanced expression of Duox2, and its
cognate maturation factor DuoxA2, by IFN- and lipopolysaccharide in human
pancreatic cancer cells. This cytokine-mediated increase in Duox2
expression is responsible for a consequent significant increase in tumor
cell H2O2 production and DNA damage. Using Caco2 and T84 human colon
cancer lines, and BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells, we now report that two
other pro-inflammatory cytokines, IL-4 and IL-13, also strongly induce
Duox2/DuoxA2 RNA and protein expression (>5-10-fold after 24h treatment
with 50 ng/ml cytokine). In the BxPC-3 line, IL-4 exposure activates the
Stat6 signaling pathway, enhances expression of Duox2/DuoxA2 in a time-
and concentration-dependent manner, and leads to a significant increase
in the generation of extracellular H2O2. The transcription and
translation inhibitors actinomycin D and cyclohexamide both individually
suppress IL-4-induced Duox2 expression, suggesting that IL-4-mediated
Duox2 up-regulation is transcriptionally regulated, but that new protein
synthesis is also necessary. We found that Stat6 is essential for
IL-4-induced Duox2 expression because silencing Stat6 with Stat6-specific
siRNA significantly attenuates IL-4-induced Duox2 RNA and protein levels
in BxPC-3 cells. To evaluate the potential role of Duox2 in
inflammation-associated human cancers further, immunohistochemical
studies were performed to semi-quantitatively examine Duox expression
using human pancreatic and colon cancer tissue arrays. We found that a
majority of samples of pancreatic intra-epithelial neoplasia and frank
pancreatic cancer demonstrated high-level expression of Duox , often in
association with inflammatory cell infiltrates; high-level Duox
expression was also found in most colorectal cancer samples. These
studies, in concert with our previous experiments, strongly suggest that
ROS, produced as a consequence of cytokine-induced Duox up-regulation,
may be associated with the development of inflammation-related
gastrointestinal malignancies.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

