Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Junctional adhesion molecule-A (JAM-A) expression is downmodulated
by miR-21 during colorectal cancer progression


Introduction: MicroRNAs are small non-coding-RNAs that control cell
homeostasis and are deregulated in human colorectal cancer (CRC). MiR-21
up-regulation is frequent in CRC and represents a driver for tumor
initiation and progression. Junctional Adhesion Molecule A (JAM-A) is a
tight junction protein involved in regulation of para-cellular
permeability in epithelial and endothelial cells. JAM-A forms homodimers
and activates signalling pathways regulating cell adhesion, polarity and
proliferation. For this reason, monoclonal antibodies against JAM-A are
currently tested in the preclinical setting as potential targeted
therapies. JAM-A loss appears to be an early event in CRC initiation but
very little is known about the role of JAM-A in human sporadic CRC. The
aim of our study was defining the pattern of expression of JAM-A in human
CRC and to the define the whether its deregulation is a consequence of
aberrant microRNA expression.Methods: JAM-A expression was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in 1254 cases of human sporadic CRC. MiR-21 and
JAM-A expression was analyzed in human CRC cells [RKO, HT29, HCT116,
SW620, HCT15, SW480, SW837, SW48, DLD1 (both Wild-Type and Knock-Out for
miR-21)] by Real-Time-PCR and Western-Blotting. MiR-21 silencing and
over-expression were performed using Exiqon Locked Nucleic Acids and
Ambion Pre-miR respectively. MiR-21 binding site in JAM-A 3UTR was
predicted using bio-informatics tools (RNA Hybrid) and a 236bp area
encompassing the predicted seed region was cloned downstream of the
Firefly Luciferase gene in PGL3 vector for Luciferase Reporter
Assay.Results: JAM-A down-regulation was observed in cancer compared to
normal adjacent tissues. JAM-A was progressively down-regulated in the
progression from normal epithelium, dysplasia, intraepithelial and
invasive cancer. Poorly differentiated cancers showed total loss of
JAM-A. Shifted staining from apical to baso-lateral compartment was
observed in 25% of all cancers. Silencing and re-expression of miR-21 in
CRC cell lines resulted in increase and down-regulation of JAM-A protein
expression respectively. Luciferase reporter assay experiments were able
to define the potential seed region by which miR-21 interacts with JAM-A
3UTR.Conclusion: Our data suggest that JAM-A expression is deregulated
during human colorectal cancer progression as a consequence of miR-21
over-expression. These results highlight how miR-21 could potentially
exert its actions on para-cellular permeability and cell polarity acting
on junctional adhesion molecules. Understanding the mechanisms of JAM-A
loss or re-localization may help to stratify patient's treatment and
identify patients who might benefit from anti-JAM-A monoclonal antibodies.

