Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting NPM1 for the radiosensitization of NSCLC


Lung cancer is a global scourge. In 2008 alone there were more than 1.25
million deaths from this disease worldwide. Eighty five percent of lung
cancers are classified as non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and for
those NSCLC patients who present with locally advanced stage IIIA/B
disease the standard of care is chemo/radiation therapy. Yet even with
this approach the median duration of survival is only 17 months. Thus,
there is an urgent need for the development of new strategies that
improve therapeutic outcomes. We addressed this challenge by employing a
forward chemical genetics screen designed to identify compounds that
could be used to exploit DNA repair pathways in tumor cells burdened with
oncogenesis-mediated replication stress. Using this approach we
identified YTR107, a substituted
5-((N-benzyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methylene)pyrimidine-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H) trione,
that amplifies replication stress and inhibits repair of DNA DSBs. Using
biochemical approaches we identified NPM1 as a potential target and found
that YTR107 impairs NPM1 oligomerization, a requirement for NPM1's
biochemical activity. However, direct genetic evidence demonstrating that
the specific targeting of NPM1 is a radiosensitizing event remains to be
established. Therefore we employed a defined genetic model consisting of
NPM1 null and wild type mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs). We found that
proliferating NPM1-null mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), but not wild
type MEFs, are burdened with high levels of H2AX foci, a characteristic
of replication stress. NPM1-null MEFs exhibit a defect in Rad51-mediated
repair of DNA DSBs that increases radiation sensitivity. Use of this
model allowed us to demonstrate that YTR107-mediated radiosensitization
requires NPM1. Because the DNA damage response pathway is continuously
activated in NSCLC in response to constant replication stress, and with
the knowledge that NPM1 expression minimizes such stress, we hypothesized
that NSCLC tumors might require significant expression of NPM1. This
hypothesis was validated by analyzing a NSCLC tumor microarray. We then
showed that YTR107-mediated targeting of NPM1 is a radiosensitizing event
in 6 NSCLC cell lines and in a syngeneic tumor model. We also found that
YTR107 is well tolerated in mice, does not produce overt toxicity, and
does not potentiate radiation-mediated pulmonary fibrosis. These data
suggest that NPM1 represents a potential molecular target for
radiosensitization of NSCLC.

