Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of HBV DNA methylation in liver tissues of
hepatitis B, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma patients


Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a hepatotropic virus causing hepatitis,
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. In patients, HBV DNA circulates
in blood as virion DNA and exists in hepatocytes both as nuclear form
(episomal cccDNA and integrated DNA) and as cytoplasmic core DNA form. It
has been reported that HBV infection up-regulates DNMTs and thus induces
epigenetic changes in the host cells. Understanding the methylation
status of the HBV DNA in its different forms can potentially provide
insight into the pathogenesis of HBV-related liver diseases including
hepatocarcinogenesis. Previous studies conducted in patient serum and in
cell cultures have demonstrated that the CpG islands of HBV virion DNA
are in the unmethylated state, and cccDNA methylation has been
extensively studied for its role in the regulation of transcription, but
very few studies have investigated the methylation status of integrated
HBV DNA in human liver tissues. To better understand the methylation
status of HBV DNA in hepatitis B, cirrhosis and HCC, a comprehensive
methylation profile of three CpG islands in the HBV genome was assessed
by BS-sequencing, and methylation of each of the 3 CpG islands was
compared by using bisulfite specific PCR and methylation specific PCR
assays in a larger sample size. We observed that the methylation of CpG
island 1 and 3 of HBV DNA from liver tissues was significantly higher in
HCC as compared to hepatitis and cirrhosis. We also obtained, for the
first time, the evidence of rare non-CpG methylation in the CpG island 1
and 2 of HBV genome in liver tissues. The overall co-relation of HBV
genome methylation and disease progression was also investigated. In
addition, no co-relation between the methylation levels of the HBV genome
and host genome was found, suggesting independent mechanisms regulate the
methylation of host and viral genomes. The mechanisms of HBV genome
methylation in liver disease and its regulation are discussed.

