Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of a novel DNA methylation analysis method (MSE) for
mucin expression in pancreatic juices for diagnosis of pancreatic
neoplasms


Mucins play crucial roles in diagnostic and prognostic prediction and in
carcinogenesis and tumor invasion. In our clinicopathological
investigation for mucin expression in human pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas (PDACs) and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms
(IPMNs), we had reported that MUC1 (pan-epithelial membrane mucin) or
MUC4 (tracheobronchial mambrane mucin) expression is related with the
aggressive behavior and a poor outcome of the patients, whereas MUC2
(intestinal secretory mucin) expression tends to be related with the
indolent behavior and a favorable outcome of the patients. We
investigated the mechanism of mucin genes expression from the DNA
methylation standpoint in human cancer cell lines using the mapping of
methylated cytosines by the quantitative MassARRAY analysis, followed by
the confirmation with MSP analysis and a novel DNA methylation analysis
method methylation specific electrophoresis (MSE, international patent
open: WO 2011/132798), and compared the results with expression levels of
mucin core protein and mRNA in the cancer cells. The results obtained
showed that MUC1, MUC2 and MUC4 expression is regulated by DNA
methylation at their proximal 5 flanking regions in the cancer cells. The
MSE method greatly decreases the amount of input DNA, although
conventional analytical methods for DNA methylation require a large
amount of DNA and have low sensitivity. The lower detection limit for
distinguishing different methylation status is under 0.1% and the
detectable minimum amount of DNA is 20 pg, which can be obtained from
only a few cells. We applied the MSE method to human pancreatic juices
from 45 patients with various pancreatic lesions. The analyses for DNA
methylation status of MUC1, MUC2 and MUC4 combined with image data were
useful for differential diagnosis of various human pancreatic neoplasms.
The examination of 45 samples of human pancreatic juices by the MSE
method combined with the image examination showed the following
specificity and sensitivity by quadratic discrimination analysis: PDAC,
87% and 80%; gastric-type IPMN (safe type), 88% and 77%; intestinal-type
IPMN (dangerous type), 100% and 88%; respectively. The MSE analysis of
human pancreatic juices may give us very useful informations for the
selection of the treatment methods for pancreatic neoplasms.

