Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific interaction of human MGMT with ER- in breast cancer
cells: Co-degradation of MGMT and ER- proteins by either fulvestrant or
O6-benzylguanine and its therapeutic significance


MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) is an antimutagenic DNA
repair protein and an established target for improving chemotherapy with
alkylating agents. MGMT is highly expressed in breast cancers. This study
investigated whether i) MGMT is modulated by endocrine therapies, ii)
MGMT interacts with ER-signaling components and iii) if such findings are
exploitable for improved breast cancer treatment. The ER- positive cell
lines MCF-7, T47D and ER- negative MDAMB 468 cells, all MGMT-proficient,
were treated with Fulvestrant (Faslodex, ICI 182, 780) or
O6-benzylguanine (BG) in various experiments. Fulvestrant is a pure
antiestrogen that binds to ER without eliciting any transcriptional
effects, but leads to the receptor degradation through the
ubiquitin-proteasome (ub-P) pathway. BG is a specific pseudosubstrate for
MGMT currently in clinical trials that inactivate the repair protein
resulting in its degradation, again by the ub-P pathway. Fulvestrant
(0.1-1 M) induced a dose- and time-dependent inhibition of MGMT's DNA
repair activity with a 75% inhibition after 1 M treatment at 72 h.
Interestingly, western blot analyses showed a progressive loss of both
ER- and MGMT proteins in Fulvestrant -treated cells. The MGMT in ER-
negative MDMAB cells was not affected by the drug. Similarly, BG (20-50
M) induced a time-dependent significant destruction of the ER- and MGMT
proteins in cells. Immunoprecipitation using antibodies to either MGMT or
ER- followed by western blot analyses showed that the two proteins exist
physically associated in breast cancer cells. siRNA and shRNAs specific
for MGMT downregulated both the ER- and MGMT proteins in MCF-7 cells
confirming the mutual dependence and maintenance of these two proteins.
RT-PCR showed the downregulation of several genes transactivated by ER-
in BG-treated cells. Furthermore, bortezomib, a proteasomal inhibitor
stabilized both ER- and MGMT proteins in cells after Fulvestrant
exposure. Temozolomide or BCNU caused a 2-4 fold increased cell killing
when combined with Fulvestrant. We postulate that portions of ER- and
MGMT proteins exist as a complex and inhibition of either of them results
in co- ubiquitination by the same E3 ligase and marked for elimination.
The MGMT-deficiency caused by Fulvestrant warrants the use of alkylating
agents with endocrine therapeutics [Supported by grants from CPRIT (RP
130266), NIH RO3 CA125872 and the Association for Research of Childhood
Cancer].

