Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selamectin and ivermectin are small molecule inhibitors that
interfere with Sin3A-PAH2 function and exert anti-tumor activity in
triple-negative breast cancer


INTRODUCTION: Sin3 is a complex scaffolding protein that participates in
epigenetic regulation involved in a variety of biological processes,
including chromatin remodeling, development, differentiation, cell cycle
and survival. Paired Amphipathic domain 2 (PAH2) domain of Sin3 was shown
to interact with Sin3 interacting domain (SID)-containing transcription
factors, such as Mxd1, KLF10/11, and REST. Previously, we reported that
SID transcripts and decoy peptides disrupt the interactions between
Sin3-PAH2 domain and SID-containing transcription factors and induce
epigenetic reprogramming in TNBC.RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Here we show
that fourteen SMIs mimicking SID decoys were identified by in silico
computation from a chemical library composed of 115,000 compounds. We
confirmed that selamectin and ivermectin are SID decoys using duo-link
assays. Our NMR 15N-HSQC spectroscopy binding results further
demonstrated ivermectin, which shares the same binding site as
selamectin, directly interacted with PAH2. Moreover, selamectin inhibited
Sin3 repression activity as measured by mammalian two-hybrid and in vitro
GST pull-down assays. Notably, ivermectin was approved by Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to treat small animals and human. However, the
anti-tumorigenic roles for these SMIs had not been investigated in TNBC
in vitro and in vivo. Remarkably, these SMIs did not affect growth in
2-dimensional (2D) clonogenecity assay, but significantly suppressed
growth in 3D matrigel and tumorsphere cultures. Moreover, selamectin
significantly suppressed Myc mammary tumor growth in vivo more than 50
percent without any cytotoxicity. Selamectin and ivermectin induced
re-expression of CDH1 and ESR1, restoring tamoxifen sensitivity.
Treatment with these compounds inhibited in vitro invasion as measured by
Boyden chamber in MCF7/ADR and MDA-MB-231 cells. Selamectin and
ivermectin were shown to alleviate multidrug resistance and enhance
doxorubicin and paclitaxel cytotoxicity in MCF7/ADR cells, which is
unrelated to disruption of Sin3-PAH2. Based on further studies of the
Sin3A complexes using selamectin and ivermectin, we seek to identify
novel SMIs with better efficiency for targeting Sin3 complex and treating
TNBCs in the future.

