Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role triptolide in sensitizing lung tumor cells to
cisplatin-induced apoptosis


Cisplatin is an anticancer drug used in treatment for many types of
cancer, including lung cancer. The quick development of tumor cell drug
resistance, however, greatly hindered the effectiveness of cisplatin in
cancer treatment. Exploring new strategies that can sensitize tumor cells
to cisplatin treatment, therefore, is essential for improving the
effectiveness of cisplatin in cancer treatment. Triptolide is a bioactive
ingredient isolated from Tripterygium wilfordii, a traditional Chinese
herbal medicine that has been used to treat immune-related disorders.
Recent studies revealed that Triptolide possesses potent antitumor
properties through CDK7-depedent RNA polymerase II (Pol II) degradation
and global transcription inhibition by binding to the XPB subunit of
general transcription factor TFIIH and inhibiting its ATPase activity. We
have studied the possibility of using Triptolide to sensitize lung tumor
cell to cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Using both HTB182 and CRL5985 lung
tumor cells, our caspase 3 activation studies demonstrated that the
presence of low-level Triptolide greatly sensitized these lung tumor
cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Our western blots results indicated
that the presence of low-level Triptolide increased the cisplatin-induced
expression of PUMA but reduced expression of Bcl-XL in these lung tumor
cells. Our immune-blotting studies revealed that the RNA Pol II level was
not significantly affected by the presence of low-level Triptolide. Our
real time PCR studies results indicated that expression levels of several
tested genes also were not affected by the presence of Triptolide. These
results suggest that the presence of low levels of triptolide sensitizes
the lung cancer cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis through binding to
XPB of the TFIIH and inhibiting the DNA repair activity for cisplatin DNA
damage, resulting in increased apoptosis of the lung tumor cells.
Therefore, the presence of low levels of triptolide sensitizes lung tumor
cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis.

