Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPR56 promotes the adhesion of glioma stem-like cells to the
perivascular niche and regulates cell fate


INTRODUCTIONGliobastomas (GBM) are the most aggressive and frequent human
malignancies in the central nervous system. A small population of cells
within the bulk of these tumors displays properties of normal neural stem
cells (NSC). Accordingly, these cells are referred to as glioma stem-like
initiating cells (GIC). Thus, deregulation of mechanisms that control NSC
biology might contribute to the pathogenesis of GBM. NSC and GIC are
localized to the perivascular space where they reside in close apposition
to blood vessels (BV), which promote self-renewal and keep these cells in
an undifferentiated state. GPR56 is an adhesion G-protein coupled
receptor expressed in neural progenitors in the embryonic and adult brain
and plays an indispensable role in cortical development. Knockout mice
studies show that GPR56 mediates the attachment of radial glial endfeet
to pial basement membrane (BM). Some of the components of the pial BM are
also present in the extracellular matrix surrounding BV, such as laminin
and collagen. Therefore, we hypothesized that GPR56 might mediate NSC/GIC
localization to the perivascular niche thus contributing to their
stem-related properties.EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESHere, we have compared the
expression of GPR56 in neural progenitors versus more differentiated
progeny. In addition, we have assessed the role of GPR56 in the neural
stem-like properties of GIC, including their differentiation into more
mesenchymal cell types such as endothelial cells or pericytes, by gain-
and loss-of-function studies.RESULTSWe have found that GPR56 is highly
expressed in NSC and its expression is downregulated during
differentiation. We have also observed that GPR56 is expressed in cells
that reside in the perivascular niche. GPR56-knockdown GIC display
impaired adhesion to endothelial cells (EC), whereas GPR56 overexpression
increases their adhesion to EC. Furthermore, loss of GPR56 increases the
ability of GIC to express endothelial/pericyte markers when co-cultured
with EC and increases the CD44+ population, suggesting that GPR56
inhibits the acquisition of a mesenchymal-like phenotype.CONCLUSIONSTaken
together, our findings indicate that GPR56 mediates the adhesion of GIC
to EC. Moreover, GPR56 inhibits the acquisition of mesenchymal features.
Therefore, we suggest that GPR56 might mediate the attachment of GIC to
the perivascular niche while preserving their neural stem-like properties
by preventing the acquisition of a mesenchymal-like phenotype.

