Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico investigation of FOXM1 binding and novel inhibitors in
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)


Objective:Using TCGA database, we had demonstrated that aberrantly
activated Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) correlates to worse overall survival in
a subgroup of platinum resistant patients. Application of thiostrepton, a
natural thiazole antibiotics that inhibits FOXM1 transcription activity,
improves the cytotoxic effect of paclitaxel and cisplatinum in ascites
cells from platinum-resistant patients. However, the use of thiazole
antibiotics in the clinic is hampered by difficulties in synthesis,
degradation potential, and solubility issues. In this study, we aim to
identify novel FOXM1 small molecule inhibitors which can be a new class
of therapeutic agents to address the challenges in treating chemotherapy
resistant EOC.Methods:The FOXM1 protein structure was obtained from the
Protein Databank (pdb ID: 3GXU) and prepared for docking studies by
Autodock Vina 1.0.2. Structural representations of the NCI Diversity Set
II in were obtained from the NCI website and converted to a pdb format
for screening. Individual pdb files were prepared for docking using the
prepare_ligand.py scripts form MGLTools 1.5.4 using the largest
non-bonded fragment present. The binding affinity was scored as the free
energies of binding in kcal/mol.Three selected compounds (one as negative
control) were applied to SKOV3, OVCAR3 and ES2 cells for 72 hrs and
sulfarodamine B assay was used to measure the cell viability and FOXM1
expression level was confirmed by RT-PCR and western blot.Results:The
FOXM1 structure obtained from 3GXU represented the DNA binding region of
FOXM1 and possessed the winged helix fold representative of the Forkhead
family of enzymes with two wings in direct contact with DNA. For ease of
representation, we described both wings as a dimer and a single wing as a
monomer. From this structure, we hypothesized two main models of how
thiostrepton binding to FOXM1 could possibly curtail its transcriptional
activity. In the first model thiostrepton could bind either of the wings
or both wings and prevent association to DNA. In the second model
thiostrepton bind the FOXM1: DNA complex and weaken association of FOXM1
to DNA. Subsequently, small molecular inhibitors could also use either of
the models to inhibit transcription. To account for both models, the NCI
Diversity set was screened against the FOXM1 dimer:DNA complex (39 hits),
dimer (11 hits) and monomer (14 hits). Those hits were further classified
by chemical structure, biological function and chemical similarities to
known molecules that target FOXM1. In cellular cytotoxicity assays,
ZINC00990239 showed cytotoxicity with IC50 around 10uM, and
downregulation of FOXM1 and transcription of its downstream molecules
such as CCNB1.Conclusion:By illustrating the characteristics of an
effective small molecule inhibitor of FOXM1 should contain, we have taken
the first step towards identification of potential compounds with
efficacy similar to thiostrepton.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

