Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGF has stimulatory and survival effects in osteosarcoma in vitro
and pan-ERBB kinase inhibition causes cell growth inhibition in vitro and
reduces lung metastases in vivo


Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone tumor in children and
adolescents, with recurring disease or lung metastases being the primary
cause of death in patients. Expression of EGFR, Her-2, and Her-4 (ERBB1,
2 and 4) have been reported in human primary osteosarcoma, suggesting
that they may be contributing to osteosarcoma pathogenesis, but the
correlation of expression levels with patient outcomes has been
controversial. We have shown that a pan-ERBB small molecule kinase
inhibitor causes growth inhibition and apoptosis of osteosarcoma cell in
vitro, suggesting a potential therapeutic benefit of using this drug in
vivo. In the present study, we show that protein expression levels of
EGFR, Her-2 and Her-4 are higher in osteosarcoma lung metastases than in
primary tumors by TMA, and that these levels are significantly higher for
Her-2 and Her-4. We created eight new osteosarcoma cell lines from
primary patient tissues and found that all eight, in addition to six
commonly used osteosarcoma cell lines, express detectable levels of EGFR
and Her-2, and several express detectable Her-4. EGF ligand stimulation
in vitro produces robust phosphorylation of EGFR, Her-2 and Her-4 in most
cell lines and moderate activation in others. EGF stimulation also
produces phosphorylation of Akt, MAPK and p70S6K in most cell lines and
of STAT5 in six cell lines, suggesting that EGF has growth and survival
stimulation effects. When adding a pan-ERBB kinase inhibitor, Pf-299804,
to cells pre-stimulated with EGF, phosphorylation of EGFR, Her-2, Her-4,
Akt, etc. are inhibited in a dose-dependent manner. Reverse phase protein
array also shows an increase in pro-apoptotic proteins Bim and cleaved
PARP with Pf-299804 treatment, confirmed by Western blots. Mouse
xenograft experiments, where cells injected in the tibia spontaneously
form lung metastases, showed a significant decrease in three categories
of Her-4-positive lung metastases in drug-treated mice based on size: 1-4
cell oligomets (p=0.0055); 5 cell-200 micron micromets (p=0.0276); and
greater than 200 micron macromets (p=0.0055). These data suggest that EGF
produces mitogenic and survival stimulation in osteosarcoma cells and
that pan ERBB-family kinase inhibition causes growth inhibition and
apoptosis in vitro and reduction of lung metastases in a mouse model in
vivo. This provides evidence that pan-ERBB kinase inhibition has
therapeutic potential for osteosarcoma lung metastases.

