Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversal of NK cell exhaustion in advanced melanoma patients by
Tim-3 blockade


Introduction: Among the most promising approaches to activate therapeutic
anti-tumor immunity is the blockade of immune checkpoints. CTLA-4 and
PD-1 inhibitors have been recently shown to enhance anti-tumor responses
and improve overall survival in various cancers including melanoma.
Similarly, Tim-3 (T cell immunoglobulin- and mucin-domain-containing
molecule-3) belongs to the group of immune checkpoints and has emerged as
a key player in immune regulation. Tim-3 is co-expressed with PD-1 on
human tumor-specific CD8+ T cells, and in vivo studies have shown that
its blockade alone, or in combination with PD-1, is able to control tumor
growth in several tumor models, including melanoma. Tim-3 is
constitutively expressed on natural killer (NK) cells, key players in
anti-tumor responses, but its precise role remains unclear. In this
study, we examined the role of Tim-3 in NK cells from healthy donors and
patients with metastatic melanoma.Methods: A cohort of 83 melanoma
patients, distributed by stage I, stage II and stage III/IV, was analyzed
for Tim-3 expression on circulating NK cells, and associated demographic
and clinical parameters. NK cells from patients with advanced melanoma
(stage III/IV ; n=20) and healthy donor (n=20) were further evaluated for
their expression of activating (NKG2D and NKp46) and inhibitory receptors
(KIRB1 and KIRNKAT2) ; function (cytotoxicity, IFN- production and
proliferation) ; and the intracellular expression of the transcription
factor T-bet. NK cell cytotoxicity was measured by Lamp-1 expression,
using K562 cells as target cells. IFN- production was measured after 4h
stimulation with rhIL-12, and proliferation was quantified by CFSE after
6 days in the presence of rhIL-2. The same functional assays
(cytotoxicity, IFN- production and proliferation) were performed after
Tim-3 blockade.Results: As the stage of melanoma advanced, we observed a
pattern of gradually increasing Tim-3+ NK cells (p=0.01). Significantly,
the expression of Tim-3 was higher in melanoma patients with poor
prognostic factors, such as thickness >1mm (p=0.006), mitotic rate
>=1/mm2 (p=0.03), ulceration (p=0.05) and presence of metastases
(p=0.009). Compared to healthy donors, NK cells from metastatic melanoma
patients were functionally impaired/exhausted according to their ability
to proliferate (p=0.002), produce cytokines (p=0.03) and kill target
cells (p=0.02). Tim-3 blockade was able to reverse this exhausted
phenotype, as shown by increased NK cell cytotoxicity (p=0.002), cytokine
production (p=0.007) and proliferation (p=0.009).Conclusion: These data
indicate that Tim-3 functions as an inhibitory receptor on NK cells in
advanced cancer and supports the development of Tim-3-targeted therapies
to restore anti-tumor immunity.

