Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elasticity of stem-like and non-stem-like breast cancer cells
studied by micropipette aspiration technique


It has been shown that the mechanical properties of pathological cells
are different from healthy ones. Therefore, mechanical characterization
of cells can be useful for investigating mechanisms and progression of
disease such as cancer. In the case of cancer, the finding that cancerous
cells are considerably more deformable than normal ones provides the
motivation for investigating deformability differences between stem-like
and non-stem-like cancerous cells. In this study, elasticity of two
breast cancer cell lines with different phenotypes, Hs578T as stem-like
and BT-20 as non-stem-like, was measured using the micropipette
aspiration technique.Cancer cells were aspirated one-by-one at controlled
pressures into small glass micropipettes with radii Rp, while the length
of the aspirated section of the cells inside the micropipette, L, was
measured. The applied pressure was increased linearly using a syringe
pump. The homogeneous half-space elastic model was employed to find the
Young's moduli of BT-20 and Hs578T breast cancer cells. According to this
model, graph of cell deformation (L/Rp) versus applied pressure is linear
for small deformations. Our results showed a linear trend for small
deformations for both BT-20 and Hs578T cells, in agreement with the
model. However, for large deformations, the graphs were no longer linear.
We related this nonlinearity to the fact that above a deformation
threshold the cells were exhibiting a liquid-like behavior for which a
solid model could not be applied. The effect of loading rate on cell's
elasticity was also examined by applying three different aspiration
pressure rates of 9, 6, and 3 Pa/s.A comparison between the Young's
moduli of BT-20 and Hs578T breast cancer cells showed that the latter are
less stiff. Such a difference might be attributed to an alteration in the
cell cytoskeleton organization and orientation for stem-like cancer
cells. In other words, a reduction in stiffness might be the result of
lower actin filament density which allows the stem-like cancer cells to
be more deformable while undergoing extravasation and intravasation
during the metastasic process. We also found that the aspiration rate
influences the elasticity properties of the cell associated with
differences in the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton. Both cell lines
showed smaller Young's moduli at slower aspiration rates and by
increasing the rate, the Young's moduli increased for both cell lines.
Therefore, cells appear softer when aspirated at a slower rate which is
in agreement with the behavior of normal elastic materials. Our
hypothesis is that the differences in the elastic properties might help
to distinguish between stem-like cancer cells and non-stem-like ones by
determining the cytoskeleton-related rate dependence of stiffness, which
could eventually lead to a new detection and diagnostic method in cancer
research.This work was supported by NSF grant CBET-1106118.

