Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models to study the role of breast
cancer stem cells in metastasis formation


Although advances have been made in the treatment of localized breast
cancer, there has been less progress in the treatment of advanced
metastatic disease. This disease is an oncoming therapeutic challenge for
breast cancer since it is always fatal. Conventional therapies may fail
to target cancer stem cells (CSC). Metastatic breast cancer may thus
benefit from current intensive research in the CSC field. Several studies
suggest that CSCs are the only cancer cells responsible for metastasis
formation. CSCs may have the ability to disseminate in blood circulation
as circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and to colonize new sites. To better
understand the biological processes that link CSCs and metastasis, we
have generated a xenobank of 50 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) of
primary tumors grafted in the humanized mammary fat pad of
immunodeficient mice. These models reflect the heterogeneity of primary
tumors both at molecular and cellular level. Using a lentiviral vector,
we infected our PDXs to obtain GFP-luciferase-positive models designed to
monitor metastasis development from the orthotopic site. To mimick the
patient therapeutic management, metastasis formation is monitored during
tumor growth but also after tumor surgical removal. Metastases are
collected and analyzed for histology and phenotype. The different
metastatic patterns are correlated with the mutational profile of PDX.
CTCs are also monitored at different time of the metastatic process using
a specific filter (ISET) for cell characterization and phenotype. PDXs
can be classified in tumor groups with similar metastatic tropisms. To
depict the role of CSC from primary tumors in the tropism of their
metastases, we collected and genomic profiled the ALDEFLUOR-positive CSCs
in orthotopic tumors from different models with distinct metastatic
pattern. These different PDX models lead to a better understanding of the
role of breast CSCs in metastasis formation from CTCs to well-constituted
metastasis and their study may identify targets able to design future
therapeutic strategies.

