Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of replicative senescence induced by SNF5 loss


Cellular senescence was initially described as the phenomenon by which
normal diploid cells cease to divide after reaching the Hayflick limit.
However, with the identification of replicative senescence, other
inducers of this process have appeared in the literature including
oncogene induced senescence (OIS). Of interest, different oncogenes can
initiate OIS through alternative pathways e.g. HRAS (G12V) and BRAF
(V600E) that effect senescence through p16 dependent and p16 independent
pathways, respectively. Alternatively, loss of tumor suppressor gene
function can also induce senescence. In malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs),
SNF5 behaves as a tumor suppressor and its re-expression in MRT cell
lines results in growth arrest via the RB pathway. Paradoxically, when we
knocked out SNF5 in normal human fibroblasts (NHF-1), we also observed
senescence. We therefore hypothesize that perturbation of the SWI/SNF
complex (e.g. knocking down SNF5) results in cellular senescence in most
normal tissues. This suggests an epigenetic mechanism of senescence
occurring through a p16 independent pathway, as previous publications
have demonstrated a critical role for SNF5 in p16 expression.
Additionally, in BRAF induced senescence, changes in levels of CD44,
phospho-MEK1/2, and p16 are observed. However, we do not find these
changes during SNF5 loss. Our findings suggest a relationship between
SWI/SNF's chromatin remodeling activity and the regulation of cellular
senescence. Importantly, our studies will identify the key signaling
pathways that allow MRTs to escape cellular senescence after SNF5 loss.
These results will further elucidate the role of SNF5 loss in MRT
development and provide new targets for clinical
intervention.Acknowledgement:We thank the members of the Weissman lab for
their help, advice, and support and R01CA91048 (B.E.W.) , T32ES007126
(D.W.), UNC Dissertation Completion Fellowship (D.W.) for financial
support.

