Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crizotinib induces tumor suppressor miR-146a, autophagy and p21
waf1/cip1 by alternative targeting non-TK target Akt-mTOR-Foxo axis: A
CPI-based systemic study on discovery of phenotypic off-target


Crizotinib, a first ever ALK /MET multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor developed by Pfizer and fast approved by FDA in 2011 for the
treatment of ALK-rearranged NSCLC patients. We hypothesize that
crizotinib acts on other molecular targets in addition to tyrosine
kinases ALK/MET and may play critical role given that there is a complex
network of kinases that work together to regulate a number of important
cellular processes and different disease signature. Approaching with a
comprehensive docking method with our established chemical-protein
interactome (CPI) and crizotinib, we have discovered 301 PDB-deposited
proteins corresponding to 353 ligand binding pockets among a total of
1,780 PDB-deposited human protein entries. Systemic pharmacology approach
also applied including validation the molecular target(s) of TKIs in
vitro. Especially multiple human cellular models (including NSCLC and
melanoma) and signaling study, luc-reporter, autophagy, apoptosis assay,
FACS and NGS analysis applied. Interestingly, crizotinib besides had a
high CPI binding score (ZZ_score) of -2.2778 against tyrosine kinase Lck,
also had -1.4672, -1.1242, -0.7033 and -1.5384 against MAPK3, S6K, GSK-3
and HDAC 7A, respectively, which indicated crizotinib had potential broad
range interaction with both TK and ser/thr kinases. In addition, those
crizotinib achieved high ZZ scores against PPAR- (-1.6145) and VitD3R
(0.9479), suggesting a high binding affinity of crizotinib with these
nuclear proteins. Our preliminary studies have showed that the crizotinib
induced autophagy by activated LC3 in vitro and inhibited oncogenic
Akt/mTOR signaling in human multiple melanoma cells resulting in G2/M
cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, crizotinib increased p21Waf1/cip1 and
Foxo3A expression and tumor suppressor miR-146a in human melanoma cells.
Taken together, crizotinib induces miR-146a, autophagy and p21 waf1/cip1
may potentially treat other type of human cancer by concurrently
targeting tyrosine kinase, Akt/mTOR/Foxo axis and nuclear receptor,
shedding a light for future both anti-cancer and anti-metabolic disorder
drug discovery and development. This is the first CPI-based systemic
study on leading discovery of crizotinib off-target phenotypic
importance. These findings suggest that non-tyrosine kinase target of
crizotinib may play critical role(s) for drug repositioning may represent
a new and effective approach to expanding the application of existing
drugs.

