Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioengineering of the adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors for
dendritic cell (DC)-based immunotherapy


Dendritic cell (DC) based immunotherapy has recently demonstrated great
potential for clinical application. However, additional progress in
methods of tumor specific antigen delivery to DC is necessary for the
further development of the anti-tumor vaccine.In our studies of the
adeno-associated virus (AAV) crystal structure combined with data from
various mutagenesis experiments on the capsid genes, we have identified
specific residues which play a critical role in intracellular trafficking
of these vectors. Genetic modifications of these regions increase
transduction efficiency of AAV vectors most likely by preventing
phosphorylation of serine (S) and threonine (T) residues by cellular
kinases and subsequent degradation of vectors by host proteosomes. These
studies led to development of several vectors such as AAV6-S663V,
AAV6-T492V and AAV6-T492+S663V which can increase transduction efficiency
of the monocytes-derived DCs (moDCs) by up to 5-fold compared to AAV6-WT.
This significant improvement in infectivity of capsid-optimized over
AAV6-WT vectors was associated with advanced nuclear translocation rather
than facilitated viral entry into cells, which was confirmed by qPCR
analysis on viral genome distribution in cytoplasmic and nuclear
fractions. Our data indicate that approximately 85% of viral genomes of
mutant AAV vectors accumulated in the nucleus 24 hrs post-infection
compared with approximately 50% of AAV6-WT vectors at the same
time-point. Considering the relatively short period of time between the
initiation of maturation and cytopathic changes in DCs, rapid expression
of antigen is critical to provide appropriate signals for T-cell
activation. Another important advantage of the employment of such
capsid-modified AAV6 vectors for vaccination is that efficient nuclear
translocation in DCs will provide less material for potential
presentation, and might prevent induction of immuno-competition in immune
responses against vector-derived and antigen-derived epitopes.We next
evaluated the possibility of whether high transduction efficiency of the
new vectors will be associated with better antigen presentation and
generating antigen-specific cytotoxic T-cells (CTLs). Our data show that
DCs loaded with AAV6-T492+S663V carrying human prostate specific antigen
(hPSA) resulted specific T-cell clone proliferation and generation of
superior CTLs with higher killing capability of human prostate
adenocarcinoma cells, LNCaP, compare CTLs stimulated by AAV6-WT vectors.
In summary, our studies lead to the development of effective novel AAV
vectors by manipulating viral capsid structure for the potential use in
DC-based immunotherapy.

