Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interfering with interferon: An axis of ATF2-mediated
chemoresistance


Malignant melanoma is currently the most lethal skin cancer and comprises
approximately 8% of total U.S. cancers cases. Despite the advent of even
the most effective targeted monotherapies to date (e.g., mutant B-RAF
inhibitors), clinical responses have largely been transient, as melanomas
rapidly develop therapeutic resistance, highlighting the need to target
other critical signaling pathways. In melanoma, Activating Transcription
Factor 2 (ATF2) elicits an oncogenic function when nuclear but a tumor
suppressor function when it is cytosolic/mitochondrial. In progressively
malignant melanoma, increased PKC-mediated phosphorylation of ATF2 on
threonine 52 (T52) promotes its nuclear localization and transcriptional
activity, and renders the cells more resistant to genotoxic stress.To
determine how PKC-phosphorylated ATF2 contributes to melanoma biology, we
performed gene expression profiling of melanoma cells that were
reconstituted with wild-type, T52 phosphomutant or phosphomimic ATF2, in
the presence or absence of genotoxic stress (which attenuates the T52
phosphorylation of ATF2). We report that in melanoma cells, genotoxic
stress induces the expression of a cluster of Interferon 1 (IFN1) and
related genes, which is suppressed by the expression of ATF2T52E. ATF2
binds to the 5-promoter region of IFN1, and we identified the ATF2/AP-1
binding site required for transcriptional repression. The stress-induced
expression of IFN1 mediates S-phase accumulation during genotoxic stress
with a concomitant induction of a senescence-like phenotype. In contrast,
blockade of type-1 interferon signaling by shRNA-mediated depletion of
the IFNAR receptor abrogates the S-phase accumulation, blocking cells in
G1 phase and reducing the extent of stress-induced cell death. The
expression of or treatment with exogenous IFN1 blunts the proliferation
of melanoma cells in both 2- and 3-dimensional spheroid cultures.
Notably, the treatment of melanoma cells with mutant BRAF inhibitor
(Vemurafenib/PLX4720) also induces the expression of IFN1 and senescence
markers, and the co-treatment of melanoma cells with IFN1 and etoposide
or PLX4720 significantly enhances the cell death induced by either
etoposide or PLX4720 alone. Lastly, we found that the stress-induced IFN1
expression by melanoma cells elicits paracrine effects, enhancing the
melanoma cell clearance by lymphocytes in an in vitro co-culture
system.Our data demonstrate a novel transcriptional regulatory role
exhibited by ATF2 on IFN1, which influences cell cycle dynamics and
stress/treatment resistance of melanoma cells. The therapeutic and
prognostic implications of these findings will be discussed.

