Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Favorable diffuse prognostic pattern of FOXP3+ and CD69+ T cells
in follicular lymphoma demonstrated using automated imaging and analysis


Background. In many cancers, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
indicate levels of tumor immunogenicity and are a strong predictor of
survival. In particular, increased levels of regulatory T cells (Tregs)
are associated with poorer prognosis in some cancers. However, visual TIL
assessment cannot easily determine the phenotype of lymphocyte in situ.
An understanding of both the phenotype and spatial distribution of TILs
in situ within tumor regions would be advantageous. Here we present a
multi-marker, computer-aided prognostication method for analysing the
distributions of CD3/FOXP3 (Treg) and CD3/CD69 (Tact) T cells in
follicular lymphoma sections using a multispectral imaging (MSI) and
automated analysis approach. An hypothesized interaction distance (HID)
analysis was used to determine whether the spatial patterns of Tregs and
Tacts was prognostically significant.Design. A single section of a tissue
microarray containing triplex follicular lymphoma cores from 40 subjects
[24 male, 16 female, age 35 to 75 years at diagnosis, median 55 years ,
2- 171 months follow-up] was stained for CD3, FOXP3, CD69 and
hematoxylin. Each core was imaged using MSI and the individual staining
of each marker separated from each other using spectral unmixing. CD3+
TILs were located using automated image analysis. The FOXP3 and CD69
status of each CD3+ TIL was then determined and the spatial distributions
of the CD3/FOXP3 and CD3/CD69 cells were used as input into the HID
analysis.Results. Multiplexed IHC staining, MSI and automated per-cell
quantitative analysis was successful. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated
favorable outcome with higher numbers of CD3+, CD3+/FOXP3+ and CD3+/CD69+
cells. HID analysis demonstrated the association of favorable outcome
with a high entropy / diffuse pattern of FOXP3+ and CD69+ positive T
cells.Conclusion. In this study we report that higher Treg cell counts in
a diffuse pattern was associated with favorable prognosis. This supports
the importance of Tregs in the tumor microenvironment. It is pertinent to
mention that contradictory findings are routinely reported from studies
investigating the role of Tregs in solid and haematological malignancies.
This is due to the complex interactions between pro-/anti- tumor immune
factors present in the tumor microenvironment. The resultant effects are
due to the summation of the activities of these factors. It is therefore
even more relevant that a method such as exhibited here, capable of
defining, and measuring the effect on biological behaviour, in this case
patient outcome, of cellular pattern is available, as demonstrated for
the HID method in the present study.

