Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of abiraterone against a luminal androgen receptor breast
cancer cell line


Background: Data from this pre-clinical model suggests that the LAR TNBC
subtype is unique and may respond to novel hormonal agents such as
bicalutamide or abiraterone. The LAR subtype represents 11 % of all TNBC
(which represent 20% of all breast cancers). Thus, positive studies of
abiraterone could potentially extend the application of abiraterone to an
additional 2% of all breast cancer patients, who could be treated in the
metastatic, neoadjuvant, and adjuvant setting (for five years) with
hormonal maintenance therapy. We, therefore, conducted studies of
abiraterone on LAR TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-453. .Methods: i). Cell
proliferation- Cell proliferation will be done by plating 500,000 cells
in triplicate Petri dishes and measuring cell number over a six day
period between parent cells and cellstreated with the following varying
concentrations of abiraterone: 100 ng/ml, 250 ng/ml, and 400 ng/ml.
ii).Cell cycle effects- Cells were incubated for 24 hours with
abiraterone and then lifted from the plate with trypsin/EDTA (0.5%/0.1%)
and fixed overnight in 80% ethanol. This was followed by staining in PBS
with 10 ug/ml of propidium iodide for twenty minutes at room temperature.
Flow cytometry was performed in our facility, and data was obtained on
the percentage of the cell population in various points of the cell
cycle. iii). Apoptosis and necrosis assay (Annexin-V-PI assay)- Cells
were harvested at 72 hours post-seeding and incubation with abiraterone
and washed with ice-cold PBS, followed by staining with 1ug/ml of PI and
5ul of Alexa Fluor 488 annexin V in 100ul of annexin binding buffer (10
mM Hepes/NaOH, pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2). After the incubation
at room temperature for 15 minutes, 400ul of ice-cold annexin binding
buffer was added and stained cells were analyzed by Becton-Dickinson
FACSCalibur Flow Cytometer.Results: Abiraterone caused a significant
impact on cell proliferation and promoted apoptosis in the MDA-MB-453
population. Cell cycle effects were also noted with abiraterone
treatment.Conclusion: Abiraterone has activity against MDA-MB-453, a
breast cancer cell line known to express luminal androgen receptor. The
results suggest that further studies may be warranted with this agent
against this unique subtype of breast cancer.

