Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of somatic mutations and gene amplifications using
amplicon sequencing with biopsy samples from patients with advanced
gastric cancer


Background: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a powerful tool for
individualized cancer treatment by detecting alterations of target genes.
We are now conducting a prospective study to investigate the profile of
targeted somatic mutations using Ion AmpliseqTM Cancer Panel in advanced
solid tumors (ABC-T study). This panel allows characterization of 739
(version 1) or 2855 (version 2) mutations in a single day with high
sensitivity and high accuracy using 10 ng of DNA; however, neither gene
copy number alteration nor gene rearrangements can be reliably
detected.Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from FFPE biopsy samples, and
10 ng of double-strand DNAs were applied to amplicon sequence using Ion
AmpliseqTM Cancer Panel (version 1 or 2). A multi-disciplinary
institutional cancer board (Expert panel) was organized to review safety
of the biopsy and the quality of the sequencing. Furthermore, we
established a diagnostic system for detecting gene amplification. The
preliminary results focusing on gastric cancer (GC) are presented.
Results: Among the 141 patients enrolled from July 2012 to July 2013, 42
GC patients were analyzed. No serious adverse events were observed with
biopsy procedures. Both DNA extraction and targeting sequence were
successfully performed in 40 patients (95%) including one patient
underwent re-biopsy. The most frequently detected mutations were TP53
(38%), STK11 (28%), PIK3CA (13%), and KRAS (10%). We indicated that the
coverage depth of the HER2 exon was correlated with the copy number of
HER2 analyzed by quantitative Real Time PCR in cancer cells with HER2
amplification. DNA samples from the biopsy specimens contain the genomic
DNA of both tumor and stroma cells. Therefore, we adjsted the coverage
depth of the HER2 using a semi-quantitative tumor-stroma ratio determined
by histopathological examination since lower tumor contents obscures the
copy number gain occurred in the tumor cells. Finally, HER2 amplification
status recognized by high coverage depth of the HER2 exon was fully
concordant with those of 4 FISH-positive and 9 FISH-negative cases. The
adjusted coverage depth of the HER2 exon exhibited correlation with the
estimated copy number gain determined by conventional HER2
FISH.Conclusions: Our preliminary results suggested that the NGS-based
multiplex analysis is safe and plausible for the screening of gene
amplification as well as single nucleotide variants and indels of genomic
DNA extracted from FFPE biopsy samples of GC.

