Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive and integrative genomic characterization of diffuse
lower grade gliomas


BackgroundDiffuse lower grade gliomas (LGGs) are infiltrative neoplasms
of the central nervous system that include astrocytoma, oligodendroglioma
and oligo-astrocytoma histologies of grades II and III. We present a
comprehensive analysis of 293 LGGs using multiple advanced genomic,
transcriptomic and proteomic platforms from The Cancer Genome Atlas to
provide a deeper understanding of the molecular features of this group of
neoplasms, to classify them in a clinically-relevant manner, and to
provide a public resource that identifies potential targets for emerging
therapies.ResultsClustering of gene expression, miRNA expression, protein
expression, DNA methylation and DNA copy number profiles identified
respectively four, four, four, five and three clusters. When combined,
the clustering results overwhelmingly pointed towards a natural grouping
of LGG into three superclusters, which can be explained as follows: 1.
IDH1/IDH2 wildtype 2. IDH1/IDH2 mutant and chromosome arms 1p/19q intact
3. IDH1/IDH2 mutant and co-deletion of chromosome arms 1p/19q. The three
groups all included samples from grade II and III astro-, oligo- and
oligo-astrocytoma histologies. Based on this result we evaluated genomic
alterations according to these three LGG categories.The IDH wildtype
subtype was characterized by a GBM like phenotype, included focal gains
of EGFR, CDK4 and MDM4, mutations in NF1, EGFR and PTEN, and a GBM like
poor median outcome of 18 months. Approximately 55% of these cases were
grade III (anaplastic) astrocytomas, while the remainder were from a
mixed grade and histology. The IDH mutant/1p-19q intact group showed
focal amplification of PDGFRA, MYC and CCND2, 100 % mutated TP53 and 80%
with mutations in ATRX. This group was not dominated by a single grade or
histology, but represented all types. Finally, the IDH mutant and 1p/19q
co-deleted subtype harbored frequent mutations in CIC, FUBP1, NOTCH1,
TERT, relatively few copy number alterations and was populated for 84% by
oligodendrogliomas. The two IDH mutant groups associated with a favorable
median survival of 90 months.DiscussionBased on integrated analysis of
genome, transcriptome, methylome and proteome we showed that LGG
naturally separates into three distinct groups that traversed grades and
histologies. Importantly, we identified a subtype with an LGG-like
histology but a molecular GBM profile, suggesting that the GBM standard
of care, concomitant radiotherapy and temozolomide, may be warranted for
these patients. We propose that classification of LGG should be revised
based on IDH1/IDH2 mutation and 1p/19q deletion status.

