Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Smad4 within the intestinal tract results in altered
intestinal homeostasis and tumor development


Background: Inactivation of the TGF- signaling occurs in 50-75% of all
colorectal cancer cases. Down-regulation of Smad4, the central mediator
of TGF- signaling, occurs in >50% of stage III patients. How Smad4
contributes to normal intestinal homeostasis and functions as a tumor
suppressor are incompletely understood. We reported that -catenin mRNA
expression is inhibited by BMP-mediated Smad4 signaling, and loss of
Smad4 signaling results in biologically significant amplification of the
Wnt/-catenin signal. Here, we report on the consequences of Smad4 loss
for intestinal homeostasis.Methods: We generated mice genetically
engineered to undergo inducible, tissue-specific deletion of Smad4 within
intestinal epithelial cells. K19-CreERT x Smad4 flx/flx and Lrig1-CreERT
x Smad4 flx/flx mice were treated with vehicle or tamoxifen to induce
recombination at the Smad4 locus in the intestinal stem cell compartment.
Intestines from sacrificed mice were cleansed for enteroid isolation,
Ussing chamber studies, RNA-seq analysis and preservation by formalin
fixation and paraffin embedding (FFPE). We validated Smad4 status via
immunohistochemistry and stained FFPE sections for different cell
populations within the crypt. To evaluate inflammatory cytokines, we
performed Luminex cytokine array analysis on colonic mucosa from control
and tamoxifen treated animals. To determine the role for Smad4 in
intestinal response to injury, we also treated control and tamoxifen
treated animals with dextran sodium sulfate (DSS). We utilized RNA-Seq
analysis to determine an intestinal Smad4 loss gene signature.Results:
Smad4 deficient crypts exhibited an expansion of the Ki67 positive cells
in the proliferative zone and fewer Carbonic anhydrase II staining cells
suggesting fewer mature enterocytes. We found that loss of Smad4 in the
intestinal crypt is accompanied by an accumulation of pericryptal CD3+
lymphocytes and F4/80+ macrophages and is associated with increased
intestinal permeability as measured by low molecular weight FITC Dextran
using the Ussing chamber. Cytokine analysis revealed Macrophage
Inflammatory Protein 3a (MIP3a) to be up-regulated in Smad4 knockout
mice. Guided by our RNA-Seq analysis, we observe increased levels of pErk
in Smad4 deplete tissue. We also observed that mice with intestinal
epithelial Smad4 depletion developed advanced mucinous adenocarcinoma
after recovery from an inflammatory stimulus induced by DSS.Conclusions:
These results suggest that Smad4 loss disrupts intestinal homeostasis by
enabling persistently high levels of Erk signaling to interfere with cell
maturation, thereby contributing to increased inflammation. We postulate
that the increased inflammation observed in Smad4 knockout mice leads to
a tumorigenic environment.

