Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-7 increases the invasive behavior of ovarian cancer cells
and promotes tumor escape


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the
Western world, the second most common gynecological cancer and the
leading cause of death from gynecological malignancies. Epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC) accounts for the majority of ovarian cancers. Here,
we have investigated the role of galectin-7 in EOC. Galectin-7 is an
epithelial cell marker which has been shown to play an important role in
the progression of many types of cancer, including breast cancer and
colon cancer. Galectins play an important role in several physiological
processes, including cell migration, programmed cell death and regulation
of the immune response. They are also involved in a number of
pathological conditions, including cancer. In fact, galectins have been
shown to create an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment by killing
helper and effector T cells. They can also bind to the surface of tumor
cells to form cell surface lattice that stabilizes the expression of key
growth factor receptors, thereby increasing cell growth, motility, and
production of matrix metalloproteinases. Using tissue microarrays, we
found that gal-7 expression increases in malignant tumors compared to
normal tissues and benign tumors. Detection of galectin-7 was also more
frequent in tissue samples with metastasis as compared to non-metastatic
primary tumor samples. Western blot analysis showed that OVCAR-3 EOC
cells secrete gal-7, while no expression was detected in COV-434, A2780
and SK-OV-3 cell lines. Treatment of EOC cells with recombinant gal-7
increased their invasive behavior through matrigel and their ability to
express MMP-9, an extracellular protease which confers an invasive
phenotype to cancer cells. Treatment of freshly isolated human PBMCs with
gal-7 also showed gal-7 increased apoptosis of monocytes, T CD4+ and T
CD8+ cells. Overall, these data provide impetus for further studies to
determine the potential of gal-7 as a therapeutic target for the
treatment of EOC.

