Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human antibodies induced by vaccination with a carbohydrate
mimetic-peptide vaccine show functional anti-tumor activity on human
lung-cancer cells


Introduction: Lung cancer is the most common cancer worldwide, and the
leading cancer killer in both men and women in the United States. The
5-year survival rate for lung cancer ranges from Introduction: Lung
cancer is the most common cancer worldwide, and the leading cancer killer
in both men and women in the United States. The 5-year survival rate for
lung cancer ranges from <2% to about 70% depending on stage. Current
treatment options including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy have
limited efficacy, as over half of people with lung cancer die within a
year of initial diagnosis. Tumor vaccines hold the potential to deliver
durable, specific and systemic anti-tumor responses in lung-cancer
patients diagnosed with advanced disease. Appearance of tumor-associated
carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) is the hallmark of cancer initiation and
metastasis in many cancer types, including lung cancer. We have developed
active vaccination strategies that target TACAs using peptide mimetics,
and successfully vaccinated stage IV breast-cancer patients. The purpose
of the current study is to evaluate functionality of vaccine-induced
antibodies against lung-cancer cells.Procedure: Patients with stage IV
breast cancer underwent vaccination with the carbohydrate mimicking
peptide P10s synthesized with the Pan T-cell peptide PADRE (P10s-PADRE).
Doses of P10s-PADRE admixed with MONTANIDE ISA 51 VG were administered to
subjects subcutaneously in rotating injection sites in the abdomen on
weeks 1, 2, 3, 7 and 9. Pre-immune (week 1) and post-immune sera (weeks 4
and 7) were tested for functional activity against a non-Small Cell
lung-cancer cell line (NCI-H522) and a Small Cell lung-cancer cell line
(NCI-H69). Cell-surface carbohydrates were profiled and serum binding to
cells was assayed by flow cytometry. Cytotoxicity, migration and invasion
assays were performed to assess functional anti-lung cancer-cell activity
of the sera.Results: Both cell lines express relevant TACAs that can be
targeted with P10s-PADRE immunization. Vaccinated serum reacted with
tumor cells, induced toxicity, and prevented tumor-cell migration and
invasion in vitro.Conclusion: Our results show that P10s-PADRE
vaccination of breast-cancer patients induces functional immune activity
against lung-cancer cells. Accordingly, we propose to extend our
successful vaccination strategy to lung-cancer patients with advanced
stage III/IV disease. This group of patients has poor survival, and
induction of functional antibodies can significantly increase disease
control and survival rate.

