Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting TGF- regulated E3 ligases: a novel therapeutic approach
for primary liver cancer


Background: Hepatocellular cancer (HCC) is the 3rd leading cause of
cancer death in the world, that is difficult to treat due to late
diagnosis and few viable targeted therapeutics. A large number of studies
have demonstrated that the TGF- pathway plays a fundamental role in the
biology of the GI tract, and as such, several components of the pathway
are commonly targeted in various GI cancers. TGF- signaling is regulated
by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, in which E3 ubiquitin ligases
recognize and target proteins for degradation by the proteasome. Numerous
E3 ubiquitin ligases have been identified as negative regulators of
different components of the TGF- pathway. More recently, Praja and Keap1
have been identified as E3 ligases that ubiquitinates 2-spectrin (2SP) in
a TGF--dependent manner. Accordingly, Praja E3 ligase activity regulates
TGF- signaling by controlling 2SP abundance through ubiquitin-mediated
degradation.Hypothesis: Specific E3 ligases, which disrupt TGF-/2SP/Smad3
tumor suppressor pathway lead to uncontrolled activation of chromatin and
tumor formation. Therefore, small molecule inhibitors that specifically
target these E3 ligases could present a novel therapeutic approach for
liver cancer.Materials & Methods: Broad genome datasets including 110
cases of HCC patients were retrieved from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
and analyzed. 23 HCC and normal liver tissue specimens were immunostained
with anti-Praja1 antibody. Whole mount in situ hybridization
histochemistry (ISHH) assay was used to determine knock down Praja1in
zebrafish embryos. A small chemical compound library was screened for E3
ligase inhibitors targeting Praja1.Results: (1) Broad genome analysis
reveals that E3 ubiquitin ligases regulating the TGF- pathway are altered
in GI cancers mainly by increase in mRNA and that they negatively
correlate with patient survival. (2) Praja1 expression is dramatically
raised in human HCCs with loss of TGF- signaling. (3) Praja1 inhibits
TGF-/Smad3 tumor suppressor function and increases c-Myc activities. (4)
Inhibition of Praja1 leads to apoptosis and suppresses its oncogenic
activities. (5) Small chemical inhibitors suppress Praja1 activities and
restores TGF- tumor suppressor function in HCC cells. (6) Small chemical
inhibitors induce apoptosis and inhibit HCC cell growth and
tumorigenesis.Conclusions: E3 ubiquitin ligases that modulate the TGF-
pathway are frequently increased in HCC. Praja1 presents a therapeutic
target- it disrupts the TGF- tumor suppressor pathway, and its
overexpression promotes cancer cell survival and proliferation. Small
molecule inhibitors such as triterpenoids that specifically target Praja1
could be very useful in HCC therapy, through targeting c-Myc, restoring
TGF- tumor suppressor function. This study may lead to new therapeutics
targeting this lethal cancer and potentially a Phase I clinical trial in
HCC.

