Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Leukosome: A biomimetic liposome for the targeting of inflamed
tumor vasculature


The development of targeted cancer treatments with increased therapeutic
efficacy is still a major challenge in drug delivery. To date, nanoscale
platforms are able to extend their circulation time and accumulate in the
tumor through surface functionalization with polyethylene glycol and with
antibodies, peptides or ligands directed against tumor biomarkers,
respectively. Despite these modifications, the mononuclear phagocytic
system efficiently clears these particles from circulation while
opsonization proteins prevent the proper recognition between targeting
ligands and target biomarkers. Additionally, most cancers are
characterized by strong inflammation and increased affinity for
circulating leukocytes. The surface of the leukocyte is enriched with
transmembrane proteins that determine self-tolerance, adhesion, and
negotiation of the inflamed vascular barrier. As result, leukocytes can
efficiently recognize and infiltrate the tumor tissues.The Leukosome is a
liposomal formulation based on leukocyte membranes able to provide
biocompatibility, self-tolerance and targeting. The Leukosome was
enriched with up to 82 different leukocyte membrane proteins in their
intact native, active configuration with the appropriate
post-translational modification and orientation. Among them, CD45 favored
extended circulation time and avoided unspecific clearance, while
Leukocyte Associated Function-1 facilitated the targeting to and
permeability of the tumor inflamed vasculature.The Leukosome retained
loading capabilities similar to current liposomal formulations but
sustained the release of the chemotherapeutic drug for twice as long. The
physical (size, surface charge and polydispersity index), chemical
(surface composition and modification, loading and release kinetics),
biochemical (protein content and stability), and biological (inhibition
of particle clearance, tumor targeting, effect on the vascular barrier
function) properties of the Leukosomes confirmed our ability to mimic the
biological features and functions of leukocytes. Compared to unmodified
liposomes, Leukosomes showed 5-fold increase in circulation time, 50-fold
reduction of liver accumulation and 70-fold accumulation of the payload
in breast, pancreatic and melanoma models in mouse. We believe this
platform will provide a superior tool for the targeting and
personalization of therapeutic intervention in cancer.

