Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional RANK expression is observed in disaggregated primary
human lung tumors


The receptor activator of nuclear factor- (RANK) and its ligand RANKL
play a key role in the regulation of bone remodeling. RANK pathway
activation has also been implicated in various aspects of lung tumor
biology. In mouse models of NSCLC bone metastasis, RANKL inhibition led
to decreased skeletal tumor progression and increased survival. By IHC,
RANK expression has been reported to occur in approximately 60-70% of
NSCLC cases profiled. Expression and function have been observed using
human lung cancer cell line models. However, there is a lack of
understanding with respect to the role RANK signaling plays in primary
human lung tumor cells. To better understand RANK biology in lung cancer
a novel platform was employed to measure RANK expression and pathway
response to RANKL stimulation in freshly resected human lung tumors.RANK
expression and function were investigated in viable, non-apoptotic
disaggregated primary NSCLC samples by flow cytometry using previously
described methodology. Cell surface RANK expression was evaluated using a
monoclonal antibody (N2B10, Amgen). Evidence of receptor function was
investigated by analysis of relevant intracellular signaling pathways
using phospho-specific antibodies following ex vivo RANKL stimulation
(2.5 pM - 5 g/mL, 30 minutes). A cocktail of EGF, HGF and IGF1 was also
employed as a positive control for functional pathway activation.
Molecular profiling of somatic mutations is ongoing to further elucidate
the molecular characteristics of tumors that have functional RANK
signaling. Table 1 summarizes RANK expression and RANKL response
profiles.This study demonstrates that RANK is expressed and functional in
a subset of primary human lung tumors. Data presented here confirms RANK
expression on tumor cells of NSCLC and suggests that RANK pathway
utilization is restricted to the sub-set of tumors that express
detectable RANK.Table 1


