Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High affinity interaction of K-Ras4B hypervariable region with Ras
active site


K-Ras4B is a ubiquitous p21 GTPase that controls cell survival and
proliferation. Oncogenic mutations in K-Ras4B impair GTP hydrolysis and
lead to constitutive activation of signaling. Ras proteins consist of
highly homologous catalytic domains (residues 1-166) and C-terminal
stretches of 18-20 amino acids called hypervariable regions (HVR) that
differ significantly for the four Ras isoforms, H-Ras, N-Ras, K-Ras4A and
K-Ras4B. The roles of these structural differences are poorly understood.
Despite the central role of K-Ras4B in oncogenesis and widespread efforts
to develop Ras-directed anti-cancer therapeutics, no selective, specific
inhibitor of K-Ras4B is available for clinical use. This is primarily
because its catalytic domain lacks pockets for high affinity small
molecule binders. Unexpectedly, Microscale Thermophoresis studies have
shown that analogs of HVR, thought to minimally impact the catalytic
domain, directly interact with GDP-bound, but not GTP-bound recombinant
K-Ras4B (1-166). The KD of HVR mimetics interaction with truncated
GDP-loaded K-Ras4B is in the nanomolar range, while replacement of GDP
with -S-GTP lowered the affinity almost two orders of magnitude. HVR
analogs significantly slowed down GDP to GTP exchange. NMR studies of
full-length K-Ras4B have revealed that HVR forms extensive interactions
with the active site of GDP, but not GTP-bound K-Ras4B. GTP binding
induces translocation of HVR and interaction of its side chains with
cellular membrane. Molecular dynamics simulations confirmed the tight
interaction of HVR with the catalytic domain in the GDP-bound state, but
not GTP-bound K-Ras4B, suggesting that in the GDP-bound state, an HVR
domain could adopt a -strand conformation, extending the -sheet in the
active site of the catalytic domain. Interaction surface identified by
NMR and computational studies involves primarily residues in the switch I
and the effector binding regions. In addition, large structural
differences have been observed between catalytic domains of the
full-length GDP- and GTP-bound states, in contrast to the truncated
protein, for which crystal structures of the GDP- and GTP-bound catalytic
domains are almost identical. The data indicate that contrary to
previously suggested models of K-Ras4B signaling, HVR plays essential
roles not only in membrane anchoring, but also in regulation of K-Ras4B
signaling. High affinity binding of short peptide analogs of HVR to
K-ras4B active site suggests that targeting this surface with inhibitory
synthetic molecules is feasible. Structure-based optimization of
compounds that bind at the interface between the HVR and the catalytic
domain and thus interfere with GDP to GTP exchange is a promising
approach for the development of potent inhibitors for so far
non-druggable Ras oncoproteins.

