Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor is expressed as a constitutively
active receptor tyrosine kinase in chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells
and exists in an active complex with Axl: Dual targeting in CLL


B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is an incurable disease and
represents a significant health problem in the western world. We and
others have reported that primary CLL B cells spontaneously produce
increased levels of proangiogenic basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)
in vitro and that CLL plasma contained elevated levels of bFGF. However,
the precise role of bFGF in CLL pathobiology is not clearly understood.
In this study we investigated functional implication of the FGF/FGFR
signaling axis in CLL B cell biology.We have detected expression of FGFR1
and FGFR3 with comparatively higher levels of the latter receptor, but
not FGFR2/FGFR4, in primary CLL B cells. Interestingly, constitutively
phosphorylated FGFR and its downstream signaling adaptor protein
fibroblast receptor substrate 2- were also detected in CLL B cells.
However, in vitro stimulation of FGFR with recombinant bFGF was unable to
increase endogenous phosphorylation levels of FGFR in CLL B cells from
most CLL patients tested, suggesting existence of an autocrine FGF/FGFR
signaling loop in the leukemic B cells. We know that Axl a known
predominant RTK in CLL B cells seems to act as a docking site for
multiple cellular kinases/lipase. Therefore, in an effort to determine
whether Axl is functionally associated with FGFR in CLL B cells, we first
examined if these two RTKs exist in the same molecular complex. Indeed we
found that Axl forms a complex with FGFR3 in CLL B cells and is therefore
likely to regulate FGFR signaling. Our hypothesis in this regard was
further supported when we inhibited Axl phosphorylation in CLL B cells
using a high-affinity Axl inhibitor (TP-0903; Tolero). Axl inhibition
resulted in significant reduction of FGFR phosphorylation in CLL B cells.
Finally, inhibition of FGFR signaling using a high-affinity FGFR
inhibitor induced significant levels of apoptosis in CLL B cells (n=20)
with a mean LD50 dose of 2.5 M. Of interest, LD50 dose for CLL B cell
apoptosis was much lower for the Axl inhibitor (mean LD50=140nM; n=20)
compared to the FGFR inhibitor, which we believe occurs partly because
TP-0903 seems to exert its inhibitory effect on P-FGFR likely via P-Axl
inhibition in CLL B cells.In conclusion, we have detected expression of
constitutively active FGFR in primary CLL B cells. Interestingly, our
preliminary findings suggest that Axl forms an active RTK complex with
FGFR and thus likely regulates FGFR signaling in these leukemic B cells.
This is evidenced by the finding that Axl inhibition significantly
reduced FGFR phosphorylation accompanied by massive induction of CLL B
cell apoptosis, suggesting that targeting dual RTK signaling pathways
(Axl and FGFR) in CLL B cells warrants further investigation as a way to
develop a more effective and efficient therapeutic intervention for CLL
patients.

