Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressive microRNA-218 inhibits cancer cell migration and
invasion via targeting LASP1 in prostate cancer


BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer
and the second leading cause of cancer death among men in developed
countries. Disease progression and the development of hormone refractory
disease remain major cause of cancer-related death.Understanding the
molecular mechanisms of PCa progression and metastatic pathways using
currently available genomic approaches would help to improve therapies
for and prevention of the disease. Our recent study of microRNA (miRNA)
expression signature of PCa has revealed that microRNA-218 (miR-218) was
significantly downregulated in cancer tissues, suggesting that miR-218
may be a putative tumor-suppressive miRNA in PCa. The aim of this study
was to investigate the functional significance of miR-218 in PCa and to
identify novel miR-218-regulated cancer pathways and target genes
involved in PCa oncogenesis and metastasis.METHODS: The expression levels
of miR-218 were validated using real-time RT-PCR using PCa clinical
specimens and cell lines (PC3 and DU145). Cell proliferation, migration
and invasion assays were performed to investigate the functional
significance of miR-218 and its target gene, LIM and SH3 protein 1
(LASP1) in PCa cell lines.Cells were transfected with mature miR-218 or
si-LASP1 by reverse transfection methods. Genome-wide gene expression
data and in silico analysis were used to identify the molecular pathways
and putative targets regulated by miR-218.The luciferase reporter assay
was applied to identify the actual binding site of miR-218 in target
gene. The expression of LASP1 was investigated by
immunohistochemistry.RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-218 were
significantly downregulated in PCa tissues and PCa cell lines.
Restoration of miR-218 in PCa cell lines revealed that miR-218
significantly inhibited cancer cell migration and invasion.Gene
expression studies and luciferase reporter assays showed that LASP1 was
directly regulated by miR-218. Silencing LASP1 resulted in significant
inhibition of cell migration and invasion in PCa cells.The expression of
LASP1 was upregulated in cancer tissues as demonstrated
byimmunohistochemical staining.CONCLUSIONS: The miR-218 was frequently
reduced in PCa clinical specimens and appeared to function as a tumor
suppressor through regulation of oncogenic LASP1. The identification of
novel molecularpathways and targets regulated by the tumor suppressive
miRNAs may lead to a better understanding of PCa progression and
metastasis, and the development of new therapeutic strategies to treat
this disease.

