Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The level of mitochondrial apoptotic priming determines cell fate
upon p53 restoration


Using genetically engineered mouse models of cancer, we and others have
recently shown that a variety of established tumors require sustained
inactivation of the p53 pathway. Reactivation of p53 in established
tumors typically results in one of two cell fate decisions: cell cycle
arrest or cell death via apoptosis. Since p53 is a transcription factor,
one hypothesis that may explain these tumor-specific outcomes is that p53
transcriptionally activates a particular set of genes that is specific to
each tumor type, in addition to genes involved in a core p53 pathway.
Another possibility is that the level of mitochondrial apoptotic priming
in a cell might dictate whether p53 activation promotes cell death or
cell cycle arrest. To test this, we derived murine p53-restorable cell
lines from three different tumor types: lung adenocarcinoma, sarcoma and
lymphoma. Upon restoration of the endogenousTrp53 gene, these cell lines
undergo cell cycle arrest (lung and sarcoma) or apoptosis (lymphoma). We
hypothesized that this tumor-specific response to p53 restoration could
be explained by the level of mitochondrial priming on each specific tumor
type, where lymphoma cell lines would be highly primed relative to the
lung and sarcoma cell lines. Indeed mitochondrial BH3 profiling
demonstrated that lymphoma cell lines were highly primed and this
correlated with their apoptotic response to p53 restoration. On the other
hand, lung and sarcoma cell lines were poorly primed and this was
consistent with their cell cycle arrest phenotype upon p53 restoration.
Modulating the expression levels of Bcl2 family members to modulate
mitochondrial apoptotic priming was sufficient to change the fate of
these cells. Lymphoma cell lines were forced to undergo cell cycle arrest
upon p53 restoration by overexpression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family
members Bcl-2 or Bcl-XL. In contrast, lung and sarcoma cell lines were
forced to undergo cell death upon p53 restoration when priming was
increased by overexpression of the pro-apoptotic Bcl2 family members Bim
or Bad. When transplanted subcutaneously, sarcoma cell lines expressing
Bad were specifically sensitized to undergo cell death upon p53
restoration whereas cell lines expressing empty vector underwent cell
cycle arrest. We are currently carrying out in vivo experiments with
lymphoma cell lines and lung cell lines, as well as with autochthonous
tumor models and human cell lines to further test our main hypothesis.
These findings may offer key insights into the potential use of drugs
that restore p53 function.

