Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and in-depth characterization of a genetically
engineered mouse model of metastatic colorectal cancer


Background:Most novel antitumor compounds fail in the clinic despite
promising efficacy in preclinical mouse experiments. This indicates a
lack of good mouse models and an apparent discrepancy in the treatability
of murine and human tumors. Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM)
may overcome these limitations as they show clinically realistic
responses to most standard therapies. A recently published GEMM of
colorectal cancer showed reproducible induction of colorectal adenoma and
carcinoma (CRC) formation, but developed distant metastasis in only a
small fraction of mice. As in CRC it is the distant metastasis rather
than the primary tumor which determines the outcome, we aimed to develop
a model with higher incidence of hepatic metastases from genetically
induced CRC.Materials/Methods:We crossed mice with conditional (floxed)
alleles of Apc loss, Kras G12D, Tp53 loss or Tp53 R172H and induced
tumorigenesis by segmental infection of the colon with cre adenovirus.
Additionally, a GFP reporter allele was introduced, allowing non-invasive
imaging of the tumors and their metastases. Tumor formation was monitored
via colonoscopy. Serum tumor marker levels were quantified and the
survival of the animals was monitored. Histology was performed at
predefined time points. Selected tumors were analysed by next-generation
exome sequencing.Results:Tumor formation was observed in >90% of infected
animals. Biallelic loss of Apc resulted in adenoma formation, which over
time developed into invasive carcinoma. Loss of Apc in combination with
an activing Kras mutation resulted in primary carcinoma formation.
Additional biallelic loss of Tp53 resulted in fast-growing, but
non-metastatic CRC formation. Mice with an R172H point mutation in Tp53
developed distant metastases in liver and lungs at 30%, which corresponds
well to clinical data of CRC patients. Survival of mice with loss or
mutation of Tp53 was significantly shorter compared to mice with
wild-type Tp53. Histologic analyses showed classical adenocarcinomas of
the colon closely mimicking human tumors. Monitoring of serum tumor
markers and fluorescence imaging allow non-invasive monitoring of tumor
growth and overall tumor burden. Exome sequencing of the tumors revealed
a genetic progression of the disease with accumulation of new mutations
over time.Conclusion:We have established and characterized a clinically
highly relevant novel mouse model of colorectal cancer, allowing both
basic science as well as therapeutic studies with clinically relevant
end-points such as survival and distant metastasis.

