Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiating pancreatic cystic neoplasms by global protease
specificity


Decision-making for patients with pancreatic cystic lesions represents
the greatest area of clinical uncertainty in the management of pancreatic
disease today. Short of pancreas removal, there is no definitive
technology that differentiates benign, pre- malignant, and malignant
pancreatic cystic neoplasms. As a result, some patients die from
undiagnosed cancers, while others undergo unnecessary pancreatic
resections with considerable morbidity. The cyst fluid from these
neoplasms is a rich resource for the discovery of new biomarkers because
it is in direct contact with the involved cells, and it is sampled
routinely as a part of clinical care. Amylase activity and CEA
concentration are typically measured, but they lack prognostic
value.Protein levels of proteases and their inhibitors differ between
benign and malignant cystic neoplasms, however, effects on enzymatic
activity and specificity profiles are unknown. We sought to identify and
characterize proteolytic signatures specific to different stages of
pancreatic carcinogenesis.We used a new protease substrate profiling
technology recently developed in our lab, Multiplex Substrate-Profiling
by Mass Spectrometry (MSP-MS), that can detect and classify the
specificity of endo- and exopeptidases in a complex sample. This assay
consists of a physiochemically diverse library of 228 tetradecapeptides
designed by incorporating all combinations of neighbor and near-neighbor
amino acid pairs to provide maximum specificity information. We have
previously used this technology to determine the proteolytic signatures
of mouse pancreatic cancer cell secretions and human neutrophil
extracellular traps. MSP-MS has the unique ability to monitor all peptide
bonds cleaved from this library of peptides, thereby simultaneously
detecting aminopeptidase, carboxypeptidase and endopeptidase
activity.This assay was applied to pancreatic cyst fluid derived from 4
low risk and 4 high risk lesions as determined by current clinical
guidelines. The cleavage data from the respective categories was combined
and compared. The proteases in the samples generated 773 cleavage sites
in the low risk category and only 285 in the high risk category.
Interestingly, only 220 of the sites were shared between groups. The
signature from the low risk group had a trypsin-like specificity with
arginine and lysine preferred at the P1 position, whereas the high risk
group had minimal trypsin-like specificity and predominantly showed
amino- and carboxypeptidase activity.These data suggest that protease
profiling of pancreatic cyst fluid may facilitate risk stratification
among pancreatic cystic lesions and thereby guide clinical
decision-making. MSP-MS offers a unique technology to both identify
active proteases in clinical samples of interest and measure total and
specific proteolytic activity despite the presence of endogenous
inhibitors.

