Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCK2R marks gastric antral stem cell and mediates antral
carcinogenesis


Gastrin is a hormone that binds to the CCK2 receptor and promotes
proximal gastric cancer, but inhibits distal gastric cancer development.
However, the precise roles of the CCK2 receptor, and its alternative
ligand, progastrin, in gastric carcinogenesis have not been clarified. In
this study, we found that progastrin accelerated antral proliferation and
carcinogenesis through CCK2R+ antral stem cell expansion, using mouse
gastric cancer models and transgenic mice lines including human
progastrin-overexpressing (hGAS) mice, CCK2R knockout mice,
Lgr5-CreERT-IRES-GFP knockin mice, and newly generated CCK2R-BAC-CreERT
mice. Progastrin promoted gastric antral cancer development induced by
MNU and/or H. felis. During carcinogenesis, progastrin increased the
expression of Lgr5 and gland fission in response to the chemical
carcinogen MNU. Genetic ablation of CCK2R diminished these
progastrin-mediated effects. In vitro 3D culture experiments revealed
that progastrin, but not amidated gastrin, significantly increased
gastric organoid formation and growth in Noggin-free condition, effects
that were ablated by a CCK2R inhibitor YF-476 or CCK2R gene deletion. In
the antrum, CCK2R was expressed in an Lgr5low cell population that
displayed stemness, which could be enhanced by progastrin. In the
presence of progastrin, Lgr5lowCCK2R+ cells interconverted to Lgr5hi
cells. Finally, we generated a new BAC-transgenic CCK2R-CreERT murine
line, and lineage tracing experiments showed that CCK2R+ cells, which
reside slightly above the base of the antrum, contained long-lived stem
cells in vivo and in vitro. Chemical inhibition of CCK2R attenuated
progastrin-dependent cancer development in mice. In conclusion, CCK2R
labels Lgr5low antral stem cells that can be activated and expanded by
progastrin. These findings may help the understanding of the underlying
mechanism in gastric stem cell regulation by a CCK2R signal.

