Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WISP3/CCN6 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor
initiating cell properties in triple negative breast cancer cells through
Slug


Background: Although triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) constitute
10%-20% of all breast cancers, they are aggressive tumors with higher
recurrence and poorer prognosis than other breast cancer subtypes. TNBCs
frequently exhibit features of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and are enriched in breast tumor initiating cells (BTICs). Recent studies
have demonstrated that aberrant activation of the EMT program induces
stem cell features in breast cells, suggesting that blocking the
cross-talk between EMT and stemness may be an effective treatment for
TNBCs. WISP3/CCN6, a secreted matrix associated protein, is expressed in
normal breast tissues and is decreased in aggressive breast cancer
samples. We have shown that CCN6 knockdown in nontumorigenic breast cells
triggers EMT and invasion. We hypothesize that CCN6 regulates the
cross-talk between EMT and BTICs pathways in TNBCs.Methods: We
overexpressed CCN6 in the TNBC cell lines, MDA-MB-231, SUM-159 and
MDA-MB-436, which are aggressive and exhibit a mesenchymal-like phenotype
and low endogenous CCN6 expression. We tested the effect of CCN6
overexpression in these cell lines using motility and invasion assays in
vitro. Stem cell features were investigated by mammosphere assays, and
the ALDEFLUOR assay by flow cytometry. We developed mammary xenografts in
nude mice using serial dilutions to investigate the role of CCN6 in tumor
initiation and metastasis.Results: Overexpression of CCN6 inhibits cell
motility and invasion, and leads to phenotypic changes of
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), with downregulation of the
mesenchymal cell marker vimentin, increased epithelial marker
cytokeratin, and decreased protein levels of the EMT transcription factor
Slug. CCN6 overexpression significantly decreased the ALDEFLUOR-positive
population and mammosphere formation of TNBC cell lines. In vivo, CCN6
overexpression delayed tumor initiation and reduced metastasis in human
breast cancer xenografts. Slug reconstitution was sufficient to rescue
the effects of CCN6 on MET and stem cell properties of TNBCs.Conclusions:
These data demonstrate that CCN6 regulates EMT and tumor initiating cell
features in TNBC at least in part through Slug. Further, our study
suggests that CCN6 may be a novel regulator of the EMT-stem cell cross
talk in TNBC, with possible clinical application.

