Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A chromatin modifier from the 8p11 amplicon in luminal breast
cancer


The chromosome 8p11-p12 amplicon is present in 12-15% of breast cancers,
resulting in an increase in both copy number and expression of several
chromatin modifiers in these tumors, including KAT6A, WHSC1L1, and ASH2L.
Previous analyses in SUM52 breast cancer cells showed amplification and
over-expression of KAT6A, and subsequent RNAi screening identified KAT6A
as a potential driving oncogene. Also known as MYST3, KAT6A is a histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) with intrinsic HAT activity towards itself and
lysine residues on histone 2B, histone 3, and histone 4. Previously
identified as a fusion partner with CREB binding protein (CREBBP) in
acute myeloid leukemia, KAT6A is amplified in 8.7% of invasive breast
cancers according to the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Knockdown of KAT6A
with several shRNAs in SUM52 cells, a luminal breast cancer cell line
harboring the 8p11 amplicon, resulted in reduced growth rate compared to
non-silencing controls and profound loss of clonogenic capacity both in
mono-layer and in soft agar. The normal cell line MCF10A, however, did
not exhibit slower growth with knockdown of KAT6A, nor did other breast
cancer cell lines without KAT6A amplfied. Interestingly, SUM52 cells with
KAT6A knockdown formed fewer mammospheres in culture compared to
non-silencing controls, suggesting a possible role for KAT6A in breast
cancer stem cell activity and self-renewal. Further analysis of cell
surface markers CD24 and CD44 in KAT6A knockdown cells revealed an
increase in cells double positive for CD24 and CD44 expression, a
characteristic of increased cell differentiation. Previous work from our
laboratory identified FGFR2 as a driving oncogene in SUM52 cells. While
FGFR inhibition can completely arrest the growth of these cells, it is
completely reversible. Thus, exposure of SUM52 cells to FGFR inhibitors
does not significantly affect the colony forming ability of the cells. By
contrast, the colony forming efficiency of SUM52 KAT6A knockdown cells in
the presence of the FGFR inhibitor PD170374 was significantly reduced
compared to cells with KAT6A knockdown only. These data suggest that
KAT6A may be a potential novel oncogene in breast cancers bearing the
8p11 amplicon and that it interacts with FGFR2 to regulate expression of
transformed phenotypes. While there are other putative oncogenes in the
amplicon, the identification of KAT6A as a driving oncogene suggests that
chromatin-modifying enzymes are a key class of oncogenes in these
cancers, and play an important role in the selection of this amplicon in
luminal B breast cancers.

