Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of cytotoxicity by soluble chromium (VI) compounds in
cultured C3H/10T1/2 Cl 8 mouse embryo cells effects of ascorbate and
dehydroascorbate


Hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)]-containing compounds are human carcinogens.
They cause cancers in the respiratory system when inhaled, and
stomach/other internal cancers when ingested. Soluble and insoluble
hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] compounds induced base substitution,
deletion, addition, and frameshift mutations. Cr(VI) compounds also
induce DNA-DNA cross links and DNA-protein cross-links in mammalian
cells. We examined the ability of the soluble chromium compounds, sodium
chromate (Na2CrO4), calcium chromate (CaCrO4) and potassium chromate
(K2CrO4) to induce cytotoxicity and morphological transformation in
C3H/10T Cl 8 (10T1/2) mouse embryo cells. We tested the hypothesis that
the intracellular reductants, ascorbate and dehydroascorbate, can reduce
Cr(VI) to Cr(V), Cr(IV), and Cr(III) intracellularly, making it a strong
cytotoxin in mammalian cells. Ascorbate is present in serum at
concentrations in the mM range under physiological conditions in humans,
but is only present in the M range in mouse embryo cells grown in BME
cell culture medium plus 10% fetal calf serum. We hypothesized the
relatively weak responses for induction of morphological transformation
of mammalian cells by Cr(VI) compounds in culture (dose-dependent but
weak induction of foci by lead chromate, and no induction of foci by
calcium chromate, potassium chromate, and sodium chromate) is due to the
small amounts of ascorbate in cultures of mammalian cells that are
insufficient to reduce Cr(VI) to Cr(V), Cr(IV), and Cr(III). Therefore,
we investigated the cytotoxic effects of ascorbate on 10T mouse embryo
cells, and the effects of the highest non-cytotoxic concentrations of
ascorbate on Cr(VI)-induced cytotoxicity in 10T cells, using reduction in
plating efficiency as our cytotoxicity assay. Cell survival data showed
that ascorbate itself exerted significant cytotoxic effects at
concentrations of 0.00625 mM and higher on 10T mouse embryo cells.
Furthermore, when 10T cells were treated with both Cr(VI) and ascorbate,
ascorbate played dual roles. It served as a pro-oxidant (enhancer of the
cytotoxicity of chromate) at concentrations up to 0.1 mM, and as an
anti-oxidant (reducer of the cytotoxicity of chromate) at concentrations
of 0.25 mM and higher. This information is important for our ongoing and
future experiments, where we designed a protocol to incorporate ascorbate
into our assays assessing the cytotoxicity and cell transforming activity
of Cr(VI) compounds. We project that at concentrations of 0.1 mM and
lower, ascorbate will enhance the cell transforming activity of Cr(VI)
compounds. Supported by undergraduate fellowships from the Provost's
Office at the University of Southern California (USC) (P. I., JRL), by
funding from the M. S. Program in Molecular Microbiology and Immunology
to JRL, by discretionary funding to JRL, and by prior grant ES03341 from
NIEHS/NIH (P. I., JRL).

