Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPEx system to increase production of pritumumab in a CHO cell line


Pritumumab, a natural human IgG1 kappa antibody isolated from a lymph
node of a patient with cervical carcinoma, has been used in a Phase II
setting with brain cancer patients. The original human-human hybridoma
secreted approximately 1 picogram of antibody per cell per day. This
level of the antibody production posed cost constrains for late stage
therapeutic clinical trials. To generate a more commercially viable
antibody, a pritumumab-secreting Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line
was created using the GPEx technology. This technology involved
construction and cloning of heavy and light chain DNA. Both DNA sequences
were cloned into the expression vector and transduced into HEK 293 cells
that constitutively produces the MLV gag, pro, and pol. The pritumumab
cell line was made by performing multiple rounds of transduction
(multiplicity of > 1000 retrovector particles/cell) of the GPEx Chinese
Hamster Ovary (GCHO) parental cell line with retrovector made from the
gene construct developed to express the pritumumab antibody light chain
(LC) and the pritumumab antibody heavy chain (HC). Five independent
transductions were performed: two LC and three HC. Limiting dilution
method was used to establish clonal cell lines. Top clones were selected
based on pritumumab antibody titer. Pritumumab expression was determined
by Protein A HPLC using a generic IgG standard. Clearly, single copies of
genes were inserted efficiently in unique locations throughout the genome
of the CHO cells to obtain genetically stable cell line that expressed
high levels of the antibody, and represented more than a 40-fold increase
in production of the antibody over the original hybridoma. Flow cytometry
binding and immunohistological analyses demonstrated comparability
between the recombinant form of pritumumab and the hybridoma form of the
protein. Thus, high level of specific productivities and titers of the
CHO clones developed through the GPEx system will allow the therapeutic
antibody program to move forward into large and extended clinical trials.

