Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid detection of somatic mutations in cancer genes


In the context of personalized cancer treatment, tumor mutational
analysis by DNA sequencing has been described frequently as the gold
standard, yet DNA sequencing is one of the least sensitive methods for
characterizing mutation. At least 10-20% of a DNA population must be
mutant for the mutation to be detected by standard DNA sequencing.
Implicit acceptance that this level of sensitivity is sufficient to
characterize tumor mutations only makes sense if one assumes that tumors
are monoclonal and that all the critical driver mutations will be present
in the bulk of the tumor. Yet these are incorrect assumptions. In fact,
it has become clear that most if not all colon tumors are polyclonal and
heterogeneous. Consequently, tumor driver mutations may not be detectable
using standard DNA sequencing methods. In order to rapidly detect these
low frequency mutations in tumor derived DNA we have developed a new
technology that allows the detection of tumor driver and drug resistance
somatic mutations at In the context of personalized cancer treatment,
tumor mutational analysis by DNA sequencing has been described frequently
as the gold standard, yet DNA sequencing is one of the least sensitive
methods for characterizing mutation. At least 10-20% of a DNA population
must be mutant for the mutation to be detected by standard DNA
sequencing. Implicit acceptance that this level of sensitivity is
sufficient to characterize tumor mutations only makes sense if one
assumes that tumors are monoclonal and that all the critical driver
mutations will be present in the bulk of the tumor. Yet these are
incorrect assumptions. In fact, it has become clear that most if not all
colon tumors are polyclonal and heterogeneous. Consequently, tumor driver
mutations may not be detectable using standard DNA sequencing methods. In
order to rapidly detect these low frequency mutations in tumor derived
DNA we have developed a new technology that allows the detection of tumor
driver and drug resistance somatic mutations at <0.1% sensitivity using
quantitative PCR (qPCR) without the need for digital PCR or droplet
digital PCR (ddPCR) methodology. We utilize xeno-nucleic acid (XNA)
clamping probes that are specific for the target gene wild-type template
and allow only the selective amplification of mismatched mutant
templates. Direct detection of driver and drug resistance mutations
within 2 hours of obtaining samples in KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, EGFR and JAK2
utilizing real-time qPCR with interchelating fluorescence dye detection.
As well as a new end-point post-PCR microtiterplate based target gene
mutant amplicon capture format that utilizes colorimetric or
chemiluminescence detection will be described.

