Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adoptive immunotherapy for pediatric solid tumors with CAR-T cells
(chimeric antigen receptor bearing T cells) targeting ALK (anaplastic
lymphoma kinase, CD246)


Neuroblastoma is the most common non-CNS tumor in children. High-risk
disease has a dire prognosis and new treatment strategies are need. The
identification of unique cell-surface proteins expressed on tumor cells,
yet not expressed on normal tissues, has been challenging for pediatric
malignancies. However, identification of such antigens allows for the
development of new immune-based therapies featuring Ig-like binding
motifs. The cell surface tyrosine kinase ALK (CD246, anaplastic lymphoma
kinase) is a promising target for neuroblastoma in that it is expressed
in either native, mutated, or over-expressed forms on the plasma membrane
surface of the tumor cell and may contribute to disease progression or
severity. We identified antibodies that bind to extracellular domains of
ALK, sequenced their variable regions, and used this sequence information
to construct chimeric antigen receptors (CARs). Primary human T
lymphocytes were then transduced with retroviral gene vectors expressing
a series of ALK-specific CAR. We tested CARs that incorporated both
different structural and signaling motifs. Transduced T cells
demonstrated ALK-specific cytolytic activity against ALK-expressing
tumors and produced Th1 cytokines upon culture in the presence of tumor.
In exploring different iterations of CAR domain structure we found that
the scFv domains created from the heavy and light variable domains of
ALK-specific immunoglobulin could be interchanged with respect to their
orientation in the context of CAR tertiary protein structure. Moreover,
ALK-specific scFv functioned whether expressed in a short format, that is
as a single domain proximal to the T cell membrane, or in a long format,
that is extended away from the plasma membrane using an IgG1-derived
spacer domain composed of CH2 and CH3. Using a xenogeneic NSG mouse model
for neuroblastoma, human ALK-specific CAR-expressing T cells were found
to eradicate ALK-positive tumor, when IL-7 was included to support T cell
persistence. These data argue for the continued evaluation of
ALK-specific CARs in pre-clinical studies.

