Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of PD-1 ligands by chemotherapeutic agents via
inhibition of STAT3 activity enhances T cell-stimulating ability of
dendritic cell


Background and objective: We have demonstrated the possibility that a
dendritic cell (DC)-based vaccination may have survival benefit in
patients with several types of malignancies such as pancreatic carcinoma
and non-small cell lung cancer; however remaining lots of cancer patients
cannot respond to the DC vaccine. It has been reported that certain
chemotherapeutic agents enhance the cancer vaccine-mediated immune
responses. In the current study, we conducted the in vitro experiments to
examine whether the chemotherapeutic agent including 5-FU, CDDP and
Docetaxel (DTX) which are used for standard treatment for oral cancer
patients, may enhance T-cell stimulating activity of DCs matured by
OK-432, a streptococcal immuno-potentiator. Methods: Healthy
volunteer-derived human peripheral blood monocytes were cultured with
IL-4 and GM-CSF for 5 days to generate immature DCs, and then, the DCs
were matured by the stimulation with OK-432 for 24 hours, followed by the
treatment with each chemotherapeutic drugs such as 5-FU, CDDP, DTX or
gemcitabine (GEM) for 24 hours.Results: IL-12 production by
OK-432-matured DCs decreased by the treatment with CDDP, DTX or GEM but
not with 5-FU. In contrast, only 5-FU decreased the amount of IL-10
secreted by the DCs. No change in IL-6 production was shown. Expression
of genes for PD-1 ligands (PD-L1 and PD-L2) as well as of their proteins
on DCs was significantly suppressed by the treated with 5-FU or DTX.
PD-1/PD-Ls pathway is involved in the negative regulation of T
cell-functions. Expression of PD-Ls was regulated by STAT3 signal. 5-FU
also inhibited STAT3 activity on the DCs. Down-regulation of PD-Ls via
STAT3 signal by chemotherapeutic agents may be closely involved in the T
cell-stimulating ability of DCs. The next experiments using allogeneic
mixed lymphocyte reaction revealed that 5-FU-treated DCs stimulated
allogeneic T cells to enhance their proliferation, and that
IFN--producing ability of the allogeneic T cells was also augmented by
the co-cultivation with DCs treated with 5-FU or DTX. Actually, DCs in
which PD-L1 and/or PD-L2 gene(s) are knocked-down by using siRNA strongly
stimulated allogeneic T cells to enhance their proliferation as well as
IFN- producing ability.Conclusions: The findings obtained from the
current study suggested that 5-FU and DTX may enhance the T
cell-stimulating ability of DCs via down-regulation of PD-L1 and PD-L2
mediated by STAT3 inhibition, and that the combination therapy of
DC-based cancer vaccine with these anti-cancer drugs may elicit better
anti-tumor immune response than only vaccination.

