Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A robust and rapid targeted sequencing technology for iterative
multiple genomic features in cancer


Targeted resequencing has enabled researchers and clinicians to analyze
specific genomic regions of interest from cancer. For example, deep
sequencing of cancer genes has allowed for the sensitive detection of
rare somatic variants as well as oncogenic rearrangements that are
otherwise difficult to observe with shotgun resequencing. Deep targeted
resequencing of these regions can potentially provide prognostic
information as well as guide treatment regimens. Current targeted
resequencing methods, however, suffer from poor on-target performance,
slow capture rates on the order of days, and significant manual effort.
Existing commercial kits are extremely restricted for targeting custom
regions of interest. Furthermore, libraries prepared for targeted
resequencing purposes generally cannot be reused, thus limiting the
number of replicates and follow-up experiments that can be performed for
cancer samples.We present APEX (attachment-based porous extension)
capture, a platform that rapidly and robustly generates targeted DNA
fragments for next-generation sequencing on the Illumina platform in as
little as two hours. It is based on the principle that chemical reactions
are rapidly enhanced in high surface-to-area ratio microenvironments when
one reaction component is surface-bound. As a proof of concept, we
covalently tethered next-generation sequencing compatible DNA libraries
to a silica membrane found in conventional spin columns, performed
target-specific primer extension, and eluted them for next-generation
sequencing. Through serial dilutions of cytomegalovirus (CMV) and human
DNA admixtures, we demonstrate CMV target enrichment down to single
genome equivalents. In addition, using a tiling primer strategy we were
able to robustly capture and resequence entire bacterial genomes.Because
our targeted resequencing technology preserves the original sample
library, we can sequentially target different regions of interest in a
series of guided experiments. We performed multi-tiered analyses of colon
biopsies, where we deep resequence cancer genes as well as survey fro
cancer-related pathogens such as bacterial genomes that are co-purified
in the sample. APEX capture therefore enables researchers to aggressively
and rapidly characterize cancer genomic material, where large-scale
targeting panels are followed by precise discriminatory ones that can
guide diagnosis and treatment.

