Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel algorithm for prioritizing candidate genes driving
malignant transformation of MCF10F cells and basal-like breast cancer


We have developed a model of malignant transformation of MCF10F cells to
identify the temporal acquisition of changes in genome structure and gene
expression that correspond to the progressive transformed phenotype
culminating in tumorigenesis. Genomic DNA and total RNA were isolated
from MCF10F, trMCF (MCF10F transformed by 70 nM 17-beta estradiol), bsMCF
(trMCF selected by Boyden chamber, tumorigenic), bcMCF (clones of bsMCF),
and caMCF (cells from tumors of bsMCF grown in SCID mice). The molecular
changes accompanying this progression were interrogated using high
resolution methods of analysis for loss of heretozygosity (LOH),
chromosome copy number (CCN) and gene expression profiles. The observed
genomic changes, along with the tumor phenotype of a poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma, indicate an underlying mechanism common to
basal-like breast cancer development in women. As examples, similarities
were found at chromosomes 4 and 5 between this ER negative cell model and
the basal-like tumors, and progression was accompanied by changes in gene
expression consistent with epithelial mesenchymal transition. Here we
describe an algorithm for prioritizing candidate oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. Venn analysis of CCN and gene expression (Venn_input, >
1100 genes) was input into GeneIndexer, a text mining tool, and queried
by key words or genes that were selected for relevance to breast cancer
and then neutralized for gene-by-word correlation bias. The sum of the
output cosine values for the Venn_input list was then used to prioritize
candidate genes of interest in relation to breast cancer (Venn_output),
and further, in relation to their first appearance during the progression
of cell transformation. To determine the relevance of these genes to
clinical breast cancer, the Venn_output list was used to perform
hierarchical cluster analysis of several clinical studies of breast
cancer. Of interest, the prioritized 113 genes identified only the
basal-like subtype in four separate clinical sample sets and one set of
51 breast cancer cell lines. Further analysis using a support vector
machine technique to train and query these same data predicted the tumor
class (basal/non basal) with a sensitivity range of 71-87 percent, and a
specificity range of 77-100 percent. These results support the use of
this approach for combining complex data for the prioritization of
candidate genes, and indicate that this model of malignant cell
transformation recapitulates many key aspects of basal breast cancer.

