Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription-regulating kinases CDK8 and CDK19 as novel
therapeutic targets for advanced prostate cancer


Most of castration-refractory prostate cancers (CRPC) continue to express
androgen receptor (AR) that maintains its activity at low levels or even
in the absence of androgen, driving tumor cell proliferation.
Androgen-depleting drugs and androgen antagonists have little or no
effect against AR+ cancers that are fully androgen-independent (AI). On
the other hand, experimental compounds that cause AR degradation prevent
AR-mediated repression of tumor-promoting genes, a tumor-suppressive
effect of AR. We report a novel druggable target for CRPC, which mediates
the induction but not the repression of gene expression by AR and
inhibits the growth of AI prostate cancer (PCa) cells. This target is two
closely related transcription-regulating kinases CDK8/CDK19 that unlike
some other members of the CDK family are not required for cell cycle
progression but play critical roles in several transcriptional signaling
pathways. CDK8 and CDK19 are highly expressed in AR+ PCa cells and
elevated under the conditions of androgen deprivation; CDK19 is
overexpressed in AR+ PCa cell lines and in metastatic clinical PCa. A
novel selective CDK8/19 kinase inhibitor (Senexin B) blocks
ligand-induced AR-mediated transcriptional activation in
androgen-dependent (AD) PCa cells but does not affect the AR-mediated
gene repression. The CDK8/19 inhibitor also inhibits ligand-independent
AR activation and AI cell growth in AI-PCa cells resistant to the
anti-androgenic drug enzalutamide, both in vitro and in a mouse xenograft
model. We have also discovered that CDK8/19 inhibition decreases NFB
mediated transcriptional activation of a group of tumor-promoting
chemokines, such as CXCL1, CXCL2 and IL8, suggesting that CDK8/19 may
promote prostate cancer chemoresistance and metastasis through the NFB
pathway. The above results suggest that CDK8/19 is an especially
attractive therapeutic target for advanced PCa, which controls both
AR-driven cell proliferation and other oncogenic pathways.

