Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studying cancer drug resistance in patient derived xenograft tumor
models


Anti-cancer drugs, either targeted therapies or cytotoxic chemotherapies,
have proven to be effective in treating certain cancer patients. However,
in most cases, tumors recur and become resistant to the treatment after a
period of time. There are urgent needs to understand the underlying drug
resistance mechanisms, to discover drug resistance targets and drug
resistance biomarkers and to develop new therapies or combination
therapies to tackle this widely occurring clinical problem. Currently the
main approaches to study cancer drug resistance include analyzing
clinical samples and developing drug resistance models in vitro. Numerous
potential resistance mechanisms have been revealed. However, validation
of these findings in a clinical-like setting and to test therapies in
preclinical studies requires in vivo tumor models of drug resistance.At
GenenDesign, we have developed cancer drug resistance PDX tumor models
through short term drug testing or long term treatment of xenograft tumor
mice. Cancer drugs investigated in our studies include major classes of
targeted therapeutic modalities such as Her2 inhibitors, EGFR inhibitors,
FGFR inhibitors and cMet/ALK inhibitors, as well as several standard of
care (SoC) chemotherapies. From these studies, we have identified de novo
resistance models, acquired resistance models and reversible resistance
models in multiple cancer types including lung cancer and gastric
cancer.In analyzing more than a dozen of Her2 positive but Herceptin
resistance PDX models, we have uncovered molecular abnormalities such as
Pten deletion, PI3K mutation, amplification of EGFR, cMet and cyclin E,
which have been reported previously to be associated with Herceptin
resistance in early studies. Studies are on-going to test whether
combination therapies will be effective in overcoming Herceptin
resistance.In drug response profiling of our PDX models, we also found
wide spread phenotypical and functional heterogeneity in individual
tumors. The heterogeneity within each tumor, in some cases, contributed
to evolving of drug resistance from initially responsive tumors.

