Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of tumor microenvironment on engraftment capacity of
hematological cell lines in immunocompromized mice


Hematological malignancies account for about 10% of newly diagnosed
cancers in the US, their heterogeneity and diverse biological
characteristics present unique therapeutic challenges. In order to
develop more promising therapeutic strategies, the establishment of
functional and reproducible in vivo models is widely pursued. A panel of
18 hematological cell lines comprising different entities including
leukemia (acute lymphoblastic AML; chronic myeloid CML; chronic lymphatic
leukemia CLL), diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), as well as multiple
myeloma (MM) was evaluated for in vivo engraftment using different mouse
strains and application routes.18 different cell lines were inoculated
into 4 different immuncompromized mouse strains (NOG; NSG; NOD/SCID;
SCID/beige nude) in 35 independent experiments. Cells were injected
intravenously (i.v.), intratibialy (i.t.) or intraperitonealy (i.p.).
Tumor growth was monitored via a) determination of overall survival, b)
fluorescence-based in vivo imaging (IVI, Bruker FX, using CF750 labeled
anti-hu CD33, CD19, CD45) c) flow cytometry and d) histological and IHC
examination.Engraftment of hematological cell lines was clearly
influenced by tumor entity, mouse strain and application route. The
investigated AML cell lines engrafted in all three applied mouse strains
(NOG; NSG; NOD/SCID) and injection routes. MOLM-13 infiltrated the bone
marrow (BM) and the spleen (>90% infiltration, 21 days after tumor cell
injection (=d21)), whereas MV4-11 cells disseminated mainly to the spleen
(5% BM and 15% spleen infiltration, d21). In contrast THP-1 (80% BM and
2% spleen infiltration, d21) as well as NOMO-1 cells (30% BM and 3%
spleen infiltration, d21) grew predominantly in the murine BM. MM cell
lines (L363, RPMI8826, MM1R, MM1S) as well as B-CLL cell lines (Mec-1)
failed to engraft reliably in NOD/SCID mice, irrespective of the
application route. MM cells engrafted predominantly in the BM (20 - 60%
depending on the cell line) of NSG mice when injected i.t.. i.v. injected
MM cells did engraft in the BM but to a significantly lower extent than
when injected i.t. (e.g. 20% vs. 2% BM infiltration of RPMI8226 cells,
d35). Mec-1 cells infiltrated the BM and spleen of NSG and NOG mice
reliably when injected i.v. and i.p. in the same individual (60% BM and
15% spleen infiltration, d28), whereas the same approach did not result
in any engraftment when using SCID/beige nude mice. 3 out of 4
investigated DLBCL cell lines engrafted in vivo. Disseminated growth
could be observed in NOG mice when injecting the cells i.v. or i.t. In
all cases, tumors grew faster and infiltrated the BM more aggressively
when injected I.t..In summary, the engraftment of hematological cell
lines strongly depends on the tumor microenvironment. The direct contact
to the BM niche is a major survival benefit for the tumor cells as is the
lack of NK cells in NOG and NSG mice.

