Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-canonical Wnt pathway stimulation in response to LiCl is
related to suppression of cell proliferation in histologically distinct
human tumors


Disturbances in cellular proliferation are a fundamental characteristic
of malignancy, and have often been associated with dysregulation of the
Wnt/B-catenin canonical pathway (CAN). The activity of the CAN pathway is
subject to regulation by the non-canonical pathway (N-CAN) which
stimulates cellular differentiation. The N-CAN pathway which has been
described as a negative regulator of the CAN pathway has not been well
studied in human cancers and its activity as a possible negative
regulator of cellular proliferation in different tumor histologies is not
known. The purpose of this study was to characterize the activation of
the N-CAN pathway in relationship to tumor cell proliferation in
histologically diverse human tumors. LiCl, a known activator of the CAN
pathway was used to investigate effects on proliferation of different
human tumors along with its capacity to regulate expression of various
Wnt pathway signaling components. Cancer cells were derived from surgical
specimens obtained from patients with colorectal (CRC), pancreatic (PC),
renal (RCC), breast (BC), stomach (SC) and lung (LC) cancers. Cultured
cells were treated with LiCl (20 mM) for 72h. Cell proliferation was
determined using the MTS assay and gene expression determined using
commercially available quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway gene expression
arrays. Significant inhibition (pDisturbances in cellular proliferation
are a fundamental characteristic of malignancy, and have often been
associated with dysregulation of the Wnt/B-catenin canonical pathway
(CAN). The activity of the CAN pathway is subject to regulation by the
non-canonical pathway (N-CAN) which stimulates cellular differentiation.
The N-CAN pathway which has been described as a negative regulator of the
CAN pathway has not been well studied in human cancers and its activity
as a possible negative regulator of cellular proliferation in different
tumor histologies is not known. The purpose of this study was to
characterize the activation of the N-CAN pathway in relationship to tumor
cell proliferation in histologically diverse human tumors. LiCl, a known
activator of the CAN pathway was used to investigate effects on
proliferation of different human tumors along with its capacity to
regulate expression of various Wnt pathway signaling components. Cancer
cells were derived from surgical specimens obtained from patients with
colorectal (CRC), pancreatic (PC), renal (RCC), breast (BC), stomach (SC)
and lung (LC) cancers. Cultured cells were treated with LiCl (20 mM) for
72h. Cell proliferation was determined using the MTS assay and gene
expression determined using commercially available quantitative RT-PCR
Wnt pathway gene expression arrays. Significant inhibition (p<0.05) of
proliferation by LiCl was exhibited by all cell types except LC cells.
Furthermore, suppression of proliferation was inversely correlated with
upregulation of N-CAN components in all tumor types with failure to
upregulate N-CAN components in LC cells. The transmembrane protein,
VANGL2, which forms a receptor complex for the N-CAN pathway was
upregulated significantly in 1 of 2 PC specimens and in RCC and SC cells
(mean 17 fold vs. media alone). In cells with increased VANGL2
expression, PRICKLE1 (N-CAN component that interacts with VANGL2), and
FRZB, an inhibitor of the CAN pathway were increased by 2.8 and 4.9 folds
respectively. In these cells, additional N-CAN components such as NKD1,
DAAM1, and CAN inhibitor Wif1 were increased in some, but not all
histologies. In contrast, there was no effect on VANGL2 expression in
CRC, 1 of 2 PC cells, and BC cells whereas upregulation of additional
N-CAN genes and CAN inhibitors was observed in all tumors that
demonstrated inhibition of proliferation in response to LiCl. In cancers
without VANGL2 increase there was an increase in expression of the N-CAN
component NKD1 (6.6 folds) and decreased expression of -catenin (2.4
folds). Other changes in Wnt pathway genes in these cells that were
observed in some but not all cell types included increased expression of
FRZB and WIF1. This study demonstrates differential effects of N-CAN
pathway components on the proliferation of histologically distinct human
tumors.

