Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The biodistribution pattern depending on the size of anti-tissue
factor antibodies


[Introduction] It has been known for a long time that cancer induces
blood hypercoagulability. Recent clinical data have indicated that most
cancer patients are at a high risk for thrombosis. Tissue factor (TF), a
transmembrane protein, initiates extrinsic coagulation by forming a
complex with factor VIIa. High expression levels of TF are seen in many
types of tumor cells, including pancreatic cancer and glioma cells. TF is
also reported to be strongly expressed in the tumor stromal cells and
endothelium of tumor vessels. Furthermore, many studies indicate the
roles of TF in cell signaling, inflammation, angiogenesis, and tumor
growth and metastasis. Based on this evidence, we propose that TF could
be a promising target to deliver therapeutic or diagnostic agents into
tumor tissues. In the present study, we investigated the in vivo
characteristics of the whole IgG of 1849, a high-affinity rat anti-human
TF monoclonal antibody (mAb) developed by us, and also those of its
F(ab')2 and Fab fragments. Based on the results of this analysis, we
determined which fragment might be the most suitable for use in imaging
and/or therapy.[Methods] F(ab')2 and Fab fragments of 1849 and its
isotype control mAb were produced through enzyme digestion, respectively.
The TF-binding activity of each fragment was evaluated by flow-cytometric
analysis using BxPC3, a human pancreatic cancer cell line that strongly
expresses TF. In vivo fluorescence imaging and ex vivo studies were
carried out in BxPC3 xenograft models. Immunofluorescence staining was
also conducted to evaluate the distribution of each of the antibody
fragments in the tumor tissues.[Results] The results of the
flow-cytometric analysis revealed that all of the fragments of 1849
examined showed a high affinity for BxPC3 cells, whereas the isotype
control fragments did not recognize the BxPC3 cells. In vivo fluorescence
imaging revealed prolonged retention and intratumor accumulation of the
whole IgG of 1849, while in contrast, the Fab fragment was rapidly
cleared from the blood via the kidneys. The results of the ex vivo study
were also consistent with those of the in vivo fluorescence imaging. The
results of immunofluorescence staining revealed that the fragments of
1849 antibody showed enhanced penetration into the tumor tissues from an
early time-point as compared to whole IgG.[Conclusions] Imaging
applications commonly require tumor deposition combined with rapid blood
clearance and minimal accumulation in non-tumor tissues. The results of
in vivo fluorescence imaging and ex vivo studies suggest that the Fab
fragment of the 1849 antibody may be the most suitable for application to
imaging diagnosis. On the other hand, the prerequisites for application
to therapeutics include longer circulation times with minimal toxicity of
the anticancer drugs to normal tissues by reduced delivery to non-tumor
tissues. Thus, our results suggest that the whole IgG of 1849 antibody
may be the most suitable for application to therapy.

