Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of intracellular sequestration of sunitinib by cystine
transporter xCT in renal cancer


Background: Acquired and/or intrinsic resistance to sunitinib, a
multikinase inhibitor, is one of the major obstacles for the treatment of
renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Recently, lysosomal sequestration of
sunitinib has been shown as one of the potential mechanisms of resistance
in renal cancer. The current study was initiated to understand the role
of the Cystine Transporter xCT (encoded product of Solute Carrier family
7A member 11, SLC7A11 gene), a lysosome regulatory gene, on intracellular
sequestration of sunitinib and to evaluate the cytotoxic effects of the
xCT inhibitor sulfasalazine alone and in combination with sunitinib on
RCC cells. Methods: Intracellular sequestration of sunitinib was
evaluated using the fluorescent microscopy technique by determining the
autofluorescence of sunitinib. Cytotoxic effects of sulfasalazine alone
and in combination with sunitinib were assessed by sulforhodamine B
assay. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis and Western blot analysis were
utilized to determine the expression of xCT in normal renal tubular HK2
cells, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), and RCC 786-O
cells, and to determine the association of sunitinib sequestration and
xCT expression. Expression of xCT interacting partner CD44s and its
variant forms CD44v6 and CD44v8, which influence the expression of xCT,
was determined in 786-O and HK2 cells. Additionally, we utilized The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data to determine the expression of xCT in
ccRCC patients and evaluated the significance of its expression and
correlation of patient survival. Results: Our results revealed higher
intracellular sequestration of sunitinib in RCC 786-O cells compared to
HK2 and HUVEC cells. Furthermore, we found higher expression of xCT in
786-O cells compared to HK2 and HUVEC cells, which was associated with
high intracellular sequestration of sunitinib. The pharmacological
inhibition of xCT by sulfasalazine revealed the reversal of intracellular
sequestration of sunitinib in 786-O cells. The SRB assay showed the
enhanced cytotoxic effects of sunitinib in combination with
sulfasalazine, which indicates that, the reversal of intracellular
sequestration of sunitinib may led to the enhanced cytotoxic effects.
Moreover, there was a significant decrease of xCT stabilizing isoform
CD44v6 mRNA in 786-O cells compared to HK2 and no change was observed in
CD44s and CD44v8. Bioinformatics analysis using cBioPortal Cancer
Genomics from MSKCC data of TCGA revealed the significant up regulation
of xCT in ccRCC patients correlated with poor prognosis. Conclusions: Our
results indicate that lysosome regulatory protein xCT inhibition by
sulfasalazine leads to the reversal of intracellular sequestration of
sunitinib and enhances the efficacy of sunitinib in renal cancer. These
results provide the rationale for the preclinical and clinical testing of
sulfasalazine in combination with sunitinib in the treatment of ccRCC.

