Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping the airway-wide molecular field of injury in smokers with
lung cancer


Lung cancer mortality is the leading cause of cancer death in the United
States in part because diagnosis occurs after regional or distant
metastasis of the disease. Identifying effective early detection
biomarkers is crucial for improving lung cancer clinical management.
Moreover, molecular biomarkers for early disease detection may provide
insight into the molecular pathways associated with disease development
and progression. Our lab has shown that smoking-induced gene expression
alterations are mirrored in the epithelia of the mainstem bronchus,
buccal and nasal cavity. We have additionally demonstrated that
gene-expression profiles in cytologically normal mainstem bronchial
epithelium can serve as an early diagnostic biomarker for lung cancer.
Here we expand on our previous work by spatially mapping the molecular
field of injury throughout the entire respiratory tract in smokers with
lung cancer. Using Affymetrix Gene ST 2.0 arrays, we profiled genome-wide
gene-expression in 1) lung lesions and adjacent normal lung obtained from
smokers undergoing surgical resection, 2) epithelial brushings obtained
at intraoperative bronchoscopy from the nasal epithelium, main carina and
ipsilateral and contralateral proximal and distal bronchi (relative to
the location of the resected lung lesion), and 3) epithelial brushings
obtained at lobectomy from sub-segmental bronchus (adjacent to tumor).
Linear modeling approaches comparing the airways and tumors of patients
with cancer to those with benign lung disease were used to explore
relationships in cancer-specific gene-expression alterations across sites
within the respiratory tract. We found that genes upregulated in the
small airways leading to the tumor were enriched in genes upregulated in
the mainstem bronchus and main carina of smokers with lung cancer. In
addition, genes upregulated in the bronchus and main carina of smokers
with lung cancer showed enrichment among cancer associated genes elevated
in the nose. Furthermore, a linear mixed effects model uncovered genes
and pathways which change in expression in a gradient-like manner as
distance from the tumor increases. Our findings suggest that the
molecular field of injury encompasses airway-wide alterations throughout
the entire respiratory tract of smokers with lung cancer as well as
gradient profiles that change with respect to proximity of the nearby
tumor. These molecular alterations may ultimately serve as early
detection biomarkers for lung cancer and provide new insights into early
stages of lung carcinogenesis.

