Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss-of-function JAK1 mutations reveal a new role of protein
tyrosine kinase mutations in human cancer


Protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) have been perceived mostly as
proto-oncogenes. PTK mutations that have been studied in human cancer
usually have increased kinase activities to drive malignant phenotypes.
Thus, these PTK mutations are gain-of-function (GOF) mutations. By
analyzing the targeted exome sequencing data of 3,274 human tumors from
48 different tissues in the Total Cancer Care (TCC) tumor bank, we have
found JAK1 truncating mutations in 36 of 635 gynecologic tumors. The
highest JAK1 truncating mutation rate (9.5%) was found in endometrial
cancer. These truncating mutations result in the loss of the JAK1 PTK
domain. Thus, they are loss-of-function (LOF) mutations. JAK1 truncating
mutations in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) databank also occur
most often in endometrial cancer cell lines. Analysis of mutation sites
identified three mutation hot spots. Re-sequencing of cancer cell lines,
primary tumors, and matched normal tissues confirmed JAK1 mutations and
revealed that these JAK1 mutations are somatic. JAK1 and JAK2 mediate
interferon (IFN)--regulated tumor immune surveillance. Recurrent JAK2 LOF
mutations were also found in TCC tumors but at lower rates. Similar to
JAK1, the highest rate of LOF JAK2 mutations was found in
endometrial/uterine cancer. No JAK1 or JAK2 truncating mutation was
identified in 130 samples from hematological malignancies. Functional
assays show that JAK1-deficient cancer cells are defective in
IFN--induced expression of tumor antigen processing machinery proteins
LMP2 and TAP1 and cell surface expression of HLA molecules. These data
identify recurrent JAK1 deficiency in endometrial cancer that could
impair tumor antigen presentation by the MHC class I complex to cytotoxic
T lymphocytes. Our findings suggest that JAK1 is a PTK tumor suppressor
and reveal a novel mechanism of tumor immune evasion via LOF mutations in
a PTK.

