Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small-molecule FASN inhibitors promote growth inhibition growth
and apoptosis of breast cancer


Increased de novo lipogenesis due to enhanced expression of several
lipogenic enzymes has been found in many types of human cancers. Fatty
acid synthase (FASN), the key enzyme in the de novo lipogenesis pathway,
is one of the most commonly over-expressed lipogenic enzymes. Studies in
the past decade have recognized FASN overexpression as a molecular marker
for poor prognosis and malignant phenotype of many cancers.
Tumor-associated FASN, by conferring growth and survival advantages
rather than functioning as an anabolic energy-storage pathway, has also
been suggested to play an active part in the development, maintenance,
and metastatic progression of human cancers. More recently, FASN has been
implicated in contributing to cellular resistance to several anticancer
treatments. A variety of agents have been developed to target lipogenic
enzymes and the key regulators involved in lipid metabolism in cancer
cell for therapeutic purposes. The development of several FASN inhibitors
has been reported from both academic labs and industries. When used in in
vitro, xenograft and genetically induced mouse model studies, these
inhibitors have supported FASN as an excellent target. A new generation
of FASN inhibitors was developed at 3-V Biosciences that are highly
specific, reversible inhibitors of FASN. One compound in this series,
TVB-2640, is orally bioavailable and has progressed into Phase 1 clinical
studies. The effect of two anti-FASN drugs in this series, TVB-3150 and
TVB-3199 were tested for their effect on breast cancer cells. We
demonstrated that the EC50 is between 9-50 nM, depending on the drug and
the tested cell line. We then demonstrated that the drugs inhibited the
anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of FASN expressing cells in a
dose dependent manner. The apparent mechanism by which the FASN
inhibitors promote inhibition of growth is by inducing apoptotic cell
death in a time- and dose-dependent manner that involves regulation of
apoptotic and pro-apoptotic proteins. Furthermore, the combination of the
anti-FASN drugs with small molecule inhibitors of the antiapoptotic
proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL significantly increased the apoptotic effect in
a synergistic manner compared to either of the synthetic inhibitors
alone. In vivo studies demonstrate tumor growth inhibition without
toxicity. Clinical development of a first-in-class, orally active,
potent, and reversible FASN inhibitor as a novel cancer therapeutic is
ongoing.

