Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of dual inhibition of EGFR and Aurora A kinase in a lung
cancer model


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death in the US.
Patients with advanced disease generally have a poor prognosis with a
median survival of around 10 to 12 months with standard chemotherapy.
Astsaturov and colleagues (2010) employed a synthetic lethal screening
method and have reported that the combined inhibition of the EGFR and
Aurora A kinase pathways had synergistic effect on cancer cell viability
in head and neck and colon cancer cell lines suggesting a potential
benefit of such combination therapy in patients. Our study aims to
examine the effects of combination of erlotinib (E), an EGFR
small-molecule inhibitor, and Alisertib (MLN8237, A), an inhibitor of
Aurora A kinase, in lung cancer models. Treatment of two human NSCLC cell
lines, A549 and H322M, with E+A showed synergistic activity in vitro.
These cell lines were chosen for the xenografts studies in CB17 SCID
mice. After tumors reached a volume of 100 mm3, mice were treated with
E+A for three weeks. The xenografts were sensitive to growth inhibition
by E (10 mg/kg/day) and A (20 mg/kg/twice daily) alone and the
combination had an additive effect. In order to understand early cell
signaling events in tumors treated with these agents we repeated the
xenograft experiment by treating mice with a one time dosing of each drug
alone and in combination. Three tumors per group were collected at 0 , 6
, 24 , or 48 hours after treatment and a panel of signaling molecules
downstream of the EGFR and Aurora A kinase pathways were examined by
Western blot. These included EGFR/pEGFR; HER2; HER3; MEK/pMEK; ERK/pERK;
Src/pSrc and Akt/pAkt among others. Our results suggest that combined
inhibition of both pathways in lung cancer cell lines and xenografts can
lead to a reduced proliferative index as indicated by quantitative
changes in these proteins and that this combination might be effective as
a treatment strategy. A clinical trial with this combination is in
progress at our center.

