Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BP1 homeobox gene is dysregulated in triple negative breast
cancer


Background: Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) lack the expression of
ER, PR and HER2 receptors, making targeted treatments against these
receptors ineffective. We are studying BETA PROTEIN 1 (BP1), a member of
homeobox gene family, which we cloned and showed is activated in 80% of
invasive breast cancers; its expression correlates with breast cancer
progression and invasion. The BP1 gene is located on 17q21, a region that
we showed is altered in 30% of breast tumors. BP1 protein has been shown
to regulate genes including BCL2, BRCA1, VEGF and c-MYC. Also BP1 mRNA
and protein are highly expressed in ER and PR negative and clinically
aggressive tumors. Thus we hypothesize that BP1 may play a role in
TNBC.Methods: To delineate pathways in TNBC cells that are dysregulated
by BP1 expression, we studied the 5 TNBC parental cell lines, 2 non-TNBC
cell lines and a stably overexpressed BP1 TNBC cell line. Microarray
analysis was performed in all these cell lines and the data obtained was
verified using qPCR and ELISA. A BP1 shRNA plasmid was stably transfected
into MDA-MB-231 cell lines to generate sh-MDA-MB-231 cell lines with
about 80% knockdown of BP1 protein. ELISA was performed to verify the
effects of BP1 expression on target genes. Formalin-Fixed,
Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) tissues of TNBC were analyzed by array-CGH and
confirmed by Taqman copy number (using a BP1-TAM specific probe) and FISH
(using our constructed BP1-BAC probe) assays.Results: All of the TNBC
cell lines had statistically more BP1 protein (pBP1) than non-TNBC cell
lines, suggesting that TNBC tumors may have higher levels of pBP1 than
non-TNBC tumors. Gene expression microarrays in the TNBC cell lines
revealed up/down regulation of several genes in comparison to the normal
breast cell lines, including the IL-6 and IL-8 genes, which were
significantly upregulated in TNBC cells overexpressing BP1. ELISA assays
confirmed a direct correlation between elevated levels of IL-6 in
conditioned media and overexpression of BP1. Knockdown of BP1 led to a
decrease in secreted IL-6. Studies are underway to establish the
mechanism by which these pathways are regulated by BP1. Increased BP1
copy number was observed in 37% (25/67) of the clinical cases and all
(8/8) of TNBC cell lines by array-CGH. Confirmation of these changes by
FISH and TaqMan copy number assays revealed increased copy number in 22%
(18/82) and 23% (9/38) of the clinical cases, respectively. Protein
expression analysis by IHC is currently being conducted to determine if
BP1 increased DNA copy number may be one of the mechanisms leading to
pBP1 overexpression.Conclusions: Both BP1 copy number and protein
expression are dysregulated in TNBC. Microarray analysis in TNBC cell
lines have revealed important cancer related genes and oncogenic pathways
that may be upregulated by BP1, suggesting that BP1 could be a valuable
molecular marker and therapeutic target in this aggressive form of breast
cancer.

