Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of IL10 haplotypes and atomic bomb radiation exposure on
risks of gastric cancer subtypes


Background: Gastric cancer is one of the cancers whose risks of incidence
and mortality clearly increased among Japanese atomic-bomb (A-bomb)
survivors. Gastric cancer incidence in the Radiation Effects Research
Foundation's (RERF) Life Span Study cohort population increased with
radiation dose and remains high even today, more than 65 years since
exposure. In this study, we specifically examined the association between
risk of gastric cancer (intestinal and diffuse types) and radiation
exposure by haplotypes of the immunosuppressive gene IL10 to investigate
inter-individual differences in gastric cancer susceptibility associated
with radiation exposure.Methods: We analyzed the follow-up data from the
RERF Immunogenome Study Cohort of 4,690 A-bomb survivors at baseline
covering 1981-2005: a total of 200 gastric cancer cases comprising 93
intestinal-type, 96 diffuse-type, and 11 other subtypes. Relative risk
(RR) for IL10 and excess relative risk (ERR) for radiation of gastric
cancer subtypes were estimated. Using a single haplotype block composed
of four haplotype-tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (comprising
major haplotype allele IL10-ATTA and minor haplotype allele IL10-GGCG),
multiplicative and additive models for joint effects of radiation and
this IL10 haplotyping were examined.Results: The RR of intestinal-type
gastric cancer among A-bomb survivors harboring the minor homozygote was
significantly high, being 2.2 (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.1-4.3),
compared to those harboring the major homozygote. In other words, the
IL10 minor haplotype allele was considered to be a risk factor for
intestinal-type gastric cancer. However, no significant association was
observed between radiation exposure and intestinal-type gastric cancer,
and no statistical interaction was observed between radiation exposure
and IL10 haplotypes. The IL10 minor haplotype allele was not a risk
factor for diffuse-type gastric cancer. The ERR per Gy of radiation
exposure by haplotype showed statistical significance only for the major
homozygote (0.46/Gy, 95% CI: 0.02-1.4). On the other hand, the ERR per Gy
for the minor homozygote was close to 0, with no statistical
significance. Therefore, the IL10 minor haplotype allele might act to
suppress the radiation-associated risk elevation of diffuse-type gastric
cancer.Conclusion: This study of A-bomb survivors suggests that IL10
haplotypes may be associated with the development of radiation-related
diffuse-type gastric cancer. There is a possibility, therefore, that
immune/inflammatory-related gene polymorphisms may be involved in
inter-individual differences in radiation-related cancer risks. Further
studies based on genome-wide association analysis are currently underway.

