Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of VEGF inhibition on skin ulcer induced by administration
of cytotoxic anticancer drugs


Introduction: An accidental extravasation of vesicant drugs-containing
chemotherapy leads to skin ulcer, necrosis and severe tissue
destruction.The clinical evidences that VEGF inhibition suppresses
tumorigenesis via inhibiting angiogenesis and causes delaying wound
repair have been accumulated. We observed the cases that simultaneous
administration of anti-human VEGF antibody, Bevacizumab, avoided critical
skin ulcer which should be caused by extravasation of cytotoxic drug in
the colorectal cancer combination chemotherapy. Therefore, we examined
effects of VEGF or anti-VEGF-antibody and angiogenesis inhibitor on skin
ulcer caused by administration of anticancer drug in a mouse
model.Methods: Experiments were performed in accordance with the United
Kingdom Coordinating Committee on Cancer Research Guidelines for the
welfare of animals in experimental neoplasia. Subcutaneous injections of
doxorubicin (0.2mg/0.2ml of saline) in mice induced dose-dependent
ulcerations under general anesthesia. The ulcers reached maximal size at
2-3 weeks following doxorubicin administration and were completely healed
by 9 weeks. Effects of co-administration of test drugs on the area of the
skin ulcer caused by administration of Adriamycin, were compared with
control. Bevacizumab is anti-human VEGF antibody, it has no reactivity
with mouse VEGF. An anti-mouse VEGF antibody was used
alternatively.Results: VEGF (5g) increased the skin ulcer size up to
150%, and the healing time was increased to 11 weeks. Anti-VEGF antibody
(50g) and suramin reduced the maximum ulcer size (50%), and the healing
time was reduced to 6 weeks.Hydrocortisone (100g) slightly reduced the
skin ulcer size and the healing time (8 week).Conclusion: VEGF aggravated
skin ulcer caused by the administration of the Adriamycin. Anti-VEGF
antibody and angiogenesis inhibitor, suramin, reduced skin ulcer caused
by the administration of the Adriamycin.Discussion: Inhibition of VEGF
signaling and/or anti-angiogenesis were suggested to reduce skin ulcer
caused by the Adriamycin. Anti-human VEGF antibody, Bevacizumab was
suggested to be an effective antidote for skin ulcer and necrosis by
extravasation of anticancer drugs and had potential for clinical use.

