Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell isolation and DNA analysis from circulating tumor
cells using a self sorting nanowell plate


IntroductionThe heterogeneity of tumor cells dictates the need for
analysis at the single cell level. In addition, gene expression can be
altered during the course of the disease and is accelerated under the
influence of therapy. This imposes the need for a tumor biopsy each time
therapeutic intervention is required. As biopsies are difficult if not
impossible to obtain, Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC) represent a unique
opportunity for a real time liquid biopsy. Current available CTC counting
technologies are hampered by inefficiency to isolate individual CTC for
further molecular characterization to unveil the best treatment strategy.
Here we introduce a simple solution to obtain and analyze the genetic
make-up of individual CTC from a CTC enriched cell suspension.MethodsA
cell suspension is applied to a self-sorting nanowell plate made out of
Silicon and containing 10,000 wells with a diameter of 65 um and a height
of 380 um. The bottom of each well is made of a Silicon Nitride membrane
with a thickness of 1 m that contains a center pore with a diameter of
5m. The fluid flows through the pore, hereby forcing a cell to enter the
well and to collect on the pore at the bottom of the well. Once the cell
has landed onto the pore, the flow inside the well is stopped and no more
cells will enter the well. This enables a perfect distribution of
individual cells over the nanowells. The efficiency of this system was
investigated by sorting CellTracker Orange (CTO) stained PC-3 and
CellTracker Green (CTG) stained LNCaP cells into a nanowell plate. A
computer controlled fluorescence microscope was used to verify the
presence of cells and to select the wells of interest. Next, a computer
controlled stage directs a needle with a diameter of 50 m to the
designated well and pushes the bottom containing the cell into a 384 PCR
well plate. A real time monitored Whole Genome Amplification (WGA)
reaction was performed on the PCR plate wells that contained a cell. As a
control, bottoms without a cell were used. The quality of the amplified
DNA was tested by a 10 gene qPCR panel.ResultsCell suspension containing
950 PC3 and 1577 LNCaP cells were passed through the self-sorting
nanowell plate. After fluorescence scanning, 707 (74%) PC3 cells and 1415
LNCap cells (90%) were found as single cells at the bottom of the
nanowell plates. After punching of the bottoms of 150 nanowells
containing single cells, 131 cells (87%) were present in separate wells
of a 384 well PCR plate. WGA was applied to the PCR plate and 61% of the
cells were successfully amplified. 79% of these amplified products
contained at least 7 out of the 10 PCR targets. This makes it suitable as
a template for genetic analysis. In the PCR plate wells that contained
only bottoms no DNA was amplified.ConclusionsWe introduced a self-sorting
nanowell plate in combination with an efficient method for the isolation
of single cells from a CTC enriched cell suspension with an efficiency
greater than 75%.

