Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modifying autophagy through combination treatments as a potential
therapeutic strategy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)


Introduction: Autophagy, a catabolic process, can play a crucial role in
cancer cell survival. Modifying this process has shown to be an effective
mechanism of inducing cell death. In order to explore this concept, we
induced autophagy with one agent (Akt-inhibitor MK-2206), and decreased
autophagosomal trafficking with other agents (Paclitaxel and Nocadazole)
by disrupting the microtubule networks. We hypothesized that by modifying
autophagy through this combination, it would lead to an accumulation of
autophagosomes and eventual cell death in a synergistic manner.Methods:
SCC 61 and Cal 27 HNSCC cell lines were used to explore this hypothesis.
SCC 61 cells were transduced with an m-Cherry GFP LC3B vector in order to
detect autophagosomes under both fixed and live cell confocal microscopy.
Cell viability and apoptosis assays were performed. A siRNA ATG 7 KO SCC
61 cell line was used to detect if in fact autophagy was important for
this therapeutic approach.Results: There was an accumulation of
autophagosomes with the combination of an Akt inhibitor and microtubule
disrupters. A decrease in fusion of autophagosome to lysosome was seen
when cells were treated with an agent, which disrupted the microtubule
networks (Paclitaxel) but even more dramatically when treated with the
combination (MK-2206 and Paclitaxel). Moreover, accumulation of
autophagosomes occurred prior to induction of apoptosis with combination
treatment. These effects were decreased with siRNA ATG 7 KO in SCC 61
cells, which were more resistant to combination treatment compared to
control.Discussion: Manipulating autophagy with Akt inhibition
(induction) and Paclitaxel (decreasing autophagic trafficking) leads to
an accumulation of autophagosomes and eventual cell death in a
synergistic manner. This therapeutic approach of altering the normal
autophagic process warrants further investigation.

