Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-talk between PI3K/AKT and ER signaling leads to
STAT3/6-modulated epigenetic transcription in aggressive breast cancer


The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway is a critical
survival cascade in tumor progression. Our previous study demonstrated
that combinational treatment of a potent PI3K inhibitor, LY294002 (LY),
and DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-Aza-deoxycytidine (DAC), compounds
effectively reduce tumor formation in the immunodeficiency mouse model,
suggesting that PI3K/AKT signaling suppresses tumorigenesis through the
epigenetic modulation. While tumor size of the LY-treated xenografts is
dramatically decreased compared to the control group, the tumor growth
cannot be completely attenuated by either LY or LY/DAC treatment,
indicating that there is an alternative route for tumor survival. Here,
we performed a microarray analysis to identify LY-mediated expression
profiling on an ER-positive breast cancer cell line, T-47D, the cell line
applied in the previous xenograft experiments. A subset of 24
LY-activated genes associated with better clinical outcome are found to
be not only direct targets of PI3K/AKT but involved in estrogen (E2)/ER
signaling by ingenuity pathway analysis, suggesting the involvement of ER
signaling in PI3K/AKT-mediated tumor growth. To clarify their
relationship, pharmacological experiments using an ER antagonist, ICI
182, 780 (ICI) and LY coupled with E2 was conducted. We observed that E2
stimulation induces both AKT and ER activation in a time-dependent
manner. Either ICI or LY treatment cannot repress the activation levels
of AKT or ER, respectively. Though, either single or combined inhibitor
treatment can effectively restore E2-suppressed gene expression. These
findings indicate that cross-talk between PI3K/AKT and ER signaling
cascades may cooperatively regulate cell growth and associated gene
expression. In addition, transcription factor motif analysis showed that
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 and 6 (STAT3/6)
binding motifs are enriched with highest prediction score on the promoter
regions of the examined AKT-directed targets. Inhibitors prohibit
E2-mediated assembly of STAT3/6 with ER and STAT3/6 recruitment onto the
promoter regions of target loci using co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) and
chromatin IP-qPCR. Moreover, repressive histone marks, H3K27me3 and
H3K9me3, are found to occupy on the same regions as STAT3/6 upon E2
treatment. DAC treatment can effectively restore E2-induced suppression
of AKT-directed target genes. Further association studies are ongoing to
interrogate whether STAT3/6 is part of repressive transcription complex
with H3K27me3 and H3K9me3. In summary, we propose that cross-talk of ER
with PI3K/AKT signaling represents the potential function switch of ER
from genomic binding to no-genomic binding. Combined treatment of
PI3K/AKT inhibitors with hormone therapy may shed a light of therapeutic
strategy to patients with aggressive or metastatic breast tumors.

