Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib potentiates effect of ionizing
radiation in human non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Ionizing irradiation (IR) is used to treat NSCLC however;
radiotherapy remains largely palliative due to radioresistance.Recently,
we reported that IR-resistant residual cells in NSCLC expresses a complex
phenotype combining cancer stem cell (CSC) and the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) traits. The tyrosine kinase receptors (RTK)
receptors, such as PDGFRa, EGFR FGFR and VEGFR, are expressed in
nonrelated cells and IR-resistant residual cells. Moreover, PDGFRb is
dramatically upregulated in IR resistant cells. Since all of these RTK
receptors, as well as other oncogenic proteins are client proteins of the
molecular chaperone HSP90a, NSCLC cells and specifically IR-resistant
residual cells could be highly dependent on HSP90 and sensitive to HSP90
inhibition.We hypothesize that inhibition of HSP90 will eliminate
IR-resistant residual cells and sensitize NSCLC cells to IR
treatment.Methods/Results: HSP90 inhibitor Ganetespib, kindly provided by
SYNTA Pharmaceuticals, was used in this study. A549 cells, primary human
adenocarcinoma cells and primary normal human airway epithelial (HSAEC),
were utilized. Using MTT and clonogenic assays we have demonstrated that
ganetespib does not affect primary normal HSAEC cells, but suppresses the
proliferation of NSCLC cells and potentiates the effect of IR treatment.
Ganetespib inhibits the growth of lung tumor spheres. Using a wound
healing assay we have determined that ganetespib inhibits motility of
NSCLC cells and IR-resistant residual cells. We also have investigated
the effect of ganetespib on cells cycle, apoptosis and DNA repair
machinery in irradiated cells. Using a SCID mice model, we have
demonstrated that ganetespib applied as monotherapy inhibits the growth
of T2821 primary adenocarcinoma cells in vivo and significantly
sensitizes T2821 tumors to IR-treatment.Conclusion: The HSP90 inhibitor
ganetespib potentiates the effect of IR in NSCLC and eliminates
IR-resistant residual cells.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

