Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGI-110 SQ provides superior disposition profile for active
metabolite decitabine than decitabine IV infusion: Results from mass
balance and tissue distribution study in cynomolgus monkeys and in vitro
human studies


Introduction: SGI-110 is 2nd generation hypomethylating agent (HMA)
formulated as a dinucleotide of decitabine (DAC) and deoxyguanosine
delivered as a small volume and pharmaceutically stable subcutaneous (SQ)
injection allowing longer effective half-life and more extended DAC
exposure window than IV infusion. As previously reported, the
differentiated PK profile offers the potential for improved biological
and clinical activity and safety over currently available HMAs
(Kantarjian et al. ASH, 2012).Objective: The aim of this study was to
characterize the mass balance and tissue distribution of [14C]SGI-110
compared to IV DAC and evaluate the potential uptake into cells of
SGI-110 in parent form prior to conversion to active metabolite
DAC.Methods: The mass balance (MB) of administered radioactivity was
evaluated in cynomolgus monkeys following a single SQ dose of
[14C]SGI-110 or a single molar equivalent IV infusion dose of
[14C]decitabine. Tissue distribution of the radiolabel was determined
using quantitative whole-body autoradiography (QWBA) up to 24 hours
following dosing. The position of the radiolabel was within the DAC
structure of SGI-110 and the same as on DAC. SGI-110 was evaluated as a
substrate in human transporter panel and its uptake into cells was also
assessed by incubation with fresh human whole blood.Results: Excretion of
radioactivity after SGI-110 SQ dosing was predominantly urinary while
only 3% of the dose was detected in feces. Recovery of the radioactive
dose was complete over 24 hr. For bone marrow, blood, plasma, red blood
cells (RBC), white blood cells and most tissues examined, total
radioactivity-derived concentrations following SGI-110 dosing were
consistently higher than for IV DAC (based on molar equivalency
comparison), suggesting that higher levels of DAC-related exposures are
achieved at potential target sites with SGI-110. SGI-110 was detected at
appreciable levels in RBC lysates from monkey MB study suggesting
intracellular presence, which was then confirmed in incubation with fresh
human whole blood where intracellular SGI-110 was detected in RBC and WBC
lysates. In vitro transporter panel study showed SGI-110 to be a
substrate for uptake by human CNT2-expressing MDCK-II cells, while
decitabine was a substrate for human nucleoside transporters CNT1 and
ENT1.Conclusions: Results show that SQ SGI-110 delivers consistently
higher decitabine-related exposures at target tissues confirming its
potential for improved clinical activity over DAC IV infusion. This is
likely the result of the enhanced disposition profile conferred by
protracted SGI-110 conversion affording a more extended exposure window
of active metabolite decitabine and the intracellular uptake of SGI-110
for overall increased exposure at target sites of action.

