Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK2 functional chromatin footprints in patient-derived breast
tumor cells predict molecular subtype, clinical outcome, and drug
response in breast cancers


Increased MAPK pathway activity is a major hallmark of acquired
resistance of breast cancers to therapies and disease recurrence, and
this oncogenic pathway is targeted in the clinic using MEK inhibitors.
However, designing combination therapies is a challenge due to
variability in the expression of potential partners of these kinases in
different tumor types. For example, we have shown previously in ER(+)
breast cancer cell lines that ERK2 localization to chromatin was dictated
by ER, and that it marked those genes associated with ER signaling
(Madak-Erdogan et al., Mol Cell Biol 31:226-236, 2011). In this study, we
hypothesized that in different subtypes of ER(-) breast tumors, ERK2
might be partnering with different transcription factors, thereby
regulating the signaling pathways that control the phenotype of that
particular tumor subtype. Furthermore, by identifying new cellular and
molecular mechanisms leading to the development of resistance to
therapies in specific tumor subtypes, it might be possible to develop
combination therapies to improve the clinical effectiveness of treatments
of these subtypes. Toward this goal, we obtained ERK2 cistrome
information (by ChIP-Seq) from our previously established dissociated
primary breast tumor cultures. These cultures represented several
different breast cancer subtypes, including Her2 enriched, triple
negative (basal), triple negative (Luminal B like), triple negative
(claudin low) and triple negative (basal epithelial). We found that
tumor-type specific ERK2 Functional Chromatin Footprints marked those
genes that delineated the subtype of the tumor as well as patient
clinical outcome, based on Oncomine and TCGA datasets. In addition,
transcription factor binding motif enrichment analysis identified new
partners and potential druggable targets for chromatin-associated ERK2.
Comparison of the ERK2 cistrome revealed Hedgehog and NRF1 signaling
pathways as major pathways associated with MAPK activity in the different
tumor subtypes. We then tested several inhibitors targeting these
pathways and showed that ERK2 occupancy indeed predicted response to
these therapies in different tumors. Our studies reveal that monitoring
MAPK activity on chromatin is predictive of patient outcome and tumor
response to different therapies. This systems approach can be used to
precisely identify the subtype of the tumor, predict outcome, and design
personalized therapies, based on the functional partners of ERK2 in a
particular breast tumor subtype.(Supported by grants from The Breast
Cancer Research Foundation (BSK), NIH P50 AT006268 (BSK), NIH R01
CA113674 (DEA), and Bankhead Coley Cancer Research Challenge Grant
09BW-04 (DEA))

