Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA H19 as a novel therapeutic target for
pancreatic cancer


Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), non-protein coding transcripts longer
than 200 nucleotides, have been recently reported to play important roles
in carcinogenesis and cancer metastasis through epigenetic regulation. In
the present study, we examined the expression levels and roles of lncRNA
in pancreatic cancer to elucidate whether lncRNA could be a novel
candidate for pancreatic cancer therapy. First, we injected PANC-1 and
PK-45H, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells into the spleens of
NOD/Shi-scid, IL-2Rnull (NOG) mice, and then established novel cell lines
from liver and lung metastatic nodules. Microarray analysis revealed that
H19, a member of lncRNA, and CTAG1A and CTAG2, cancer-testis antigens,
were the most increased RNAs in PANC-lung-1A cells from lung metastasis
as compared to the parental cells (82.4, 84.4 and 62.2-fold,
respectively). Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) confirmed higher levels of
H19 mRNA in the metastatic cell lines from PANC-1 and PK-45H cells than
in PANC-Skin cells from subcutaneous tumors. H19 is an imprinted
non-coding RNA, and the H19 gene produces a 2.3 kb lncRNA during
embryogenesis. Its expression is low or non-existent in normal human
tissues. H19 is abundantly expressed in liver, breast, endometrial and
bladder cancers, but the roles of H19 that have been reported in these
cancers are controversial. In six of 10 pancreatic carcinoma cell lines,
the H19 levels determined by qRT-PCR were higher than those of
immortalized pancreatic ductal epithelial cell lines (HPDE 4 and 6).
Established pancreatic cancer cells from liver metastasis of the same
patient (PK-45H) showed higher H19 mRNA levels than those from primary
tumor (PK-45P). In situ hybridization analysis using branched DNA probe
for H19 mRNA showed that H19 was expressed in ductal cells, but not in
acinar and islet cells in normal pancreatic tissues. On the other hand,
H19 was strongly expressed in pancreatic cancer cells in 6 out of 38
(16%) pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissues. siRNA targeting H19 was
transfected to PANC-lung-1A cells to clarify the roles of H19 in the
metastatic cells. The cell proliferation rate was not altered in the
siRNA transfected metastatic cells, but cell migration, as observed using
a Boyden chamber assay, and sphere formation were significantly decreased
in the cells. H19 mRNA in PANC-1 cells was more abundantly detected in
the spheres than the non-sphere cells. These findings suggest that H19
lncRNA plays important roles in the metastasis and cancer stem cell
functions of pancreatic cancer. H19 is a novel candidate as a therapeutic
target for pancreatic cancer metastasis.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

