Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lacking clonal relationship in 20% of relapsing diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas


Introduction:Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common
lymphoma in adults. Nearly half of the patients can be cured with
standard therapeutic regimens. However, a substantial number of patients
experience a recurrence. In general, lymphoma recurrences are considered
to represent a relapse of the original neoplasm, but this concept has
been recently challenged by demonstration of clonally unrelated relapses
by immunoglobulin (heavy chain) gene (IGH) rearrangement analysis.
Although being the most widely used method for clonality testing, IGH
fragment length analysis has a very limited output of information not
giving any insight about tumor heterogeneity and evolution in time. Also,
the result is based only on a single gene in the whole genome, and
therefore it can be error-prone.We applied a genome-wide clonality
testing on 17 paired primary and relapsed DLBCL aiming to provide an
unambiguous answer about the existence of clonally unrelated recurrences
in this entity. Additionally, we profiled 10 cases of non-relapsing DLBCL
searching for genetic markers at diagnosis which could predict lymphoma
relapse.Methods:Genomic DNA extracted from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue with at least 70% tumor content was used for the
analysis. Array-comparative genomic hybridization was utilized to detect
chromosomal copy number aberrations and to determine clonal relationship
status of each primary-relapse pair. This result was then verified by IGH
gene fragment length analysis. Directed deep-sequencing was performed on
a custom hot-spot panel consisting of most frequently mutated genes in
DLBCL.Results:Among 17 cases of recurring DLBCL, 3 relapses (17%) were
identified which were clonally unrelated to the primary disease by copy
number aberration and IGH fragment length analysis. Different modes of
tumor progression could be detected within clonally related set of
relapses, providing evidence of a common early progenitor cell population
in some patients. Moreover, some DLBCL exhibit substantial intra- and
inter- tumoral heterogeneity, which is probably a source of variation in
patient outcomes and clonal progression. Comparison of copy number
aberration and point mutation profiles between relapsing and
non-relapsing tumors yielded significant differences, which could be
useful for understanding the genetic basis of DLBCL
recurrence.Conclusions:We provide a clear evidence for the existence of
clonally unrelated relapses in DLBCL. The existence of clonally unrelated
relapses might be of clinical importance since relapses are usually
treated more aggressively than primary neoplasms with a significant
treatment-related morbidity, and this may be by-passed in the former
instances. Moreover, the high definition clonal analyses provide new
insights into the molecular profiles of tumors in vivo, and therefore
might contribute to the development of more personalized approaches for
cancer treatment.

