Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between monocytes and bone marrow microenvironment in
pathogenesis of multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable haematological malignancy
characterized by the clonal proliferation of malignant plasma cells
within the bone marrow. The current data on MM disease progression
indicate that bone marrow microenvironment plays crucial role in
pathogenesis of MM. Myeloma cells contacts with bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs), which secrete factors/cytokines, promoting tumor cell growth and
survival. Paracrine secretion of cytokines, such as IL-6, insulin-like
growth factor-1, inflammatory protein-1a in BMSCs promotes MM cell
proliferation and protects against drug-induced cytotoxicity. MM lytic
bone disease is caused by osteoclast activation and osteoblast
inhibition. Disease-related bone complications result in significant
morbidity due to pain, pathologic fractures and spinal cord compression.
The bone microenvironment creates a supportive niche for MM progression.
Osteoclasts and BMSCs, along with extracellular matrix and cytokines
stimulate myeloma cell proliferation and confer chemoresistance.
Therefore, the reciprocal interactions among tumor cells, osteoclasts,
osteoblasts, and bone marrow stromal cells impact both the establishment
and progression of MM.In current study, monocyte can directly promote
osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells through cell contact
interactions and production of osteogenic factors. This mechanism is
mediated by the activation of STAT3 signaling pathway in the mesechymal
stem cells that leads to the upregulation of osteoblasts-associated genes
such as Runx2 and alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and the downregulation of
osteoblast inhibitors such as DKK1 to drive the differentiation of
mesechymal stem cells into osteoblasts.In this study, we examined the
role of monocyte, a component of bone marrow microenvironment, in the MM
progression. We investigated the proliferation of MM cell lines cultured
alone or co-cultured with BMSCs and/or monocytes of MM patients.
Consistently, we observed increased proliferation of MM cell lines in the
presence of either BMSCs or monocytes compared to cell line-only control.
Furthermore, the co-culture of BMSCs plus monocytes induced the greatest
degree of proliferation of myeloma cells. In addition to increased
proliferation, BMSCs and monocytes decreased the rate of apoptosis of
myeloma cells. Our results therefore suggest that highlights the role of
monocyte as an important component of the bone marrow microenvironment.

