Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BIG3-PHB2 interaction is a key therapeutic target in luminal-type
of breast cancer


More than 70% of primary breast tumors are estrogen receptor alpha
(ER)-positive, and the interactions between estrogen (E2) and ER
dramatically enhance the proliferative and metastatic activity of breast
tumor cells. The selective estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen directly
inhibits E2 and ER interactions and is a standard treatment offered to
patients with ER-positive breast cancer. The acquisition of endocrine
resistance is a common obstacle in endocrine therapy for ER-positive
breast tumors. Therefore, identifying the factors and pathways
responsible for resistance and defining ways to overcome it represent
important therapeutic challenges in breast cancer research. Prohibitin 2
(PHB2) is known to function as a co-repressor of ER because it regulates
ER transcriptional activity via its direct binding to ER. However, it
remains unclear how endogenous PHB2 is inactivated in ER-positive breast
cancer cells, despite its abundant expression and the lack of genomic
mutations or methylations in breast cancer clinical specimens or cell
lines. Here we report that brefeldin A-inhibited guanine
nucleotide-exchange protein 3 (BIG3) protein interacts PP1, and
dephosphorylates the E2-dependent phosphorylation of PHB2, which is
indispensable for its tumor suppressive ability, thereby causing an
apparent loss-of-function of PHB2 protein, resulting in the constitutive
activation of ER signaling pathways. These findings demonstrate for the
first time the novel mechanism for the inactivation of tumor suppressor
protein. From a therapeutic perspective, intrinsic PHB2 released from
BIG3 by the cell-permeable peptide inhibitor directly binds to both
nuclear- and membrane-associated ER, which leads to the inhibition of
multiple ER-signaling pathways, and the growth of ER-positive breast
cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo. More importantly, this peptide
inhibitor treatment suppressed tamoxifen resistance and enhanced
tamoxifen responsiveness in ER-positive breast cancer cells. These
findings mark the first step toward uncovering a new E2/ ER signaling
network in breast cancer and shed light on novel therapeutic strategies
utilizing PHB2 protein functions for E2/ ER-positive breast cancer.

