Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel biologically active acid stable liposomal formulation of
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) for breast cancer prevention


The role of fish oil (FO) rich in omega-3 fatty acids (n-3 FA) in breast
cancer prevention remains controversial. Our data showing that higher
ratios of n-3 FA:n-6 FA (in excess of 10:1) are necessary to inhibit rat
mammary carcinogenesis suggest that a component of FO may be responsible
for its tumor protective effect. DHA may be the critical n-3 FA present
in FO since it has been shown to be superior to EPA in inhibiting mammary
carcinogenesis. However, the typical Western Diet with a ratio of 1:15
n-3 FA:n-6 FA is not sufficient in providing the amount of DHA required
for cancer prevention. In addition, mammals can't synthesize this fatty
acid; thus further emphasizing the need for developing a translationally
relevant formulation of DHA which can be used for breast cancer
prevention in humans. A liposomal formulation for DHA for intravenous
administration has been developed, but this route of administration is
not appropriate for clinical application as a chemopreventive agent. We
hypothesize that the oral liposomal formulation of DHA which is resistant
to oxidation and low gastric pH would be ideal since it will enhance its
bioavailability in the circulation and at the breast tissue, and thus
enhance the chemopreventive efficacy. As an initial approach to test our
hypothesis, we developed a liposome that contains lipids similar in
structure to lipids found in Archaea, which is known to endure high
acidity and temperature. Thus, ether lipids
1,2-di-O-hexadecyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine and
1,2-di-O-phytanyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoenatholamine were utilized to
develop our liposomal formulation via the extrusion method. Our results
revealed that the average size of the DHA ether liposome, determined by
Dynamic Light Scattering, is approximately 135nm, while that of the ghost
formulation is approximately 150nm. This size is ideal for oral
administration and can cross the enterocytes of the intestine. The
encapsulation efficiency of the liposomes as determined by HPLC-MS/MS is
approximately 80%. We showed for the first time that our formulation is
resistant to oxidation and stable at various pH (1.0-7.4) at room
temperature and at 37C for a duration of more than two hours. Next, we
tested the antitumor action of the liposomal DHA and compared it to that
of DHA in the triple negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line. We
observed that liposomal DHA was ten times more potent at inhibiting cell
proliferation in culture than non-liposomal DHA. In summary, we report
for the first time a liposomal formulation of DHA that can withstand a
low pH, thus making its oral delivery feasible. Furthermore, its
remarkable growth inhibitory activity at a much lower dose than
non-liposomal DHA suggests that our nanotechnology-based approach is a
promising strategy to be tested for breast cancer prevention. (Support:
Susan G. Komen For the Cure, KG081632 )

