Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collections of simultaneously altered genes as highly predictive
markers of cancer cell drug response


Introduction: Many genetic markers of drug response have been reported in
cancer pharmacogenomics studies. However, most of these markers fail to
achieve clinical utility because they capture response in only a small
fraction of the patient population; this shortcoming might result from a
reliance on single-gene markers in contemporary personalized medicine.
While there is growing evidence that therapeutic response can be
modulated by the concerted impact of multiple genetic alterations, the
combinatorics associated with many-body interactions has mostly
prohibited the discovery of multi-gene biomarkers, even using
computational methods. We developed a computational approach, MOCA
(Multivariate Organization of Combinatorial Alterations), to partially
address these challenges. Extending our method that accounts for pairwise
interactions, MOCA combines many genomic alterations into biomarkers of
drug response, using Boolean set operations coupled with optimization; in
this framework the union, intersection, and difference Boolean set
operations are proxies of molecular redundancy, synergy, and
interference. The algorithm is fast, broadly applicable to genomics data,
of immediate utility for prioritizing cancer pharmacogenomics
experiments, and recovers known clinical findings without bias.
Furthermore, results from this work connect many important, previously
isolated observations.Major Findings: When applied to 416
pharmacogenomically characterized cancer cell lines from the Cancer Cell
Line Encyclopedia, MOCA identified many known and potential markers of
drug response. For example, correlation of ERBB inhibitor response
drastically increased when considering EGFR (ERBB1), ERBB2, ERBB3, ERBB4,
and KRAS alterations in a single marker. Similarly, a marker combining
IGF1, IGF1R, and RAD51 alterations drastically increased correlation with
IGF1R inhibitor response, relative to any of these three genetic markers
considered in isolation. This approach is also powerful for determining
subsets of gene-specific mutations that increase correlation with drug
response. For instance, MOCA accurately captures the differential EGFR
inhibitor response conferred by known activating EGFR mutations.
Similarly, we find specific HDAC1 mutations cooperate with HDAC5
overexpression to potentiate cells to the HDAC inhibitor panobinostat.
Additionally, considering all pairwise gene-drug interactions, MOCA
recovers known and compelling correlations, including: RTK inhibitor
resistance via c-MET, EGFR, ERBB2, and PDGFRB kinase switching; mutual
exclusivity of TP53 mutation and response to the MDM2 inhibitor nutlin-3;
greater nutlin-3 potentiation via MDM4, rather than MDM2, overexpression;
MEK and RAF inhibitor response in BRAF mutated cell lines; and MEK
inhibitor potentiating NRAS mutations.Masica, David L., & Rachel Karchin.
Cancer Research 73 (2013): 1699-1708.

