Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RG7787 - a novel de-immunized PE based fusion protein for therapy
of mesothelin-positive solid tumors


Attaching toxic payloads to antibodies has recently been established as a
breakthrough in cancer therapy. Most of the currently developed antibody
drug conjugate programs represent targeted chemotherapy with microtubule
polymerization inhibiting drugs and hence share resistance mechanisms and
side effects with classical chemotherapeutics like Taxol. Inhibition of
protein synthesis by Pseudomonas Exotoxin (PE) is a more powerful mode of
action that interferes with all hallmarks of cancer cells, not just with
proliferation. However, its clinical use has been limited by
immunogenicity as shown for SS1P, a mesothelin targeted immunotoxin. We
have developed a novel de-immunized PE fusion protein (RG7787) for
treatment of mesothelin-positive tumors.In order to de-immunize PE, point
mutations have been introduced into domain III and the entire domain II
has been deleted reducing the size of the effector moiety to
approximately 24 kD. PE24 fusions with a disulfide-stabilized Fv fragment
have previously been shown to be much better tolerated in rodents, but
this could, at least in part, also be attributed to a much reduced serum
half-life and exposure. In order to also de-immunize the targeting moiety
of RG7787 and restore PK parameters similar to those of SS1P, we
substituted the mouse dsFv moiety by a humanized Fab fragment. We show
that RG7787 has indeed similar PK properties to SS1P in mouse and
cyno.Cell viability assays show that RG7787 has similar cytotoxic potency
as SS1P on different cell lines. In-vivo equipotency to SS1P in different
xenograft models has been achieved at 3 fold higher doses indicating that
tumor penetration of SS1P might be slightly better. However, RG7787 is up
to tenfold better tolerated in rodents and cynomolgus monkeys, indicating
that the therapeutic window is improved. RG7787 achieves potent tumor
growth inhibition and even tumor regressions in several xenograft models.
We also observed clearly synergistic efficacy with Taxol treatment in
different tumor models making this a promising combination for clinical
trials.

