Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating stem cell-specific metabolic pathways in normal and
malignant hematopoiesis to target human acute myeloid leukemia stem cells


Metabolic alterations are a cancer hallmark but the metabolic
requirements of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in general, and leukemic
stem cells (LSCs) specifically are poorly understood, particularly beyond
energy metabolism. By analyzing a comprehensive transcriptional roadmap
of human hematopoiesis, and comparing this to a LSC signature developed
from 84 primary human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples, we uncovered
two unexpected findings: (1) several metabolic pathways, specifically in
bioactive lipids, distinguish HSC from progenitors and are essential for
their function; and LSC are more similar to HSC overall, but also possess
specific metabolic pathways that are more comparable to those of normal
progenitors. We compiled a comprehensive list of 67 genes involved in
fatty acid metabolism based on literature and database information and
found that 36 of these were differentially expressed between HSC and
progenitors, with 24 of them higher in HSC. In particular, sphingolipid
enzymes are differentially regulated throughout the hematopoietic
hierarchy. Interesting, sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) plays a role in HSC
egress and ceramide vs S1P levels serve as a rheostat to regulate growth
and cell survival. We defined these 24 genes as a lipid stem signature,
and find that it is enriched in the LSC gene expression profiles from our
84 primary AML cohort by GSEA analysis indicating that fatty acid
metabolism is differentially regulated in LSCs and non-LSCs, as it is for
HSCs vs. normal progenitors. Our signature was found to be prognostic for
patient survival in a Dutch cohort of 181 cytogenetically normal AMLs. To
determine if lipid metabolism plays a functional role in AML biology, we
screened a fatty acid compound library using a novel AML cell line (8227)
that retains hierarchical organization and assessed cell viability,
phenotypic LSC content, and differentiation. We identified myriocin,
which targets serine palmitoyltransferase (1st step of sphingolipid
synthesis) in this screen. Myriocin decreased 8227 viability and altered
differentiation in vitro and reduced leukemia burden in vivo following
transplantation into NOD/SCID mice transgenic for human cytokines.
Treatment of mice bearing primary AML xenografts, including those from
therapy resistant and relapsed patients, with myriocin or its derivative
FTY720, a S1P mimetic, resulted in reduction of leukemic engraftment.
Moreover, serial transplantation of AML samples by limiting dilution
showed decreased LSC frequency of FTY720- and myriocin-treated cells in
secondary mice compared to vehicle-treated cells. Importantly, myriocin
or FTY720 treatment do not disrupt engraftment in mice bearing normal
hematopoietic grafts. Thus, sphingolipid biology in LSC is different from
that of HSC, and we present a novel AML therapeutic strategy targeting
bioactive sphingolipids as a means to eradicate LSC while sparing HSC.

