Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physician preferences in tobacco cessation support for cancer
patients: A survey of physicians at National Cancer Institute Designated
Cancer Centers


Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate oncologists'
preferences for methods to increase delivery of tobacco cessation support
to cancer patients.Methods: An email list of 6844 physicians at NCI
Designated Cancer Centers was generated using publically available online
resources. An online survey was conducted in the fall of 2013 to assess
tobacco assessment and cessation practices by physicians, barriers to
providing cessation support, and methods to improve access to cessation
services for cancer patients. Results of this survey are compared to
similar survey findings by the American Society of Clinical Oncology
(ASCO) and the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer
(IASLC).Results: Of 6844 electronically delivered survey invitations, we
received 887 responses (13%). Consistent with previously published ASCO
and IASLC surveys, 90% of physicians agreed that tobacco use by patients
affects cancer treatment outcomes (vs. 87-92% in ASCO/IASLC), 90% of
respondents reported that they ask patients about their tobacco use (vs.
90% in ASCO/IASLC), and 83% routinely advise tobacco users to quit (vs.
80-82% in ASCO/IASLC). However, only 37% of respondents regularly
discussed medications, and 35% actively treated patients (vs. 39-44% in
ASCO/IASLC). Most (71%) responding oncologists preferred cessation
support be provided at the initial patient consult, and few (11%) were
concerned about the use of tobacco cessation medications. Lack of time
and lack of available resources were the dominant barriers to the
administration of tobacco cessation support to cancer patients by
oncologists. Only 10% of oncologists believed they were adequately
trained to counsel patients on smoking cessation, but 55% reported that
training for someone else in their clinic would increase tobacco
cessation support. When asked what provider they prefer to administer
cessation support to cancer patients, 16% reported a primary care
physician, 18% reported a mid-level (nurse practitioner or physician
assistant), 50% reported any other clinical staff, and only 1% preferred
to personally provide cessation support. Whereas most (58%) oncologists
preferred to have dedicated cessation services within their institution,
38% reported they would use dedicated services either within, or outside
their institution.Conclusions: Most oncologists at NCI Designated Cancer
Centers recognize the importance of tobacco cessation, but prefer to have
tobacco cessation support for cancer patients provided by another trained
professional.

