Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic biochemical tissue analysis detects functional selectin
ligands expressed on breast, colorectal, liver, lung, ovarian,
pancreatic, prostate, and stomach cancer tissues


Accumulating evidence suggests that selectin/selectin ligand interactions
are involved in mediating the adhesion of bloodborne circulating tumor
cells at distant sites during the later stages of cancer metastasis.
Presently, immunostaining is the standard method for detecting selectin
ligands expressed on tissue, but this approach cannot ascertain if the
selectin ligands are functional. That is, detection of purported selectin
ligands by static (no-force) immunostaining under equilibrium conditions
does not necessitate that the reactive antigens are able to mediate cell
adhesion with hemodynamic flow (force) under non-equilibrium conditions.
The relevance of functional selectin ligands as a biomarker is presently
unclear because of the lack of adequate detection methods. Recently, we
developed a method to detect functional selectin ligands in situ by
perfusing selectin-coated microspheres (probes) over cancer tissues in a
microfluidic device. This method of tissue interrogation is termed
dynamic biochemical tissue analysis (DBTA). Preliminary analysis of
signet ring cell colon carcinoma tissue revealed the highest amount of
specific probe adhesion relative to negative control probes occurred with
a murine E-selectin probe, rather than human E-, P-, or L-selectin
probes. Therefore, to investigate the relevance of functional selectin
ligand expression on cancer tissue as a biomarker, 196 cases of various
solid tumors at primary and metastatic sites were investigated with DBTA
using murine E-selectin. Probe adhesion occurred on multiple cases of
breast, colon, liver, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, prostate, and stomach
cancers, demonstrating the presence of functional selectin ligands. In
addition, probe adhesion occurred on multiple cases of breast, colon,
liver, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, rectal, and stomach cancer tissues
sampled from metastatic sites. Overall, probe adhesion levels for the
tissues investigated ranged from 10 specifically adherent probes/mm2 on
lung adenosquamous carcinoma to 1170 specifically adherent probes/mm2 on
ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma, indicating broad levels of
functional selectin ligand expression. In summary, DBTA detects
functional selectin ligands expressed on tissue from multiple cancer
types at both the primary and metastatic sites, data that may provide
valuable diagnostic and prognostic information for malignant tumors.

