Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maresin 1: a potent endogenous anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving
inhibitor of primary tumor growth and metastasis


Background: Inflammation is a recent hallmark of cancer, and
chemotherapeutic agents, such as etoposide, cisplatin and paclitaxel,
stimulate pro-inflammatory cytokine production by macrophages in the
tumor microenvironment. A new direction has emerged in inflammation
research with the discovery of endogenous anti-inflammatory and
pro-resolving lipid-autacoid mediators derived from omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids. These specialized pro-resolving mediators
(SPM), including maresin 1, have novel inflammation clearing
(pro-resolution) activity without being immunosuppressive. Maresin 1
(Mar1) is a novel endogenous anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving lipid
autacoid mediator biosynthesized by human macrophages from endogenous
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). The role of maresin 1 in cancer has not been
studied to date. However, we hypothesize that maresin 1 inhibits cancer
progression and metastasis by stimulating the resolution of inflammation
and down-regulating pro-inflammatory cytokines. Results: Maresin 1
stimulated macrophage phagocytosis of chemotherapy-induced melanoma
(A375-SM) cell debris by 117%. The maresin 1 epimer, 7(S)-Mar1, also
enhanced macrophage phagocytosis of chemotherapy-induced cell debris by
58%. Maresin 1 stimulated macrophage phagocytosis of apoptotic prostate
(PC3M-LN), melanoma (A375-SM), head and neck (HSC-3), and ovarian (HEY)
tumor cells by 206%, 32%, 35%, and 13%, respectively, as well as enhanced
macrophage phagocytosis of zymosan by 62%. Macrophages, exposed to tumor
cells treated with cisplatin, secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines. Mar1
and 7(S)-Mar1 regulated these inflammatory cytokines. Mar1 decreased
cisplatin-induced pro-tumorigenic and pro-inflammatory cytokines secreted
by macrophages, including: IL-8, IL-6, CXCL1, CCL1, CCL2, CCL5, and
Serpin E1. In contrast, 7(S)-Mar1 increased IL-6, CXCL1, CCL2, CCL3,
CCL5. Systemic therapy with Mar1 (15 nanogram/mouse/day) for 15-24 days
potently inhibited primary melanoma xenografts (A375-SM) and lung
metastasis (B16F10) by 75% and 57%, respectively, without toxicity.
Conclusions: Maresin 1 inhibits primary tumor growth and metastasis via
the stimulation of phagocytosis of apoptotic and chemotherapy-treated
tumor cells by macrophages. In addition, maresin 1 reduces tumor
inflammation by counter-regulating pro-inflammatory cytokines secreted by
macrophages. Our results provide a mechanistic rationale to specifically
enhance endogenous resolution processes to complement conventional
modalities for cancer treatment.

