Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of prostate cancer cells with tumor microenvironment
promotes EMT and DTCs activation


Metastasis causes high mortality in malignancies, which includes prostate
cancer (PCa), breast cancer, lung cancer and other cancer types. PCa
cells, for example, frequently metastasize to bone resulting in a mixture
of osteoblastic and osteolytic lesions. There are currently no effective
treatments proven to cure PCa skeletal metastases. Accumulating data has
suggested that cancer cells undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) to initiate tumor progression. Recent evidence has addressed a link
between EMT and activation of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) that are
located in bone marrow and called sleeping cells when they are inactive
state. However, there is lack of studies regarding direct evidence of
localized PCa cells occurring EMT and DTCs activation when tumor cells
interact with microenvironment. In this study, we first generated
luciferase labeled PCa cells (PC3-luc and C4-2B-luc), and implanted the
cells subcutaneously into nude mice. Tumor growth was monitored by in
vivo bioluminescense imaging and tumor volume was measured twice a week.
We found that tumor volumes were at heterogeneous levels. Then, the
tumors were removed, exercised, and digested ex vivo to generate single
cell suspension (we named the cells as PC3-lucsc and C4-2B-lucsc), and
the cells were subcutaneously re-injected into nude mice. We observed
those cells grew faster than that of parental cells and enhanced
neo-vessel formation. We compared the differences of gene and protein
expressions between PC3-lucand PC3-lucsc cells and found that hallmarkers
of EMT, for example vimentin, slug and ZEB2 were expressed at higher
levels in PC3-lucsc compared to PC3-luccells. Accordingly, production of
E-cadherin and -catenin was significantly decreased in PC3-lucsc cells.
Angiogenesis markers, including VEGFR2, VEGFR3, MCP-3, MCP-4, I-TAC,
I309, uPAR, GCP-2 and GRO, were also increased in PC3-lucsc cells using
antibody array. Interestingly, CCL2 was significantly increased in
PC3-lucsc cells comparing to the parental cells. We finally flushed out
bone marrow and we were able to detect DTCs by RT-PCR and successfully
isolated DTCs by Magnetic Activated Cell Sorting (MACS), in addition to
confirmation of DTCs by immunohistochemical staining. This is the first
report showing that interaction of PCa cells with tumor microenvironment
promotes EMT and DTCs activation. The current study may provide potential
therapeutic targets and diagnostic markers in PCa progression. Supported
by NSF projects 81171993 and 81272415; NSF key project 81130046.

