Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of DNA methylation and H3K27me3 is a
cancer-specific dual epigenetic modification


Alterations of epigenetic modifications are promising targets of cancer
therapy, and several epigenetic drugs are now used in the clinical field.
At the same time, individual epigenetic modifications have physiological
roles. Therefore, a cancer-specific combination of epigenetic
modifications (dual modifications) is considered to be better as a
therapeutic target. However, it is unclear whether or not such
cancer-specific dual modification is present. In this study, we aimed to
clarify whether cancer-specific dual modification is present by focusing
on the combination of two major repressive modifications, DNA methylation
and trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3).DNA methylation and
H3K27me3 analyses in human colon, breast, and prostate cancer cell lines
by Infinium HumanMethylation450 and ChIP-on-chip, respectively, revealed
that 24.74.1% of DNA methylated genes were co-localized with H3K27me3 in
cancer cells. In contrast, only 11.87.1% of DNA methylated genes were
co-localized with H3K27me3 in their normal counterpart cells. 29.917.4%
of genes with the dual modifications had neither DNA methylation nor
H3K27me3 in normal counterpart cells. Expression levels of genes with the
dual modifications were as low as those of genes with only DNA
methylation in cancer cells. Analysis of re-activation of genes with the
dual modifications by a DNA demethylating reagent, 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC), and/or an EZH2 inhibitor, GSK126, revealed that genes with
the dual modifications, such as IGFBP7, SFRP1, and SLC6A15, were
re-activated more efficiently by the combination treatment than by a
single treatment with 5-aza-dC. In contrast, such a combination effect on
gene re-activation was not observed for genes with only DNA methylation.
Furthermore, the combination treatment by 5-aza-dC and GSK126 had an
additive inhibitory effect on growth of cancer cells.These results showed
that genes with the dual modifications, DNA methylation and H3K27me3, are
increased in cancer cells, and the combination of a DNA demethylating
reagent and an EZH2 inhibitor is useful for re-activation of these genes.

