Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism and therapeutic potential of the histone demethylase
GASC1 in castration-resistant prostate cancer


The histone lysine demethylase, GASC1 (Gene Amplified in Squamous Cell
Carcinoma 1) is an epigenetic regulatory protein both highly expressed
during mammalian embryogenesis and overexpressed in several types of
cancer, including aggressive Castration Resistant Prostate Cancer (CRPC).
GASC1 mainly catalyzes demethylation of tri- and di-methylated forms of
histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9me3/me2) epigenetic repressive marks, regulating
gene expression and chromatin architecture. This research aims to
elucidate the fundamental mechanism by which GASC1 dysregulation
contributes to CRPC progression, as well as to evaluate its potential as
a therapeutic target against aggressive prostate cancer. Previously, our
lab and others have shown that GASC1 interacts with the androgen receptor
(AR) and functions as a co-activator of AR-induced transcription in
prostate cancer. We have used an shRNA approach to determine whether
GASC1 knockdown affects the proliferation and transformation of CRPC
cells. We found that knocking down GASC1 inhibits the growth and colony
formation of C4-2B and CWR22Rv1 cells in vitro. Knockdown also reduced
transcript levels of classical and CRPC-specific AR target genes in
either the presence or absence of the AR ligand. As a result, we are
evaluating the therapeutic potential of novel and highly specific lysine
demethylase inhibitors towards abating GASC1 function in prostate cancer
cells in vitro. We have recently determined that one of these novel
inhibitors is highly effective in modulating the survival and
proliferation of several prostate cancer cell lines including CRPC lines
with IC50 values, all well under 1 uM. Together, our data demonstrates
that GASC1 is a therapeutically relevant target in controlling and
preventing the emergence of prostate cancers, with particular application
against aggressive CRPC subtypes.

