Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of anti-PD-1 in combination with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in a preclinical renal cell carcinoma model


Introduction: Nivolumab (BMS-936558; MDX-1106; ONO-4538) is a fully human
IgG4 programmed death-1 (PD-1) immune checkpoint inhibitor antibody that
selectively prevents interaction with PD-1 ligands (PD-L1 and PD-L2),
inhibiting the downregulation of antitumor T-cell functions. Nivolumab
has shown activity in advanced solid tumors, including renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), melanoma, and non-small cell lung cancer (Topalian SL,
et al. NEJM 2012;366:2443-54). Sunitinib and sorafenib are
anti-angiogenic tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) used for the treatment
of RCC. We investigated the activity of nivolumab in combination with
TKIs in a preclinical RCC murine model. Methods: The murine RCC (Renca)
tumor cell line was maintained in vitro and implanted subcutaneously into
8-12 week old female Balb/c mice. When mean tumor volume reached
approximately 90-100 mm3, mice were randomized into groups of eight.
Vehicle control, sunitinib 120 mg/kg, or sorafenib 200 mg/kg were
administered orally once daily for 14 days. The nivolumab surrogate
antibody, an IgG1 anti-mouse PD-1 monoclonal antibody (clone 4H2), was
administered at 10 mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection every four days for
four cycles. Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry analyses were used
to assess immune cell infiltration of tumors. Results: Sunitinib
monotherapy showed activity in the Renca murine RCC model producing tumor
growth inhibition of 84% by the end of treatment; however, tumors grew
progressively after cessation of therapy. Conversely, while the anti-PD-1
monoclonal antibody was inactive in this model, addition of anti-PD-1 to
sunitinib produced significant antitumor activity, resulting in complete
tumor regressions or marked delay in tumor growth. Combination anti-PD-1
plus sunitinib therapy also had no effect on the body weight of the mice.
Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that sunitinib monotherapy led
to an influx of immune cells predominantly into the tumor periphery,
whereas greater infiltration of immune cells throughout the tumor was
observed with combination anti-PD-1 and sunitinib therapy. In contrast,
combination treatment with anti-PD-1 antibody and sorafenib did not
enhance antitumor activity in this murine RCC model. Further exploration
of the mechanisms contributing to this synergy will be presented.
Conclusions: Combination therapy with sunitinib and anti-PD-1 antibody
demonstrated an enhanced effect against murine RCC. Safety and response
to nivolumab plus sunitinib, pazopanib, or ipilimumab in patients with
metastatic RCC are being assessed in an ongoing phase 1 study
(NCT01472081).

