Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of focal adhesion and actin cytoskeleton regulation
family genes as druggable target for gastric cancer


Gastric cancer(GC) is the 4th most common malignancy in the world and the
2nd most common cause of cancer related death worldwide (1). The known
causes of GC are diet, hygiene, Helicobacter pylori, Epstein-Barr virus
and hereditary factors. Other genetic causes of GC are known to be
heterogenic, partially due to differences in ethnic/genetic background.
Surgical removal of the tumor is the first-line treatment. Targeted
therapy agents and chemotherapeutic agents that show survival advantage
in other cancer types are being evaluated in GC(2,3), which only target
few known oncogenes. Targeted therapy for GC is still an unmet need, and
in light of personalized medicine, identifying genes specific to GC is
critical for its treatment. From our NGS data, we have discovered protein
family members involved in focal adhesion and actin cytoskeleton
regulation pathways, which are involved in mitosis and metastasis.We
developed a subpathway network analysis method called
PATHOME(unpublished), to identify pathways related to GC. For the first
stage, two datasets (84 Korean GC: GSE13861 and 56 Japanese
GC:GSE15081)(4,5). Two datasets (25 Korean GC: GSE36968 and 160 Chinese
GC:GSE27342)(6,7,8) were used as validation sets. We identified top 10
common pathways. We have then categorized genes within these pathways
according their functional category and druggability, either as drug
transporter or druggable target. As a result, we identified genes
involved in the focal adhesion and regulation of actin cytoskeleton
pathways and cell junction, all critical for cell division and metastasis
of tumor cells. Genes G1-9 are tight junction genes, and G10-20 are
protein family group related to Ras-like GTP-binding protein, G10 - 20.
G10, 11 and 12 are ras-like GTPases, and G13-20 are interacting proteins
or downstream proteins. We then compared differential expression of these
genes between the Asian and Caucasian dataset. G1-9 show co-regulation
pattern among the two ethnic group. G9 in particular, is normally
expressed in the stomach, and is downregulated (p=0.0045) in GC tumor
samples. In contrast, G10 is upregulated in the Korean dataset and is
shown to be upregulated in Japanese and Chinese GC sample (public) as
well(9,10), but not in our Caucasian dataset(unpublished). The TCGA
stomach cancer provisional data via cBioPortal(11) shows that most of the
G10 alterations in GC cases are mutations (9% of total cases) with 2
known cases of downregulation. It is interesting that most of the G10
alterations were found in Caucasian patients (11/18 cases).In our study,
we have identified genes that are significant in GC and are druggable
targets/drug transporters. It is significant that the pathways we
identified are detected in both ethnic groups, with different expression
pattern. This finding is critical for personalized treatment and drug
development for GC.

