Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the adaptive kinome response to BRAF and MEK inhibition
in melanoma


Early clinical studies have shown that concurrent administration of BRAF
and MEK inhibitors, dabrafenib and trametinib, is more active in patients
with BRAFV600E/K melanoma than either single agent alone. Even though the
combination of BRAF/MEK inhibitors is initially highly effective in
treating melanoma in a subset of patients, progression to resistance
ultimately occurscommonly via reactivation of the BRAF/MEK/ERK pathway.
Therefore, therapeutic strategies to counter primary resistance and
prevent the emergence of secondary resistance are needed. Following
pharmacological or progressive genetic perturbations, dynamic and
system-wide adaptive changes (reprogramming) in the expression and
activity of multiple kinases (collectively termed the kinome) clearly
occur in tumor cells. Rich networks of serine/threonine and tyrosine
kinases, many of which are understudied, are integrated into the
signaling systems controlled by oncogenes known to drive melanoma. Thus,
a comprehensive understanding of the kinome at baseline, during the
adaptive response to kinase inhibitor treatment, and in the context of
acquired resistance is critical. We use Multiplexed Inhibitor Beads
(MIBs), mixtures of covalently immobilized, linker-adapted kinase
inhibitors coupled with mass spectrometry (MS), to assess changes in
activation of kinases in untreated samples, during acute inhibition of
BRAF and/or MEK and in the context of acquired resistance. Our enhanced
MIB/MS technology allows us to study over 75-80% of the expressed kinome
(and numerous lipid and metabolic kinases) simultaneously using lysates
from cell lines, genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM) tumors,
patient-derived xenografts or human melanoma. We have identified several
kinases (e.g. PDGFR, DDR1, MAP3K1) that are activated upon acute
treatment with dabrafenib, trametinib, or dabrafenib/trametinib as well
as in drug-resistant human melanoma cells and BRAFV600E/PTEN-/-
GEMM-derived tumors and cell lines. Thus, studies using MIB/MS to measure
dynamic kinome responses have identified kinases that have not been
previously shown to be involved in the adaptive response to BRAF and/or
MEK inhibition. We are currently targeting kinases involved in adaptive
kiome reprogramming, pharmacologically or by RNAi, to determine whether
their activation leads to vulnerability. This work will lead to the
identification of novel and rationally predicted therapies for patients
with advanced melanoma.

