Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In situ photocontrolled intratumoral depot for combined
photodynamic therapy and brachytherapy for solid tumor


Intratumoral (i.t.) drug delivery can circumvent the transport
barriers_high intratumoral fluid pressure and irregular
vascularization_of solid tumors that limit the effectiveness of
systemically delivered therapeutics. Unfortunately, long tumor retention
and tumor coverage are difficult to concurrently optimize in most i.t.
delivery methodologies. One method to overcome this limitation is to
design an i.t. delivery system where the initial dissemination of the
delivery system_as a liquid_can be independently controlled from its
liquid-solid transition by an external stimulus. Herein, we propose such
a system in which a liquid can be converted to a solid by photo-oxidation
within the tumor. This approach builds upon our previous work, wherein we
successfully cross-linked elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs) within a tumor
by mixing a cysteine containing ELP (cELP) with a low concentration of
H2O2, a strong oxidant for the formation of disulfides. I.t. injection of
the mixture led to quick (Intratumoral (i.t.) drug delivery can
circumvent the transport barriers_high intratumoral fluid pressure and
irregular vascularization_of solid tumors that limit the effectiveness of
systemically delivered therapeutics. Unfortunately, long tumor retention
and tumor coverage are difficult to concurrently optimize in most i.t.
delivery methodologies. One method to overcome this limitation is to
design an i.t. delivery system where the initial dissemination of the
delivery system_as a liquid_can be independently controlled from its
liquid-solid transition by an external stimulus. Herein, we propose such
a system in which a liquid can be converted to a solid by photo-oxidation
within the tumor. This approach builds upon our previous work, wherein we
successfully cross-linked elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs) within a tumor
by mixing a cysteine containing ELP (cELP) with a low concentration of
H2O2, a strong oxidant for the formation of disulfides. I.t. injection of
the mixture led to quick (< 2min) crosslinking of the cELP that resulted
in prolonged tumor retention of the cELP. However, we could not control
the timing of the ELP crosslinking in this methodology. We hypothesized
that the strong oxidative agent, singlet oxygen (O3), produced in
photodynamic therapy (PDT) may provide the potential to trigger the in
situ crosslinking of a cELP in solid tumor injected with a
photosensitizer-loaded cELP and exposed to light to produce O3 within the
tumor.We hypothesized that upon the i.t. injection, a soluble,
photosensitizer (PS)-conjugated cELP (cELP-PS) will freely distribute
within the tumor interstitium due to initial_injection driven_convection
and subsequently by convection because of the intratumoral fluid
pressure, and by diffusion driven by the concentration gradient. After
dissemination within the tumor, its retention is ensured by
photoirradiation (PR) of the tumor with light of a specific wavelength
tuned to the absorbance maximum of the PS to generate O3 that triggers
the cross-linking of cysteines in the cELP-PS. In this scenario, the
cELP-PS is thus immobilized in the tumor after achieving sufficient tumor
coverage without transport outside the tumor. Our results show that a
conjugate of cELP with a PS, chlorine E6 (Ce6), exhibited in vitro cELP
gelation after exposure to light at 660 nm (the peak absorbance
wavelength). Exposure to the light also successfully triggered in situ
hydrogel formation after i.t. infusion of the conjugate, resulting in
significantly higher tumor retention than either cELP+Ce6 w/o PR or cELP
with PR. The antitumor efficacy of this PS-cELP-PDT system for local
radiotherapy is ongoing. The results suggest that in situ crosslinking of
a cELP-Ce6 conjugate by PR of the tumor may provide a solution to
maximizing tumor coverage and tumor retention. Furthermore, this system
could provide a multi-functional platform for controlled release of
additional antitumor agents within a solid tumor.

