Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The 5 endonuclease EEPD1 maintains genomic stability by mediating
DNA repair pathway choice


EEPD1 (endonuclease/exonuclease/phosphatase family domain-containing 1)
is an uncharacterized human protein that we found to be transcriptionally
increased upon induction of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). A549 cells
with EEPD1 repressed by siRNA arrested at the G1/S and G2/M transitions
and had markedly increased sensitivity to various DSB-inducing agents,
such as camptothecin, VP-16, hydroxyurea (HU), and ionizing irradiation
(IR). There are two major types of DSB repair, non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR), which is essential for
replication fork repair. Using the EJ5 NHEJ reporter system, EEPD1
repression resulted in a 2-fold increase in NHEJ repair. However,
formation of 53BP1 foci was unaffected in these cells, indicating that
the initial step towards NHEJ was intact. However, in the HT256 HR
reporter system, EEPD1 repression produced a 5-fold decrease in HR
repair, indicating that EEPD1 mediates HR and inhibits NHEJ, placing it
at the decision point for DSB repair. Immunofluorescence assays of HR
components were performed in the presence of HU. EEPD1 repression
significantly decreased -H2Ax, RAD51, and RPA32 foci formation, so
placing EEPD1 above these HR components. The initial activity that
commits a DSB to HR repair and away from NHEJ is 5 end resection. This
generates the 3 ss DNA that results in ATR/Chk1 activation as well as
RPA32 and -H2Ax foci. To assess this, a ss BRDU end resection assay was
done after IR and there was a 4-fold decrease in 5 end resection when
EEPD1 was repressed. Consistently, there was also a decrease in ATR and
Chk1 phosphorylation. Co-immunoprecipitation studies found that EEPD1
interacts with Ku80 and NBS1. In vitro assays using purified recombinant
EEPD1 protein found its 5 endonuclease activity was distinct from both
Exo1 and DNA2, the two major mediators of 5 end resection. This activity
was, however, repressed by the Ku complex, indicating antagonism between
EEPD1 and Ku. Cells with decreased EEPD1 expression showed severe nuclear
anomalies, such as micronuclei, nucleoplasmic bridges that may have been
caused by unopposed NHEJ when the functional HR was not available.
Metaphase analysis in these cells also showed a significant increase in
chromosomal aberrations, especially after IR and HU. These data suggest a
novel model of collapsed replication fork repair pathway choice, where
the free DS end binds the MRN complex, and NBS1 recruits EEPD1,
inhibiting NHEJ and promoting HR via initiation of 5 end resection. This
is supported by the finding that EEPD1 is required for RPA32/ATRIP
activation of ATR/Chk1, and all subsequent steps in repairing collapsed
replication forks. Without such repair, the collapsed forks are
end-joined to create chromosome fusions, which generate the nucleoplasmic
bridging during mitosis. Lung and endometrial cancers have significant
rates of EEPD1 mutation, further indicating that EEPD1 might be a novel
tumor suppressor.

