Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of a multiplexed fluorescence microscopy method
(MultiOmyxTM) to dissect proteomic biomarkers of
(18)F-fluorodeoxy-glucose ((18)FDG) uptake in breast cancer


Background: While routinely collected human tumor specimen can now
readily be examined for genetic alterations on a genome wide scale,
multi-parameter measurements of protein expression remain challenging. We
developed a multiplexed fluorescence microscopy method (MultiOmyxTM) for
the quantitative characterization of multiple analytes in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue (PMID23818604). We now applied this platform to
human breast cancer samples to determine the expression of 25 proteins at
a single-cell level and examine their relationship to tumor uptake of the
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) radiotracer (18)F-fluorodeoxy-glucose
((18)FDG). Methodology: We stained a single 5 m section of breast
carcinoma from each of 18 patients with antibodies against members of
growth factor signaling pathways (HER2, IGF1R, PTEN, p-EGFR, p-PDK1,
p-ERK1/2, p-S6 Ribosomal Protein, p-4EBP1, p-eIF4E), the glycolysis
pathway (Glut-1, HK2, LDH-A), hormone receptors (ER, PR, AR), tumor cell
proliferation markers (KI-67 and phospho-histone H3), and markers of
hypoxia (HIF-1, CA IX), and angiogenesis (CD31). 28-30 representative
fields of view (FOVs) were randomly selected in each tumor, each
comprising 300-500 cells. Images were automatically separated into
subcellular and histopathological compartments based on the staining of
tumor cells with a panel of segmentation markers (NaK-ATPase,
pan-Cadherin, pan-cytokeratin, S6, and DAPI). A breast pathologist
assessed and annotated the histologic composition of each FOV. Further
analysis focused on FOVs (n=390) containing only invasive ductal
carcinoma without admixed DCIS or normal breast tissue. Multivariate
analysis between marker expression and FDG uptake was performed using
logistic regression and Cox proportional hazard models. All patients had
(18)-FDG PET within four weeks prior to collection of the tumor specimen.
Results: Staining results with our MultiOmyxTM platform correlated
closely with the results from CLIA-certified single marker biomarker
assays (e.g., ER IHC and HER2 FISH assay) performed independently on the
same set of samples (PMID: 21646475). Nuclear ER staining was associated
with low FDG uptake (p=0.02). KI-67 was higher in tumors with high FDG
uptake (p=0.04). K-median clustering identified molecular breast cancer
subtypes. Conclusions: Our study illustrates the feasibility of
quantitative proteomic measurements using a new in-situ multiplexed
fluorescence microscopy platform on only a single routinely collected
FFPE tissue section. Quantitative staining results from many thousand
cells per tumor support the previously reported relationship between
hormone receptor status, tumor cell proliferation, and FDG-uptake in
breast cancer. Multiple protein markers showed a high degree of intra-
and inter-tumoral heterogeneity.

