Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LIMD2 is a small LIM-only protein overexpressed in metastatic
lesions which regulates cell motility and tumor progression by directly
binding to and activating the integrin-linked-kinase


Proteins that communicate signals from the cytoskeleton to the nucleus
are prime targets for effectors of metastasis as they often transduce
signals regulating adhesion, motility and invasiveness. LIM domain
proteins shuttle between the cytoplasm and the nucleus, and bind to
partners in both compartments, often coupling changes in gene expression
to extracellular cues and hence are a prime target for deregulation
during tumor progression and metastasis. The LIM domain is a modular Zn
finger structure, often found tandemly repeated in proteins. These LIM
arrays often serve as scaffolds for assembling signal transduction
apparatus. In this work, we characterize LIMD2 which is unique in that it
encodes a single LIM domain. LIMD2 was originally identified as a
transcript overexpressed in metastatic lesions but absent in the matched
primary tumor from the same patient suggesting that it may be either a
marker or effector of metastatic spread. We have shown that LIMD2 levels
in fresh and archival tumors positively correlate with cell motility,
metastatic potential and tumor grade in many different tumor types
including bladder, melanoma, breast and thyroid tumors. LIMD2 directly
contributes to these cellular phenotypes as shown by overexpression,
knockdown and reconstitution experiments in cell culture models. Tumor
cells with poor metastatic capability are converted to highly motile,
invasive cells by expression of LIMD2 suggesting a dominant gain of
function action. To understand the molecular mechanisms of its biological
effects we determined its solution structure using NMR. The structure
studies of LIMD2 revealed a classic LIM-domain structure containing a
rigid hydrophobic core which bound 2 molecules of Zn. The 3D structure of
LIMD2 was most highly related to the LIM1 domain of PINCH1, a core
component of the Integrin Linked Kinase-Parvin-Pinch (IPP) complex. The
IPP complex plays a key role in cell-cell and cell matrix interaction by
transducing signals from membrane bound integrins to the nucleus.
Structural and biochemical analyses revealed that LIMD2 bound directly to
the kinase domain of ILK near the active site and strongly activated ILK
kinase activity in vitro. Immunolocalization studies showed that LIMD2
and components of the IPP complex co-existed in focal adhesion plaques.
Cells which were null for ILK failed to respond to the induction of
motility and invasion by ectopic expression of LIMD2. This strongly
suggests that LIMD2 potentiates its biological effects through direct
interactions with ILK, a signal transduction pathway firmly linked to
cell motility and invasion. In summary, we have defined LIMD2 as a new
component of the signal transduction cascade that links integrin-mediated
signaling to cell motility/metastatic behavior and may be a promising
target for controlling tumor spread.

