Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating correlations of DARC under-expression (Duffy null
phenotypes) with increased breast cancer lymph node metastasis


DARC (aka Duffy), a chemokine receptor, is expressed on erythrocytes and
endothelial cells in blood vessels. It has been linked to inhibition of
tumor metastasis, and to regulation of plasma levels of some cytokines.
The Duffy null (Fy-) phenotype, in which DARC is not expressed on red
blood cells, is especially prevalent among people of West African
descent. Little is known about how the presence or absence of DARC
expression may affect breast cancer metastases and overall survival among
African-American and European- American women. Our lab is investigating
whether Fy- phenotypes could be associated with increased BrCa metastasis
by genotyping the Fy- (null and weak) alleles and assessing DARC gene
expression in breast and lymphoblast cells using qPCR and
Immunofluorescence (IF). There are two isoforms of DARC, each with the
Fy- SNP located in the promoter of one and the 5UTR of the other. Due to
this SNP, it is plausible that the alternate isoform is specific to these
cell types and may still be expressed. Here we present data from the
preliminary stages of this project; including characterizing Duffy
alleles in our cell line models. We have genotyped the 3 known DARC
polymorphisms that result in Fy- (and weak) erythrocyte phenotypes in
breast cancer and lymphoblast cell lines. Specifically, we validated the
genotype of HAPMAP lines from Yoruba, African-American, and CEPH-European
descent for the -541T>C point mutation Fy- allele (rs2814778). Our breast
cancer (BrCa) lines are derived from tumors of varying molecular
subtypes, isolated from African-American women. We show that these BrCa
lines are homozygous for the Fy- allele and yet still express the DARC
protein. The specific isoform expressed in these cells (DARC-2) may not
be the same as used to phenotype the Fy- status in erythrocytes (DARC-1).
This suggests that a Fy- genotype may have some tissue specific
expression of DARC-2 in epithelial cells. As well, we show that the
levels of expression of the two DARC isoforms vary and are distinct among
ancestral groups. We also show expression on the RNA level for
individuals who have the duffy null genotype, which will be further
validated. In conclusion, we hypothesize that Fy- status, as determined
in endothelial and erythrocytes in people of African descent, may remove
the metastatic protection of DARC. Also, alternate expression of DARC-2
on epithelial cells may increase the rate of metastases in the African
population. Currently, we are analyzing clinical samples (blood and
breast tissues) from local breast cancer patients for Fy- status and will
determine if this correlates with metastatic disease. In addition,
biochemical experiments will be conducted to determine whether
DARC-related chemokines are in higher prevalence in the Fy- patients, how
the isoforms differ in their affinity to the chemokine ligands, and
whether this is associated with specific breast cancer subtypes.

