Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential angiogenic roles of serum amyloid A 1 (SAA1) isoforms
in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC)


Esophageal Caner (EC), a highly metastatic and fatal cancer, is ranked
the eighth in mortality rate in Hong Kong cancer patients (Hong Kong
Cancer Registry, Hospital Authority, 2010). Esophageal Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (ESCC) is the predominant type comprising more than 90% of EC.
Using a functional complementation approach, SAA1 was identified as one
of the tumor suppressor gene candidates. SAA1 is located at chromosome
11p15.1 and is expressed as a secretary protein in liver, human cultured
smooth muscle cells, monocyte-macrophage cell lines, and in
histologically-normal human epithelial tissues. Genetic polymorphisms of
SAA1 have been identified as a risk factor of diseases such as
amyloidosis. Three SAA1 isoforms with two single nucleotide polymorphisms
at exon three (SAA1.1, 1.3, and 1.5) were observed in the ESCC patients
and healthy individuals.The SAA proteins contain the functional
YIGSR-like and RGD-like motifs, proteins with these motifs can inhibit
angiogenesis, cell adhesion to ECM, growth and metastasis. To understand
the anti-tumorigenic and anti-angiogenic roles of the three SAA1 isoforms
in ESCC progression, both recombinant proteins and secreted proteins from
the conditioned media of lentiviral-infected ESCC cell lines were used
for functional assays. For the vascular endothelial cell tube formation
assay, the treatments with SAA1.1 and 1.3 proteins showed suppression of
tube formation, whereas no significant effects could be observed in the
treatment with the SAA1.5. Suppression of cell proliferation and
induction of cell death were observed when the endothelial cells were
cultured with SAA1.1 and 1.3 proteins. To further elucidate the
differential effects among the three SAA1 isoforms in anti-angiogenesis,
the cytoskeleton arrangement of the vascular endothelial cells was
studied. The SAA1.1 and SAA1.3 proteins could abolish the endothelial
cell adhesion by disturbing the formation of stress fibers and focal
adhesions. As a conclusion, the present data has shown the variation in
anti-angiogenic potential of the three SAA1 isoforms.We acknowledge the
financial support of the Food and Health Bureau of the Hong Kong Special
Administration Region, China, grant number HMRF 01120886 to HLL.

