Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of combined epigenetic therapy with histone
methyltransferase EZH2 inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin and histone
deacetylase inhibitor SAHA on non-small cell lung cancer cells


[Background] EZH2, a polycomb group protein, has histone
methyltransferase activity, and is involved in malignant transformation
of several cancers. We have previously shown that an EZH2 inhibitor,
DZNep, inhibits growth of non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC) cell lines
via G1 arrest and apoptosis. Recently, cotreatment with DZNep and an
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor has been shown to induce apoptosis
synergistically in AML, ovarian cancers and renal cancers. Therefore, we
determined the combined effect of DZNep and an HDAC inhibitor, SAHA, on
NSCLC cells.[Methods] We evaluated the effect of combined therapy with
DZNep and SAHA against four human NSCLC cell lines_H1299, H1975, A549 and
PC-3. Cell proliferation was measured by MTT assay. Percentage of
apoptotic cells was measured using Annexin V-FITC with a flow cytometer.
Western blot analysis was performed on total cell lysates. For in vivo
assay, H1975 cells were subcutaneously implanted into the flank of
BALB/cAJcl nu/nu nude mice. When the average tumor volume reached
approximately 50100mm3, the following treatments were intraperitoneally
administered twice per week for 6 weeks; vehicle alone (5% DM SO), DZNep
(4mg/kg), SAHA (40mg/kg), and DZNep (4mg/kg) plus SAHA
(40mg/kg).[Results] Co-treatment with DZNep and SAHA inhibited cell
proliferation synergistically, and reduced EZH2 expression and histone H3
lysine 27 trimethylation more effectively compared with each agent alone.
The co-treatment greatly induced accumulation of p27 Kip1 and decrease in
cyclin A expression. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that the
apoptotic fraction was increased in an additive or synergistic manner by
the combination therapy. These effects were more evident in H1975 and
PC-3 cells with EGFR mutation, in which the co-treatment markedly reduced
phosphorylation of EGFR, AKT and ERK1/2. The combined therapy reduced the
levels of -catenin, and its downstream pro-proliferative targets cyclin
D1 and EGFR. The co-treatment with DZNep and SAHA also caused
significantly greater inhibition of tumor growth of H1975 xenografts than
each agent alone in nude mice without visible toxicity.[Conclusion]
Combined epigenetic therapy with an EZH2 inhibitor and an HDAC inhibitor
may represent an effective approach for NSCLCs.

