Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross validation of NGS methylated targets using droplet digital
PCR (ddPCR)


DNA methylation is one of the most studied epigenetic modifications. DNA
methylation plays an important role in a number of physiological
processes as well as common diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative
disorders. In mammals, DNA methylation occurs at the C-5 position of
cytosine in CpG dinucleotide sequences, which are mainly concentrated in
regions known as CpG islands. Methylation in CpG islands within gene
promoters usually leads to gene silencing.Recent data have shown the
correlation of methylation and disease status. However, there are
significant limitations in both biology and technology. Biologically,
methylation status is highly heterogeneous in nature. In normal controls
there is never a complete lack of methylation marks, and conversely,
never a completely saturated methylation signature. In addition
methylation sites of interest are often located in CpG islands, regions
where multiple methylation sites occur side by side, making assay design
and discrimination challenging. Technological hurdles add significant
variability as well. The typical method for determining methylation is
bisulfite conversion, which uses harsh chemicals to convert cytosines to
uracil. When a cytosine is methylated, it is largely, though not
completely, protected from the conversion process. However, bisulfite
conversion also causes a great deal of DNA damage, causing the strands to
separate and fragment. In most cases of research, the DNAs that
researchers want to examine are from FFPE or cfDNA samples, samples which
are already both limited and damaged.Because of these challenges, there
is an unmet need for a sensitive yet robust method to analyze DNA
methylation in clinical samples in a rapid, inexpensive, and high
throughput manner.Herein we showcase the use of ddPCR for detection of
DNA methylation in bisulfite converted gDNA samples. First we demonstrate
the superior sensitivity, linearity and robustness of ddPCR methylation
detection in the SNRPN promoter, a model system for an imprinted gene
involved in neurological disorders. Secondly we show the detection of DNA
methylation in the vimentin promoter, which is known to be methylated in
cancer (Li et al. Nat. Biotech. 2009). We will demonstrate reproducible
detection in replicate bisulfite converted samples and sensitivity.

