Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity-mediated regulation of HGF/c-Met and reduced basal-like
breast cancer latency in parous mice


Background: Epidemiologic and experimental data have shown that a full
term pregnancy reduces breast cancer risk. While a full term pregnancy
reduces risk for estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and luminal breast
cancers, parity is associated with increased risk of basal-like breast
cancer (BBC) subtype. BBC represents Background: Epidemiologic and
experimental data have shown that a full term pregnancy reduces breast
cancer risk. While a full term pregnancy reduces risk for estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) and luminal breast cancers, parity is associated
with increased risk of basal-like breast cancer (BBC) subtype. BBC
represents <10% of breast cancers, are highly aggressive, affecting
primarily young and African-American women. Experimental studies have
examined parity and obesity individually, but to date, the independent
and joint effects of parity and obesity have not been dissected. Our
previous work demonstrated that high fat diet-induced obesity
significantly blunted BBC latency in nulliparous C3(1)-Tag mice,
potentially through the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met oncogenic
pathway. Since obesity and post-partum weight gain are sometimes
difficult to parse out, we investigated the role of obesity in parous
mice on BBC. Methods: Seven week old female C3(1)-TAg mice were placed
with male mice for breeding. Males were removed at pregnancy and pups
were removed immediately after birth. The mothers were then randomly
assigned to diet groups to model post-partum obesity. Mice were fed
control low fat diet (10% kcal from fat) or high fat diet (45% or 60%
kcal from fat) at 10 weeks until sacrifice. Mice were monitored for fat
accretion, tumor onset, and tumor progression. Plasma measures of
cytokines and metabolic parameters were assessed. Immunohistochemical
analyses for HGF, c-Met and F4/80 macrophage markers were performed.
Results: Mice on both 45% and 60% diets gained significantly greater fat
mass compared to mice remaining lean on 10% diet. Compared with
nulliparous mice fed the same diets, parity induced significant decreases
in latency in C3(1)-TAg mice fed 10% and 45% diets. 60% diet reduced
latency in parous mice to the same extent as nulliparous mice fed 60%
diet. Tumor burden and tumor aggressiveness were not regulated by obesity
in parous mouse. Obesity-associated metabolic mediators and hormones such
as insulin, estrogen, and progesterone were not significantly regulated
however, leptin levels were elevated in 45%-fed mice compared to other
groups. Plasma IL-6 was significantly elevated by obesity in parous mice.
Importantly, the HGF/c-Met axis in normal mammary gland was elevated
significantly by obesity and correlated with reduced tumor
latency.Conclusions: In summary, our studies demonstrate that, similar to
epidemiologic reports, parity in C3(1)-TAg mice alone dramatically
reduced BBC latency compared to nulliparous mice. Obesity in parous mice
did not reduce latency further than obesity alone, indicating that
obesity and parity may work through similar pathways. Finally, obesity
induced c-Met expression in normal mammary gland in parous mice, similar
to our reports in nulliparous mice, implicating an interaction between
the HGF/c-Met signaling pathway and obesity in the etiology of BBC.

