Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivity of PC9 cells to erlotinib is affected by extracellular
matrix


Tyrosine kinase inhibitors of epidermal growth factor receptor, such as
erlotinib and gefinitib, have been effective in the initial treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer. With time, however, initially responsive
tumors almost invariably rebound and proliferate under therapy. Of
general interest is the impact of tumor cell heterogeneity on rebound
time. Previously, we isolated 89 single-cell derived discrete sublines
(DS) from the commonly studied PC9 cell line by monitoring the
distribution of cell fates (division, quiescence, and cell death) and the
drug-induced proliferation (DIP) rate under erlotinib treatment. In this
work we examine the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in determining
proliferation behavior and the distribution of cell fates. Cells
suspended in 3D matrices show increased sensitivity to erlotinb with the
rate of cell death depending on the ECM composition. DS sublines that
were highly resilient in 2D culture (i.e., positive DIP rate and Tyrosine
kinase inhibitors of epidermal growth factor receptor, such as erlotinib
and gefinitib, have been effective in the initial treatment of non-small
cell lung cancer. With time, however, initially responsive tumors almost
invariably rebound and proliferate under therapy. Of general interest is
the impact of tumor cell heterogeneity on rebound time. Previously, we
isolated 89 single-cell derived discrete sublines (DS) from the commonly
studied PC9 cell line by monitoring the distribution of cell fates
(division, quiescence, and cell death) and the drug-induced proliferation
(DIP) rate under erlotinib treatment. In this work we examine the role of
the extracellular matrix (ECM) in determining proliferation behavior and
the distribution of cell fates. Cells suspended in 3D matrices show
increased sensitivity to erlotinb with the rate of cell death depending
on the ECM composition. DS sublines that were highly resilient in 2D
culture (i.e., positive DIP rate and <10% cell death under treatment)
asymptote to about 40% cell death in Matrigel after ten days in 1 M
erlotinb. Both the rate of cell death and the total percentage of the
cell population that dies increased in collagen I and in collagen I
coated hydrogel. At asymptotic levels, the cell population contained both
dividing and quiescent cells. In contrast, DS sublines with negative DIP
rates in 2D culture reached 90-99% cell death in each ECM considered. We
conclude that the pathways conferring resilience in these cells are
sensitive to ECM conditions. Intriguingly, we find that resilient DS
sublines tend to have diversity in cluster morphologies in the matrices,
suggesting a possible correlation between ECM engagement and/or adhesion
and resilience. Molecular studies should clarify mechanistic
relationships between ECM and sensitivity to targeted therapy, and
whether such relationship may extend to clinical tumors.

