Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OMP-59R5 (Anti-Notch2/3) inhibits tumor growth and reduces cancer
stem cell frequency in patient derived SCLC xenografts


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a devastating disease with very poor
prognosis and few treatment options. We have established patient derived
xenografts from SCLC tumors and determined that Notch pathway target
genes are up-regulated in this disease relative to normal lung tissues
and relative to other tumor types. We examined the in vivo efficacy of
OMP-59R5, an antibody that was initially identified by binding to Notch2
and was subsequently shown to block signaling of both human and mouse
Notch2 and Notch3. We performed in vivo growth inhibition and
tumorigenicity studies with this Notch2/3 antibody alone or in
combination with chemotherapeutic agents in a panel of six
patient-derived SCLC xenograft models. We found that OMP-59R5 treatment
significantly reduced tumor recurrence in combination with chemotherapy
in five of the six models. Through a serial transplantation study from a
sensitive tumor, we found that OMP-59R5 in combination with chemotherapy
(cisplatin plus irinotecan) profoundly reduced the cancer stem cell (CSC)
frequency. In contrast, treatment with chemotherapeutic agents alone had
the opposite effect and increased CSC frequency. In minimal residual
disease models, we analyzed the ability of OMP-59R5 to delay tumor
recurrence following chemotherapy-induced tumor regression. While
chemotherapeutic agent-treated tumors re-grew rapidly following treatment
termination, the growth of recurrent tumors was delayed by OMP-59R5. We
also evaluated changes in gene expression post treatment and found that
OMP-59R5 modulated the expression of Notch pathway,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, stromal and vasculature genes.
Furthermore, we observed an increase in expression of neuroendocrine
differentiation markers after OMP-59R5 treatment in sensitive tumors.
Following up on these preclinical findings, OMP-59R5 is currently being
evaluated for safety and efficacy in combination with cisplatin and
etoposide for treatment of SCLC in an ongoing Phase 1b/2 clinical trial
(PINNACLE).

