Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of SPAG6 by DNA methylation in NSCLCs


Epigenetic abnormalities, especially DNA methylation, are involved in the
pathogenesis of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). By using a
genome-wide approach, we recently identified 500 tumor-specifically
methylated genes in a large number of NSCLC patients and from most of
them tumor-specific methylation in NSCLCs was unknown so far.One of these
genes is the Sperm Associated Antigen 6 (SPAG6) gene. By analysing
publically available IlluminaHiSeq RNA-seq data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas database, we observed that SPAG6 mRNA expression is frequently lost
in tumor samples compared to corresponding non-malignant lung tissue
samples of NSCLC patients (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). To further
investigate the mechanism of SPAG6 downregulation, we studied SPAG6
expression in 5 NSCLC cell lines. We observed loss of SPAG6 expression in
all of these cell lines compared to normal human bronchial epithelial
cells (NHBECs). Subsequently, we treated cells of NSCLC cell lines which
do not express SPAG6 with the epigenetically active drugs
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine and Trichostatin A and observed SPAG6 reexpression.
These results suggest that transcriptional regulation of SPAG6 is
epigenetically regulated. Bisulfite genomic sequencing of parts of the 5
region of SPAG6 revealed that the vast majority of CpG sites indeed are
methylated in cells of NSCLC cell lines which do not express SPAG6 while
no methylation was found in NHBECs. Moroever, we analysed SPAG6
methylation in tumor and corresponding non-malignant tissue samples of
147 stage I-III NSCLC patients using methylation-sensitive
high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) assays. Differences in SPAG6 methylation
between tumor and corresponding non-malignant lung tissue samples were
statistically significant (p Epigenetic abnormalities, especially DNA
methylation, are involved in the pathogenesis of non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLC). By using a genome-wide approach, we recently identified
500 tumor-specifically methylated genes in a large number of NSCLC
patients and from most of them tumor-specific methylation in NSCLCs was
unknown so far.One of these genes is the Sperm Associated Antigen 6
(SPAG6) gene. By analysing publically available IlluminaHiSeq RNA-seq
data from The Cancer Genome Atlas database, we observed that SPAG6 mRNA
expression is frequently lost in tumor samples compared to corresponding
non-malignant lung tissue samples of NSCLC patients
(http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). To further investigate the mechanism of
SPAG6 downregulation, we studied SPAG6 expression in 5 NSCLC cell lines.
We observed loss of SPAG6 expression in all of these cell lines compared
to normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBECs). Subsequently, we
treated cells of NSCLC cell lines which do not express SPAG6 with the
epigenetically active drugs 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine and Trichostatin A and
observed SPAG6 reexpression. These results suggest that transcriptional
regulation of SPAG6 is epigenetically regulated. Bisulfite genomic
sequencing of parts of the 5 region of SPAG6 revealed that the vast
majority of CpG sites indeed are methylated in cells of NSCLC cell lines
which do not express SPAG6 while no methylation was found in NHBECs.
Moroever, we analysed SPAG6 methylation in tumor and corresponding
non-malignant tissue samples of 147 stage I-III NSCLC patients using
methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) assays.
Differences in SPAG6 methylation between tumor and corresponding
non-malignant lung tissue samples were statistically significant (p <
0.0001) demonstrating that SPAG6 is tumor-specifically methylated.
Furthermore, ROC curve analyses of methylation results revealed that
methylation of SPAG6 is able to distinguish tumor samples from
corresponding non-malignant lung tissue samples of NSCLC patients. We
additionally investigated SPAG6 protein expression in tumor and
corresponding non-malignant tissue samples of 35 NSCLC patients by
immunohistochemistry. In the vast majority of tumor samples which were
found to be SPAG6 methylated, SPAG6 protein expression was lost in tumor
cells while SPAG6 protein expression was observed in bronchial and
bronchiolar epithelial cells of non-malignant lung tissue samples.
Comparison of SPAG6 methylation results with clinico-pathological data of
NSCLC patients suggests a potential negative prognostic relevance of
SPAG6 methylation for NSCLC patients. Currently, we determine the
biological function of SPAG6 in NSCLC cell lines. Overall, our results
demonstrate that DNA methylation is the major mechanism for frequent loss
of SPAG6 expression in NSCLCs.

