Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LMO1 is a novel oncogene in neuroendocrine lung cancer


Introduction. The aim of the study is to characterize the role of LMO1 in
tumorigenesis of neuroendocrine lung cancer. LMO1 is a transcription
factor that belongs to the LMO protein family containing the
cysteine-rich LIM domains. LMO1 has been demonstrated to function as an
important oncogene in the development of T-lineage leukemia and lymphoma.
A recent study in neuroblastoma suggests that aberrant overexpression of
LMO1 may play a critical role in the development of neuroendocrine
cancers. The role of LMO1 in neuroendocrine lung cancer, however, was not
investigated.Experimental Approaches. By analyzing a large panel of cell
lines including lung cancer cell lines and normal lung epithelial cells,
we compared the relative expression of LMO1 in different subtypes of lung
cancers, and examined the correlation of LMO1 expression levels with
neuroendocrine differentiation markers. Using in vitro approaches, we
investigated the function of LMO1 in regulating lung cancer cell growth.
To investigate the clinical significance of LMO1 dysregulation in lung
cancer patients, we analyzed the correlation of LMO1 tumor levels with
lung cancer patient survival.Results. We show that LMO1 is significantly
overexpressed in small cell lung cancer (SCLC), an aggressive and major
subtype of neuroendocrine lung cancers, relative to non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and normal lung cells. In addition, in NSCLC cells, LMO1
mRNA levels are significantly correlated with expression of
neuroendocrine differentiation markers. Functional in vitro
investigations indicate that LMO1 overexpression significantly promotes
growth of cultured lung cancer cells, suggesting its oncogenic function
in lung cancer. More strikingly, our investigations of two independent
lung cancer patient populations indicate that high tumor LMO1 mRNA level
is an independent predictor of poor patient survival.Conclusions.
Altogether, our findings strongly suggest that LMO1 is a
neuroendocrine-specific oncogene in lung cancer that plays an important
role in determining the cancer aggressiveness. Further studies are
certainly warranted to define the mechanisms underlying the oncogenic
function of LMO1 in neuroendocrine lung cancer and to further evaluate
the clinical significance of LMO1 as a diagnostic and prognostic marker
for neuroendocrine lung cancers in prospective studies.

