Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of anti-tumurogenic activity of the brown seaweed, F.
vesiculosus


Introduction. We previously reported significant anti-estrogenic effects
related to the consumption of the brown seaweed, F. vesiculosus. The
present study aimed to further characterize the mechanisms involved and
to investigate other actions of F. vesiculosus that may be biologically
relevant.Methods. Activation of the estrogen receptor was determined
using a luciferase reporter assay (CALUX assay) in six breast, ovarian
and endometrial cancer cells lines (MCF7, T47D, MDA-MB-231, OVCAR-3 and
HEC-1-B) treated with an F. vesiculosus extract. Cell proliferation and
apoptosis were determined by the MTT assay and the AnnexinV affinity
assay, respectively. Gene expression profiling for 248 genes in pathways
including tumor suppression, apoptosis, autophagy, hormonal regulation,
cell cycling, proliferation, angiogenesis, inflammation and oxidative
stress were analyzed using the nCounter Analysis System (NanoString
Technologies, Seattle, WA), and validated by real-time quantitative
RT-PCR. A two-way ANOVA model, with cell line effect and treatment dose
effect, was fitted to the normalized expression data for each gene. The
permutation based F-test was used to identify genes differentially
expressed between treatment doses.Results. In co-treatments with 12.5 pM
-estradiol (EC50), F. vesiculosus reduced ER activity by 50% at the
1mg/mL dose, showing a potent ER antagonist effect. All cells showed a
progressive decrease in proliferation rates, as measured by the MTT assay
over 3 days, with increasing concentrations of the seaweed extract, but
the sensitivity of individual cell lines was variable. The two
endometrial cell lines were most responsive, with up to a 50% reduction
in cell number, whereas the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line was least
responsive with a 30% overall reduction. Transcription levels of multiple
genes were affected by the treatments in all cell lines, with more
notable effects in apoptosis, proliferation, and several
receptor-mediated signaling pathways.Conclusion. Our results provide new
insights into the anti-estrogenic activity of F. vesiculosus through
direct inhibition of estrogen receptor activation that may be
particularly relevant in the pathogenesis and progression of female
cancers. We also found that the F. vesiculosus extract reduced cell
proliferation, induced apoptosis and up-regulated genes in signaling
pathways that have anti-tumorigenic potential.

