Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPM1D/WIP1, a potential target in neuroblastoma


Background:Gain of 17q is the most powerful genetic predictor of adverse
clinical outcome in neuroblastoma (NB). 17q+ correlated with poor
survival in our population-based material where we found aberrations of
chromosome 17 in 85% of primary neuroblastoma tumors. Specifically, gain
of WIP1 at 17q23 is frequently detected in NB. WIP1 is a serine/threonine
phosphatase encoded by the gene PPM1D, member of the PP2C family known to
be regulators of DNA repair pathways.Methods:A formazan-based
spectrophotometric method was used to measure cell viability in several
NB cell lines treated with different WIP1 inhibitors. Comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) was used to analyze primary NB tumors and cell lines.
NB cells were examined for WIP1 expression using immunoblotting,
immunohistochemistry and qPCR. Stable WIP1 knockdown NB cells were
generated by shRNA transfections. Clonogenicity of WIP1 knockdown were
examined by clonogenic assay. In vivo, WIP1 knocked- and non-silenced
cells were injected in nude NMRI mice followed by daily evaluation of
tumor formation.Results:Detailed CGH analysis revealed that genomic gain
of WIP1 is evident with at least one extra copy in all tumor samples
showing 17q gain. Results from our NB cell lines demonstrate 17q
aberrations in all samples. These findings were corroborated by
expression pattern of WIP1 mRNA and different immunostaining techniques.
In a wide range of NB cell lines we found that all WIP1 inhibitors had
good cytotoxic effect at higher concentrations (50M) while some showed
cytotoxic effects at lower concentrations. Transfection experiments with
shRNA against WIP1 showed decreased cell viability, proliferation and
colony formation in NB cells. Tumor xenograft development after WIP1
downregulation was significantly delayed with time to tumor development
(0.10 mL) more than doubled compared to animals injected with cells
transfected with the scrambled construct (15 days median, vs. 33
days).Conclusions:Our data suggest that WIP1 expression have significant
oncogenic function in neuroblastoma development. Our results showed that
WIP1 is present in at least one extra genomic copy in the majority of
primary NB. WIP1 knocked cells exhibited decreased cell growth and
clonogenic capacity compared to non-silenced cells. In addition, WIP1
inhibition could be a potential target in treating high-risk
neuroblastoma but more studies investigating the effects of WIP1
inhibition in neuroblastoma are needed to evaluate its clinical
significance.

