Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the histone methyl transferase EZH2 causes viability
defects in multiple myeloma


Histone lysine methylation, which is dynamically regulated by
methyltransferases and demethylases, plays an important role in the
establishment and maintenance of chromatin structure and thereby
contributes to the control of gene expression. The development of small
molecule methyltransferase and demethylase inhibitors provides an
approach to manipulate transcriptional programs, and thus potentially
allow interference with aberrant cellular states as observed in
cancer.The histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2)
is a component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2. It mediates
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone 3 (H3K27me3), which leads to
transcriptional repression. EZH2 has been widely implicated in cancer and
inhibition of its catalytic activity provides a novel therapeutic
approach to treat human cancers. Constellation has identified,
characterized and optimized potent, selective and reversible EZH2 small
molecule inhibitors as well as studied the biological impact of such
inhibition. We have previously shown that pharmacological inhibition of
EZH2 causes selective lymphoma cell viability defects with cell lines
harboring EZH2 mutations being the most sensitive.The discovery of small
molecules that specifically inhibit EZH2 has enabled us to look for other
disease indications that might be dependent on EZH2 for survival. We
carried out a long term cell viability screen in 75 cell lines across
several different hematological malignancies using an EZH2 inhibitor.
About 30% of all tested Mutliple Myeloma and Plasmacytoma cell lines
showed a time-dependent phenotypic response. In these cell lines H3K27me3
levels were effectively reduced in a dose dependent manner within 4 days
of compound treatment which was followed by the induction of apoptotsis
at later time points. EZH2 inhibitors also achieved tumor growth
inhibition in a Multiple Myeloma subcutaneous xenograft model. To
understand the underlying molecular mechanism of EZH2 inhibitor
sensitivity in Multiple Myeloma, genome-wide mapping of EZH2 and H3K27me3
sites in the absence and presence of the compound have been performed in
conjunction with gene expression profiling and the results will be
discussed. In conclusion, we identified Multiple Myeloma as a disease
modality where EZH2 inhibition leads to cell viability defects both in
vitro and in vivo.

