Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic yield of clinical tumor and germline exome sequencing
for newly diagnosed children with solid tumors


Background: Advances in sequencing technologies allow for provision of
genome-scale data to physicians caring for pediatric cancer patients but
current experience with the clinical application of genomic sequencing is
limited and the diagnostic yield of these methods is unclear.Methods: The
goal of the BASIC3 (Baylor Advancing Sequencing into Childhood Cancer
Care) study is to determine the clinical impact of incorporating tumor
and constitutional whole exome sequencing (WES) into the care of children
with newly diagnosed solid tumors at Texas Children's Cancer Center
(target enrollment n=280). WES of patient blood and frozen tumor samples
is being conducted in the CLIA-certified Whole Genome Laboratory at
Baylor College of Medicine using the VCRome 2.1 capture reagent and
Illumina paired-end sequencing with reports incorporated in the medical
record.Results: 120 patients have enrolled to date, including 39 (33%)
and 81 (67%) with CNS and non-CNS tumors, respectively. Despite limited
diagnostic biopsies in many patients, tumor samples adequate for WES have
been obtained from 97 subjects (81%). WES results have been reported for
89 patients. Tumor WES (n=73) revealed 20 of 73 tumors (27%) to contain
mutations classified as having proven or potential clinical utility,
including recurrent alterations of CTNNB1, BRAF, KIT, and NRAS/KRAS.
Notably, less than 50% of somatic mutations would have been detected on
an adult-focused cancer panel, BCM Cancer Gene Mutation Panel v.2.
Germline WES (n=89) identified diagnostic findings in 11 cases (12%)
including 8 patients with pathogenic mutations in dominant cancer
susceptibility genes (singletons except for 2 patients with TP53
mutations). Four of these 8 patients had genetic testing recommended
clinically. There were 2 patients with mutations providing the genetic
cause of non-cancer medical problems and 1 patient with a mutation which
explained both liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma. Downstream
testing of at-risk relatives has occurred rapidly in several families and
cancer screening recommendations implemented. Seven (8%) medically
actionable incidental findings unrelated to phenotype were reported,
predominantly in cardiovascular genes and mitochondrial DNA.Conclusions:
These data demonstrate the feasibility of routine WES in the pediatric
oncology setting. Early results demonstrate that clinically relevant
findings are identified by tumor and germline WES in 38% of pediatric
solid tumor patients. The yield of clinically relevant somatic and
germline alterations would likely increase further by incorporation of
complementary genomic methods (e.g. RNA-seq or copy number analysis).
Assessment of the clinical utility of the tumor and germline exomes and
preferences for reporting of these results to physicians and parents are
under study. Supported by NHGRI/NCI 1U01HG006485.

