Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPHK1 promotes lung metastasis of breast cancer


Breast cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer and second
leading cause of cancer death in American women. The majority of
cancer-related fatalities are a result of metastases to distant organs,
rather than due to the primary tumors themselves. The role of the lipid
metabolic pathways in breast cancer progression and metastasis has become
a focal point of interest in recent years and our work is mainly focused
on sphingolipids. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a lipid signaling
mediator that functions both intracellularly, as a second messenger
signaling molecule, and extracellularly, as a ligand for G-protein
coupled S1P receptors (S1PRs). S1P plays important roles in modulating
diverse cellular functions involved in cancer, i.e. cell growth,
survival, and motility. Sphingosine Kinase 1 (SPHK1) catalyzes the
phosphorylation of sphingosine, an amino alcohol, to generate S1P.
Recently, studies have shown that SPHK1 is overexpressed in breast cancer
and correlates with poor prognosis; thus, its role in breast cancer has
received substantial attention. It is still unclear if SPHK1 plays any
role in spontaneous metastasis of breast cancer to the lungs, and if so,
the underlying mechanism behind it. To study this, we used the highly
metastatic human triple negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-435, as
it expressed high levels of endogenous SPHK1. We generated SPHK1
knockdown (435 shSPHK1) and control (435 shScramble) cells using
SPHK1-targeting shRNA and scrambled shRNA, respectively. Knocking down
SPHK1 decreased the invasive and migration potential of MDA-MB-435 cells
in vitro, but had no significant effect on in vitro cell proliferation.
Then, the control and knockdown cells were orthotopically injected into
mammary fat pads (MFP) of nude mice to form MFP tumors. MFP tumors were
excised from mice with survival surgery at day 30. Consistent with our in
vitro proliferation data, there was no significant difference in MFP
tumor proliferation, indicated by Ki-67 staining, between control and
SPHK1 knockdown cells by day 30. However, TUNEL staining of MFP tumors
showed that tumors formed by 435 shSPHK1 cells have increased apoptosis
compared to tumors formed by 435 shScramble cells. After tumor excision
at day 30, mice were monitored for another 4 weeks for spontaneous
metastases. Remarkably, although 100% of mice injected with 435
shScramble developed spontaneous lung metastasis, only 20% of mice
injected with 435 shSPHK1 had spontaneous lung metastasis. No metastasis
was detected in the liver and the brain in this time frame. These data
suggest that SPHK1 might play an important role in promoting spontaneous
lung metastasis of breast cancer. Currently, we are investigating the
specific step(s) of the metastatic cascade regulated by SPHK1. An
understanding of the molecular mechanism of SPHK1-mediated breast cancer
lung metastasis may enable SPHK1 to be developed as a molecular marker
and a therapeutic target of metastatic breast cancer.

