Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt inhibitory factor 1 reduces the growth and migration of human
adenoid cystic carcinoma cells


Background: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a common malignancy that
arises in major and minor salivary glands. It is well characterized by
relatively high rate of local recurrence, and late onset of distant
metastases, which cause high morbidity and mortality. Dysregulation in
the Wingless-type (Wnt)/-catenin pathway contributes to many human
tumors. Here, we report that downregulation of an important Wnt
antagonist, Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1), promotes ACC cell
proliferation and migration.Aims: To determine the status of WIF1 and
study the effects of WIF1 on human adenoid cystic carcinoma cell growth,
migration, spheroid formation and senescence.Methods: Genomic DNA
isolated from human adenoid cystic carcinoma cell lines (ACC52 and
ACC112) was used for methylation-specific PCR after bisulfite
modification. ACC52 and ACC112 cells were treated with a demethylating
agent, 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (DAC) [50 M for 4 days], and used for total
RNA isolation and real-time RT-PCR to determine WIF1 mRNA expression. To
determine the growth suppressive effects of WIF1, ACC52 and ACC112 cells
were transiently transfected with either pCI blast (vector) or pCI
blast-WIF1 and assessed for cell proliferation, migration, spheroid
formation and senescence. Cell proliferation was determined at different
time intervals (24, 48, 72 h) by hexosaminidase assay. Cell migration and
spheroid formation were assessed by scratch assay and soft agar assay,
respectively. Cellular senescence was determined using senescence
-galactosidase staining kit.Results: Methylation-specific PCR demonstrate
that WIF1 is silenced by promoter methylation in ACC cells. DAC treatment
increased the WIF1 mRNA expression by 2.3-fold and 3.8-fold in ACC52 and
ACC112 cells, respectively compared with vehicle treatment. WIF1
significantly decreased the proliferation and migration of adenoid cystic
carcinoma cells. Additionally, WIF1 significantly decreased the number of
spheroids formed at 7 and 17 days. Furthermore, WIF1 induced a remarkable
increase in cellular senescence in both the cell lines.Conclusions: We
demonstrate that WIF1 is downregulated by promoter hypermethylation in
human adenoid cystic carcinoma cells. Importantly, WIF1 inhibited the
cell growth, migration and cancer stemness, while inducing cellular
senescence. Our findings suggest that WIF1 is a potent growth inhibitor
of adenoid cystic carcinoma cells and therefore could be a potential
therapeutic agent for ACC.Grant support: This work was supported by the
Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma Research Foundation (LQ). LQ holds a
Presbyterian Health Foundation Endowed Chair in Otorhinolaryngology.

