Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of the p53 pathway is associated with subclonal tumor
progression in glioblastoma


To evaluate evolutionary patterns in progression and therapy-resistance
of GBM, we analyzed the genomic profiles of 252 GBM samples from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)1, including 48 multi-sector and recurrent
tumor biopsies taken from 17 pairs of pre- and post-treatment GBMs, to
understand 1) the intratumoral heterogeneity of GBM and 2) how GBM
responds to therapeutic intervention.We integrated variant allele
fraction, DNA copy number and genotype information to determine clonality
of all mutations and found that 69.5% of mutations (median across samples
70.1% 19.6%) were classified as clonal and 30.5% as subclonal. To verify
our classification approach, we classified mutations detected in two
non-overlapping biopsies from 11 tumors into clonal and subclonal
categories. Of mutations detected in both tumor sectors 86.2% were
classified as clonal and 45.2% of sample-private mutations were
categorized as clonal, which was a strongly significant difference (P =
1.810-87).Separating patients into discrete age groups by an interval of
10 years, we found a significant linear correlation between clonal
mutations and age (P To evaluate evolutionary patterns in progression and
therapy-resistance of GBM, we analyzed the genomic profiles of 252 GBM
samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)1, including 48 multi-sector
and recurrent tumor biopsies taken from 17 pairs of pre- and
post-treatment GBMs, to understand 1) the intratumoral heterogeneity of
GBM and 2) how GBM responds to therapeutic intervention.We integrated
variant allele fraction, DNA copy number and genotype information to
determine clonality of all mutations and found that 69.5% of mutations
(median across samples 70.1% 19.6%) were classified as clonal and 30.5%
as subclonal. To verify our classification approach, we classified
mutations detected in two non-overlapping biopsies from 11 tumors into
clonal and subclonal categories. Of mutations detected in both tumor
sectors 86.2% were classified as clonal and 45.2% of sample-private
mutations were categorized as clonal, which was a strongly significant
difference (P = 1.810-87).Separating patients into discrete age groups by
an interval of 10 years, we found a significant linear correlation
between clonal mutations and age (P < 0.001). This observation supports
the notion that clonal mutations predominantly accumulated over the life
span of the cell population that gave rise to the cell of origin before
neoplastic onset2. No correlation with age was found for subclonal
mutations. In contrast, the frequency of subclonal mutations was strongly
correlated with the presence of alterations related to the p53 pathway (P
To evaluate evolutionary patterns in progression and therapy-resistance
of GBM, we analyzed the genomic profiles of 252 GBM samples from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)1, including 48 multi-sector and recurrent
tumor biopsies taken from 17 pairs of pre- and post-treatment GBMs, to
understand 1) the intratumoral heterogeneity of GBM and 2) how GBM
responds to therapeutic intervention.We integrated variant allele
fraction, DNA copy number and genotype information to determine clonality
of all mutations and found that 69.5% of mutations (median across samples
70.1% 19.6%) were classified as clonal and 30.5% as subclonal. To verify
our classification approach, we classified mutations detected in two
non-overlapping biopsies from 11 tumors into clonal and subclonal
categories. Of mutations detected in both tumor sectors 86.2% were
classified as clonal and 45.2% of sample-private mutations were
categorized as clonal, which was a strongly significant difference (P =
1.810-87).Separating patients into discrete age groups by an interval of
10 years, we found a significant linear correlation between clonal
mutations and age (P < 0.001). This observation supports the notion that
clonal mutations predominantly accumulated over the life span of the cell
population that gave rise to the cell of origin before neoplastic onset2.
No correlation with age was found for subclonal mutations. In contrast,
the frequency of subclonal mutations was strongly correlated with the
presence of alterations related to the p53 pathway (P < 0.001),
particularly TP53 point mutation or amplification of MDM2. This
observation raises the possibility that p53 pathway alterations stimulate
subclonal evolution, possibly by providing greater tolerance to DNA
damage and/or suppression of apoptosis3.To evaluate the effects of clonal
heterogeneity on disease recurrence, we analyzed matched pairs of primary
and recurrent GBM, including five pairs with mutated TP53 and nine pairs
with wildtype TP53. Recurrent TP53 mutant GBM showed a further and
significant increase in the subclonal mutation frequency. In contrast,
TP53 wildtype tumors showed an increase in the frequency of clonal
mutations compared to their matched primary tumor. These data suggest
that TP53 mutant GBM became increasingly clonally complex at time of
recurrence, whereas TP53 wildtype GBM showed a reduced level of
intratumoral heterogeneity. We observed an ultramutator phenotype in
three recurrent tumors, associated with temozolomide treatment.Our
results suggest that mutations in the p53 pathway affect the response to
therapy by supporting greater intratumoral heterogeneity. Paradoxically
we observe a trend towards improved event free survival in samples with
high subclonal mutation frequency. Further research is needed to assess
whether the level of intratumoral heterogeneity is a reflection of the
molecular portrait of GBM progression.

