Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamics of Gemcitabine induced interleukin-8 (IL-8) expression in
pancreatic tumor microenvironment


Background: The clinical standard of care for patients with pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is treatment with Gemcitabine (Gem) despite
Gem's limited benefits. To date, no surrogate marker has been identified
to indicate whether Gem treatment directly affects PDAC tumor cells. In
order to identify such a marker, we analyzed Gem treated cell lines and
clinical samples. Methods: 12 PDAC cell lines were treated with 5M Gem
for three hours and then allowed to grow in the absence of Gem for 24hrs
before mRNA expression analysis (Illumina Gene Expression Array). IHC and
WB were used to quantify IL-8 expression. ShRNA mediated silencing was
utilized to study the therapeutic value of IL-8. Results: mRNA expression
and WB confirmed the induction of IL-8 after Gem treatment. Gem induced
IL-8 expression was transcriptionally controlled by NFB and C/EBP. PDAC
cells (MPanc96 and BxPc-3-CXCR1), HPSC (Human Pancreatic Stellate
Cells-CXCR1) and HUVEC (Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial cells-CXCR1 & 2)
expressed the receptor of IL-8. Conditioned media from Gem treated cells
and rIL-8 treated cells, stimulated cell growth (PDAC, HPSC and HUVEC),
polygon formation in HUVEC and -SMA expression in HPSC. Stable silencing
of IL-8 in Capan2 cells, which develop an abundant stroma, led to a
significant reduction in tumor volume. Histologically, IL-8 silenced
tumors showed reduced micro-vessel density (CD37), as well as highly
reduced desmoplasia (Trichrome stain & -SMA) associated with necrosis.
Further, IHC revealed strong IL-8 expression in neo-adjuvant Gem-treated
human PDAC tissues (strong expression 42.1%, weak expression 57.9%,
negative 0%) in comparison to tissue from patients that underwent surgery
alone (strong expression 0%, weak expression 77.8%, negative
22.2%).Conclusion: Gem induced IL-8 functions as a growth factor for
cancer cells and its microenvironment. Thus, IL-8 can serve as a
surrogate marker to indicate Gem effects in PDAC.

