Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of ATR, but not ATM, sensitizes gynecologic cancer
cells to cisplatin


Resistance to platinum-based therapies remains a major hurdle in the
management of gynecologic (GYN) cancer especially in ovarian cancer.
Platinum such as cisplatin damages DNA by inducing DNA crosslinks that
stalls DNA replication forks where significant accumulation of
single-stranded DNA from persistently stalled replication forks could
ultimately lead to double strand breaks and activation of apoptosis.
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATM and Rad-3-related (ATR) are
two main DNA damage response (DDR) protein kinases that recognize
genotoxic stress and function to initiate cell cycle arrest and DNA
repair mechanisms. We hypothesized by combining genotoxic stress with
inhibition of DDR kinases ATR and/or ATM, therapeutic response of GYN
cancer cells to platinum-based chemotherapy could be improved. To test
our hypothesis, we assessed cell survival of multiple GYN cell lines
including ovarian (A2780, A2780-CP20, OVCAR3), endometrial (KLE, HEC1B),
and cervical (HELA, SIHA) carcinoma cells exposed to cisplatin along with
ATR inhibitor (ETP-46464) and/or ATM inhibitor (KU55933). We observed
inhibition of ATR significantly enhanced cisplatin induced cell death in
all seven cell lines tested, resulting in 65 - 96% increased sensitivity
to cisplatin. Inhibition of ATM did not sensitize GYN cancer cells to
cisplatin and cells were not further sensitized by co-inhibition of ATM
and ATR beyond that observed by inhibition of ATR alone. DDR signaling
was assessed by immunoblotting in cells exposed to cisplatin with or
without the presence of ETP-46464 and/or KU55933 where elevated levels of
phospho-ATM (Ser1981), phospho-Chk2 (Thr68) and phospho-Chk1 (Ser345)
observed in cisplatin treated cells were attenuated in cells that were
co-treated with cisplatin and ETP-46464. In addition, increased levels of
cleaved PARP1 and caspase 3 were observed in cisplatin-treated,
ATR-inhibited cells, suggesting the enhancement of cisplatin induced cell
death with ATR inhibition occurs through elevated apoptosis. Further, no
differential effect was observed in GYN cancer cells harboring wild type
(A2780, OVCAR3, HELA, SIHA) or mutant (CP20, KLE, HEC1B) TP53. These data
support further investigation of pharmacologic inhibitors of ATR in
combination with existing platinum based therapeutics for treating GYN
cancer.

