Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellular and molecular determinants of retinoic acid sensitivity
in breast cancer


All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) is the primary metabolite of vitamin A and
a promising agent in the treatment/prevention of solid tumors, including
breast cancer. Breast cancer is a very heterogeneous disease that can be
classified according to the global gene-expression profiles into various
subgroups. A rational use of ATRA in the clinics requires definition of
the breast cancer subtypes characterized by
sensitivity/natural-resistance to this compound and derived retinoids. In
addition, it is fundamental to define the cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying the sensitivity/resistance to ATRA. As a first step
in this direction, 44 breast cancer cell lines, belonging to the Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) of the Broad Institute and recapitulating
the heterogeneity of this tumor, were evaluated for their sensitivity to
the anti-proliferative activity of ATRA. Individual cell lines were
challenged with increasing concentrations of the retinoid for 3, 6 and 9
days. The concentrations of ATRA causing 50% of the maximal growth
inhibition (IC50) and the maximal effect observed were calculated. The
two parameters, along with the duplication time of the cell lines, were
used to define a novel algorithm (ATRA SCORE). The ATRA score is a
continuous parameter which defines the sensitivity of the cell lines to
ATRA in a quantitative fashion. The lower the ATRA score the higher the
sensitivity of the cell to the anti-proliferative action of ATRA. Using
this score, an enrichment in cell lines characterized by a luminal
phenotype and/or estrogen receptor (ER)-positivity was observed in the
group showing sensitivity to ATRA. In contrast an enrichment in cell
lines with a basal phenotype and/or ER-negativity was evident in the
group characterized by natural resistance to the retinoid. Measurement of
the mRNAs corresponding to various isoforms of the retinoid receptors
belonging to the RAR and RXR family in the 44 cell lines allowed us to
establish correlations between the expression of these transcripts and
ATRA sensitivity. With respect to this, we found a significant and direct
correlation with the expression levels of RARalpha1. This indicates that
the receptor represents a determinant and a predictor of ATRA-
sensitivity in breast cancer cells. The correlation was confirmed also at
the protein level using specific RARalpha antibodies. Most of these
findings were validated with the use of short-term cultures of breast
cancer tissue slices obtained from surgical specimens. The availability
of the global gene-expression profiles of each cell line permitted the
construction of a gene fingerprint consisting of approximately 130
elements that has the potential to predict sensitivity to ATRA not only
in breast cancer cell lines, but also in tumor samples. In addition, the
identified gene fingerprint allowed the identification of various and
unexpected molecular determinants of sensitivity which do not belong to
the classic retinoid pathway.

