Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic cell death in nedd8 and hrb27c mutant cells under an
rbf-negative background is dependent on EGFR/MAPK signaling


The Rb (retinoblastoma) protein is highly functionally conserved between
the Drosophila, and deregulation and mutations in the Rb pathway are
common events across a wide range of cancers. Here, we identify two novel
synthetic lethal interactions between Rb and mutant alleles of Nedd8 and
Hrb27c that were identified through an unbiased genetic screen in
Drosophila that resulted in apoptosis in both the wing disc pouch and the
region of the eye disc posterior to the morphogenetic furrow. However,
the molecular mechanisms behind the apoptotic phenotypes in both
synthetic lethal double mutants have yet to be elucidated. It is known
that wild-type Rb normally sequesters and can prevent the E2F1
transcription factor from promoting transcription of hid, the major
pro-apoptotic regulator in imaginal discs. Synthetic lethality is
therefore likely to be contingent on EGFR/hid signaling, and I will
determine if such is the case through a series of genetic epistasis
tests. Interestingly, preliminary evidence also suggests that EGFR/MAPK
signaling may be ablated in both mutants of Nedd8 and Hrb27c. However,
this observation is completely novel and therefore the molecular
mechanisms behind downregulation of MAPK signaling have yet to be
elucidated in both these mutants. I will again perform a series of
epistasis experiments to determine how Nedd8 and Hrb27c mutations
mechanistically affect EGFR/MAPK signaling. This will be achieved first
by determining if signaling is downregulated either during EGFR ligand
processing or downstream of the EGFR receptor. This will be followed by
subsequent experiments to determine which specific element in either
pathway is being affected by Nedd8 or Hrb27c ablation. I therefore
hypothesize that inhibition of both nedd8 and hrb27c synergistically
induce cell death in Rb-negative cells in a process that is dependent on
both E2F1 activity and downregulation of MAPK signaling. Many existing
treatment regimens fail to take into account the unique biological
properties of cancer cells compared to their normal counterparts, thus
often resulting in off-target effects and limitations in dosage. This
proposal is therefore both novel and significant because the mechanisms
behind both the Rb/Hrb27c and Rb/Nedd8 synthetic lethal interactions have
yet to be elucidated and characterization of such interactions such as
these have the potential to catalyze the development of new therapeutic
strategies in the treatment of cancer.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

