Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nano-engineered mesenchymal stem cells as targeted therapeutic
carriers


Poor availability of chemotherapeutics in deep-seated and metastatic
cancers results in the development of drug resistance and failed
therapeutic outcomes. Approaches that can specifically enhance drug
delivery to the tumor tissue can potentially improve therapeutic efficacy
while minimizing toxic side effects. In our current studies, we used
nano-engineered mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as tumor-targeted
therapeutic carriers. MSCs possess exquisite tumor homing capabilities.
In addition, MSCs overexpress efflux transporters such as P-glycoprotein
and are highly drug resistant. The inherent tumor-tropic and
drug-resistant properties make MSCs ideal carriers for toxic payload.
Since a majority of MSCs first accumulate in the lungs following systemic
administration, this technology is particularly suitable for the delivery
of anticancer therapeutics to lung tumors.The overall objective of this
study was to investigate the efficacy of nano-engineered MSCs in
non-small cell lung cancer. We hypothesized that incorporation of
drug-loaded, polymeric nanoparticles in MSCs will allow for
tumor-targeted and sustained drug delivery. Nanoparticles containing
paclitaxel and imaging agent were formulated using poly
(DL-lactide-co-glycolide) polymer by solvent evaporation technique and
characterized for size, charge, drug loading and in vitro drug release.
Nano-engineered MSCs were designed by loading MSCs with nanoparticles
containing paclitaxel and an infrared (in vivo) or green fluorescent (in
vitro) imaging agent and characterized for nanoparticle uptake using flow
cytometry. Nano-engineered MSCs were characterized for in vitro
cytotoxicity, differentiation potential and in vivo migratory
potential.Human MSCs incubated with nanoparticles showed a steady
increase in nanoparticle uptake, with saturation at 4 hours.
Nanoparticles encapsulation did not affect the viability or the
differentiation potential of MSCs. Nano-engineered MSCs resulted in
dose-dependent cytotoxicity in A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells. An
orthotopic lung tumor model was used to monitor the in vivo distribution
of nano-engineered MSCs. Intravenous injection of A549 cells stably
transfected with luciferase in mice resulted in formation of lung tumors
that were monitored by bioluminescence imaging. Intravenous injection of
nanoparticles alone resulted in non-specific biodistribution, with high
accumulation in liver and spleen. Nano-engineered MSCs, in contrast,
demonstrated selective accumulation and retention in lung tumors.These
results indicate that nano-engineered MSCs can be loaded with high
concentration of anticancer agents without affecting their migratory or
drug resistance properties. Future studies will examine the anticancer
efficacy of nano-engineered MSCs in an orthotopic mouse model of lung
cancer.

