Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced anti-tumor effect of WNT pathway antagonists in
combination with taxanes


The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the Frizzled (FZD)
receptor family and several co-receptors, has long been implicated in
cancer. We have previously demonstrated that inhibition of
WNT/beta-catenin signaling by vantictumab (anti-FZD) or OMP-54F28
(FZD8-Fc) inhibits tumor growth, decreases tumorigenicity and induces
differentiation in solid tumors. The anti-tumor effect of our Wnt
antagonists is most evident in combination with chemotherapeutic agents.
We sought to determine if the anti-tumor effect of Wnt pathway inhibitors
varied with different chemotherapeutic agents. We compared the growth
inhibitory effect of vantictumab and OMP-54F28 with either taxanes
(paclitaxel and nab-paclitaxel) or with DNA synthesis inhibitors
(gemcitabine and carboplatin) in patient-derived tumor xenografts. In a
model for pancreatic ductal carcinoma, vantictumab with nab-paclitaxel
was more efficacious than vantictumab with gemcitabine in inhibiting
tumor growth and Wnt target gene expression (at doses of nab-paclitaxel
and gemcitabine that were equivalent in their single-agent
growth-inhibitory effects). Histologic analysis indicated that
nab-paclitaxel increased mitotic cells and beta-catenin levels.
Importantly, the addition of vantictumab to nab-paclitaxel reversed the
nab-paclitaxel-induced increase in mitotic cells and beta-catenin
expression. An independent experiment in a serous ovarian cancer
xenograft model also showed enhanced anti-tumor activity when combining
OMP-54F28 with either paclitaxel or nab-paclitaxel compared to the
combination with carboplatin. A potential mechanism to account for these
results involves on the observation that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is
under cell cycle control and peaks at the G2/M phase. Taxanes inhibit
microtubule function and block the cell cycle at G2/M. In contrast, other
chemotherapeutic agents, such as platinum compounds and nucleoside
analogs, inhibit DNA synthesis and block cell proliferation at S phase.
We hypothesize that combination of Wnt blockade with chemotherapeutic
agents, such as taxanes, that induce G2/M arrest may result in optimal
anti-tumor activity.

