Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological reversal of caffeine-mediated phagocytic
suppression


Caffeine's mechanism of action on immune cells has been an issue of
debate for some time. Previous studies suggest caffeine inhibits cyclic
AMP (cAMP)-phosphodiesterase, resulting in increased cAMP levels,
increased protein kinase A (PKA) activation, and subsequently a decreased
pro-inflammatory response. Caffeine is also an antagonist of adenosine
receptors, resulting in delayed resolution of inflammation. If the
primary effect of caffeine in macrophages was to antagonize adenosine
receptors, we would expect caffeine to stimulate phagocytosis. We treated
human macrophages with varying concentrations of caffeine (0 - 13mM) and
measured their phagocytic ability to engulf fluorescent microspheres.
Engulfment rates were measured by flow cytometry. Our results indicate
that caffeine suppresses phagocytosis by 22% at physiological
concentrations (35 uM- 750uM). At supraphysiological (4-13 mM) levels of
caffeine, however, there is no significant decrease in phagocytosis. We
wanted to find out if this suppressive effect at physiological
concentrations could be blocked with a PKA inhibitor. We tested this by
treating the cells with a PKA inhibitor at each of the different caffeine
concentrations previously used. Initial results indicate that
phagocytosis increased up to 27% in macrophages treated with PKA and
caffeine compared to caffeine treated and control cells.These results
need further validation but, initial results suggest inhibition of PKA
results in increased engulfment, and indicate that the suppressive
effects of caffeine on macrophage phagocytosis can be reversed with the
treatment of PKA inhibitor suppression can be reversed. Macrophages are
highly involved in regulation of inflammation and dysregulation has been
implicated in a number of diseases, including cancer. These results
suggest further potential for the therapeutic applications of caffeine,
its analogs, and PKA inhibitors for the control of inflammation.

