Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of skin cancer in xeroderma pigmentosum: A long-term
study of fourteen patients


Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a multigenic, recessively inherited
precancerous disorder occurring in approximately 4 per million live
births in the United States with higher rates in Japan, the Middle East,
and regions of Latin America. Eight separate genetic subgroups, known as
complementation groups, each due to a mutation in a separate gene and
associated with a defect in a separate protein encoded by that gene are
known at present, but the biology may be considerably more complex, with
other genes not yet identified and other defective genes and proteins
simultaneously involved. The seven known classical complementation
groups, identified as XP-A to XP-G, are associated with defective
nucleotide excision type DNA repair(NER) of adducts induced into the DNA
of sun exposed cells by ultraviolet radiation in sunlight, whereas the
eighth complementation group, designated the variant group, XP-V, is
associated with defective DNA synthesis bypassing such adducts in a
process known as trans-lesion synthesis (TLS); some of these patients
have been shown to have a defective DNA polymerase, pol eta, which is
primarily responsible for this TLS in normal human cells. Depending on
the severity of the disease and the degree of sun protection, XP patients
have historically been known to be markedly susceptible to skin and other
cancers in sun-exposed areas, with hundreds or even thousands of such
cancers developing early in life, often in early childhood. EXPERIMENTAL
DESIGN AND METHODS: Over ten years ago we began to apply topical 5
fluorouracil (5-FU), 2 to 8 percent, once or twice per day for two to
three weeks every three to six months, as tolerated, topically to sun
exposed areas of children with XP, identified clinically and/or by
cellular functional assays testing fibroblasts removed from these
subjects and grown in culture. Topical 5-FU is known to sensitize normal
immunity, producing focal inflammation at sites of developing skin
cancers; such skin cancers, or their precursors, actinic keratoses, then
tend not to arise at these sites. Some XP patients do not experience
focal inflammation but are protected from development of skin cancer by a
second mechanism. More recently we have alternatively applied imiquimod
(IQ), 2 to 5 percent, topically to these same sites. IQ acts as an immune
response modifier in a manner analogous to that of topical 5-FU. Fourteen
patients have now been treated for over 5 years. RESULTS: Over 5 to nine
years, the 14 patients have developed a total of 88 skin cancers, all
non-melanoma skin cancers and all removed at early stages with minimal
morbidity, even though DNA repair related, unscheduled DNA synthesis
(UDS) was as low as two percent. Thousands of skin cancers were expected
in this group without this intervention. Skin inflammation was also
reduced. CONCLUSION: Skin cancer may be effectively prevented in XP
patients using topical immune response modifiers such as topical 5-FU or
IQ.

