Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting an attenuated cytokine to tumor cells via antibody
fusion results in enhanced tumor killing with significantly reduced
off-target activity


Many cytokines have potential therapeutic applications and several,
including interferon (IFN) and IFN, have been approved for the treatment
of cancer and/or autoimmune disease. While these agents are effective,
they are associated with significant dose-limiting toxicities that
prevent their use at levels sufficient to promote optimal therapeutic
benefit. The toxicity of type I interferons, like other cytokines, is
likely mediated via cognate receptor activation on cells other than those
that mediate their therapeutic effects. For example, IFN2b, which is
indicated for the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM), has a narrow
therapeutic index due to significant systemic toxicity. Approaches that
seek to minimize dose-limiting systemic toxicity while maximizing
tumor-specific cytokine exposure could greatly enhance the therapeutic
index and effectiveness of type I IFNs and other cytokines.Other groups
have previously shown that a moderate degree of tumor-specificity can be
achieved by attaching a cytokine such as IFN to a tumor-targeting
antibody; such first generation antibody-targeted cytokines are highly
active but show only moderate tumor-specificity since the cytokine can
still potently stimulate its receptor on antigen-negative cells. We
sought to improve the therapeutic index of antibody-targeted cytokines by
mutating the cytokine portion to significantly reduce affinity for its
receptor, thereby making it more dependent on antibody-based
cell-targeting. Here we demonstrate that such fusion proteins, consisting
of mutant or attenuated cytokines (Attenukines) attached to
tumor-targeting antibodies, are 1,000 to 100,000-fold more potent on
target-positive cells compared to target-negative (normal) cells. This is
shown for antibody-Attenukine fusion proteins based on multiple tumor
antigens (CD20, CD38, CD138, HMW-MAA, HLA) and multiple attenuated
mutants of IFN, IFN, IL-4 and IL-6. Furthermore, we have evaluated an
anti-CD38-attenuated IFN molecule (anti-CD38-Attenukine) in various CD38+
MM xenograft models and found that this molecule retains potent
tumor-targeting activity and anti-tumor efficacy. Moreover, in non-human
primates, we have confirmed that the attenuating mutation in IFN indeed
decreases non-targeted IFN biomarker responses by greater than 100-fold.
Taken together, our findings suggest that the administration of
antibody-attenuated cytokine fusion proteins to cancer patients may
promote robust cytokine-dependent tumor-killing while minimizing systemic
toxicity.

