Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Demethylating therapy modulates expression of the RON tyrosine
kinase receptor in pancreatic cancer


Introduction -The RON tyrosine kinase receptor is overexpressed in 80% of
Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinomas (PDAC) and mediates invasiveness,
resistance to apoptosis, and VEGF secretion. Though point mutations are
rare a wide variety of RON protein isoforms have been identified, some of
which are constitutively active and oncogenic. Previous studies of the
DNA methylation patterns of pancreatic cancer specimens identified the
gene for RON, MST1R, to be controlled by epigenetic modification.
Methylation is one mechanism to regulate expression of RON, and we seek
to investigate the effects of hypomethylating therapy on isoform
expression and alteration of PDAC biology.Methods -Established pancreatic
cancer cell lines (MiaPaca2, BxPC3, AsPC1, HPDE, Panc1) and 2 novel cell
lines derived from patient tumor specimens (34E, 79E) were treated with
5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (Decitabine, DAC) for 96 hours. Genomic DNA was
analyzed using the Methylflash (Epigentek) assay to determine genomic
methylation percentage. Reverse Transcriptase PCR and western blot
analysis was used to determine treatment effects on RON transcription and
expression.Results -Genomic methylation analysis of pancreatic cancer
cell lines revealed that compared to the control HPDE line (1.2%
methylation) some lines were hypomethylated (ASPC1-1.13%, 34E-1.17%,
Panc1-1.17%) while others were hypermethylated (BxPC3-1.6%,
MiaPaca2-1.98%, 79E-2.06%). Hypomethylating therapy was effective in
decreasing genomic methylation to below normal levels (0.4%-0.9%) in all
cell lines and depleted DNA MethylTransferase 1 (DNMT1) protein levels.
The effects of demethylating therapy on RON expression were differential.
The amount of RON transcripts and protein expression in the RON
expressing lines (79E and 34E) was decreased but increased in MiaPaca2
and Panc1. MiaPaca2 does not normally express RON, but demethylation
induced RON expression. Transcripts specific for the 55 isoform of RON
decreased in 34E, 79E, and HPDE cell lines but did not change in the
others. Transcription and expression of other RON isoforms which are
constitutively active decreased in 34E, 79E, ASPC1, and BxPC3 lines, with
less exon 11 skipping and partial splicing of exon 5 and 6. Though RON
protein expression was decreased overall in the expressing lines,
phosphorylation was still detectable following DAC treatment.Conclusions
-Genomic methylation of pancreatic cancer cell lines is variable and RON
expression is modulated by the methylation status of its promoter.
Demethylating therapy has variable effects on RON expression and is
context specific. RON isoform expression was decreased in response to
treatment, linking DNA methylation to alternative splicing events. These
findings suggest that the consequences of demethylating therapy on PDAC
biology are complex and additional studies are required to further
elucidate definitive mechanisms.

