Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor PaintTM technology detects naturally occurring solid tumors
in dogs


Tumor PaintTM technology is designed to provide real-time visualization
of tumors during surgery at improved resolution over existing methods.
BLZ-100 is a Tumor Paint product consisting of a chlorotoxin (CTX)
peptide conjugated to a near-infrared (NIR) fluorophore that is being
advanced toward clinical studies. CTX-based Tumor Paint products have
been shown to illuminate a broad range of cancers in mouse models. To
facilitate clinical translation, a preclinical feasibility study was
conducted in dogs with naturally occurring solid tumors. Many types of
canine tumors resemble human disease, including sarcomas, mammary and
lung cancers, mucosal squamous cell cancers, and gliomas. The diversity
of tumor size and type, surrounding tissue, and patient body mass
provides a model that is superior to the mouse in predicting the clinical
characteristics of BLZ-100, including tumor penetration, background
staining, and effective imaging dose. Twenty-seven dogs were given
BLZ-100 intravenously 24 - 48 hours before surgery. Doses, normalized to
body surface area (mg/m2), were 0.25 - 0.8 (7 dogs), 0.8 - 1.2 (15 dogs)
and 1.2 - 1.6 (5 dogs). Tumor types were sarcoma, adenocarcinoma,
mastocytoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and meningioma. Dogs received
standard of care including tumor resection with intent to control or cure
local disease. Excised tissues were imaged using the IVIS Spectrum
(Caliper) and the Odyssey NIR scanner (Li-Cor) to determine overall
signal in tumor and gross tumor to normal ratios. Tissues were then
embedded in OCT, sectioned on a cryostat, and scanned on the Odyssey.
Serial sections were stained with H&E, and comparison with the
fluorescence scans was used to validate the specificity of BLZ-100 for
tumor tissue. Ex vivo imaging data showed maximal tumor fluorescence at
doses above 0.9 mg/m2. In dogs treated with 0.8 mg/m2 or higher (20 dogs
in total), ratios of fluorescence in tumour to normal surrounding tissue
ranged from 200, with good differentiation in several tumor types
including meningioma, carcinomas (lung, thyroid, and mammary), and
sarcomas. Highest signals and gross tumor to background ratios were seen
in a subset of soft tissue sarcomas, suggesting preferential uptake of
the conjugate in these tumor types. Histologic analysis of these cases
showed 95% sensitivity and 85% specificity. Intraoperative imaging was
conducted in several cases, using a prototype open NIR imaging device.
These cases showed good contrast between gross tumors and surrounding
structures, detection of tumor through 0.5 cm of normal fatty tissue, and
low background in tissues such as fat and muscle. The information
obtained in this study provides data that will be valuable in clinical
translation of BLZ-100.This project was funded in whole with Federal
funds from National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, under Contract No.
HHSN2612012000054C.

