Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting IL-11R inhibits osteosarcoma pulmonary metastasis in an
orthotopic xenograft mouse model


Osteosarcoma is the most common primary tumor of bones. In the past three
decades treatment paradigms and survival rates have not improved. While
osteosarcoma clinical phenotype has been well characterized, the
underlying tumor molecular biology remains unclear. We have previously
demonstrated that IL-11R is overexpressed in primary and metastatic
osteosarcoma. Recently investigators identified that IL-11 and IL-11R
play a role in the development of metastasis in breast and
gastrointestinal cancer. However the role of IL-11/IL-11R signaling in
osteosarcoma is unknown. Using in vitro and in vivo osteosarcoma models
we investigated the role of IL-11/IL-11R in osteosarcoma metastasis. The
purpose of our study is to determine the effect of the knockdown of
IL-11R in osteosarcoma. We stably knocked down IL-11R expression in a
highly metastatic osteosarcoma cell line, using a lentiviral short
hair-pin (shRNA) based approach. Knockdown of IL-11R led to inhibition of
STAT-3(Tyr705) protein phosphorylation, cell growth, migration, invasion
and colony formation in vitro. To determine the role of IL-11R in
osteosarcoma tumorigeniesis and metastasis, we used an orthotopic
metastatic model. In this model, mice injected with KRIB-IL-11R shRNA
cells developed significantly less metastasis than control mice injected
with KRIB control shRNA (POsteosarcoma is the most common primary tumor
of bones. In the past three decades treatment paradigms and survival
rates have not improved. While osteosarcoma clinical phenotype has been
well characterized, the underlying tumor molecular biology remains
unclear. We have previously demonstrated that IL-11R is overexpressed in
primary and metastatic osteosarcoma. Recently investigators identified
that IL-11 and IL-11R play a role in the development of metastasis in
breast and gastrointestinal cancer. However the role of IL-11/IL-11R
signaling in osteosarcoma is unknown. Using in vitro and in vivo
osteosarcoma models we investigated the role of IL-11/IL-11R in
osteosarcoma metastasis. The purpose of our study is to determine the
effect of the knockdown of IL-11R in osteosarcoma. We stably knocked down
IL-11R expression in a highly metastatic osteosarcoma cell line, using a
lentiviral short hair-pin (shRNA) based approach. Knockdown of IL-11R led
to inhibition of STAT-3(Tyr705) protein phosphorylation, cell growth,
migration, invasion and colony formation in vitro. To determine the role
of IL-11R in osteosarcoma tumorigeniesis and metastasis, we used an
orthotopic metastatic model. In this model, mice injected with
KRIB-IL-11R shRNA cells developed significantly less metastasis than
control mice injected with KRIB control shRNA (P<0.01). The relevance of
our data to human conditions was studied by immunohistochemical staining
of IL-11R protein in human osteosarcoma biopsy samples containing primary
tumor and lesions, significant difference (pOsteosarcoma is the most
common primary tumor of bones. In the past three decades treatment
paradigms and survival rates have not improved. While osteosarcoma
clinical phenotype has been well characterized, the underlying tumor
molecular biology remains unclear. We have previously demonstrated that
IL-11R is overexpressed in primary and metastatic osteosarcoma. Recently
investigators identified that IL-11 and IL-11R play a role in the
development of metastasis in breast and gastrointestinal cancer. However
the role of IL-11/IL-11R signaling in osteosarcoma is unknown. Using in
vitro and in vivo osteosarcoma models we investigated the role of
IL-11/IL-11R in osteosarcoma metastasis. The purpose of our study is to
determine the effect of the knockdown of IL-11R in osteosarcoma. We
stably knocked down IL-11R expression in a highly metastatic osteosarcoma
cell line, using a lentiviral short hair-pin (shRNA) based approach.
Knockdown of IL-11R led to inhibition of STAT-3(Tyr705) protein
phosphorylation, cell growth, migration, invasion and colony formation in
vitro. To determine the role of IL-11R in osteosarcoma tumorigeniesis and
metastasis, we used an orthotopic metastatic model. In this model, mice
injected with KRIB-IL-11R shRNA cells developed significantly less
metastasis than control mice injected with KRIB control shRNA (P<0.01).
The relevance of our data to human conditions was studied by
immunohistochemical staining of IL-11R protein in human osteosarcoma
biopsy samples containing primary tumor and lesions, significant
difference (p<0.01) in expression distribution between primary and
metastatic osteosarcoma lesions and a trend toward an impact on survival
was noted. In conclusion, we showed that IL-11R plays an important role
in the development of metastasis in osteosarcoma and blockade of this
axis may inhibit the formation of metastasis and may provide an excellent
target for the treatment of osteosarcoma.

