Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential inhibition of microtubule-dependent transport and
signaling pathways important for cancer cell growth and survival


Microtubule targeting agents are some of the most valuable drugs used in
the treatment of cancer. Recent studies demonstrate that the effects of
these agents on interphase cells are likely central to their anticancer
actions. The ability of microtubule targeting agents to interrupt
multiple microtubule-dependent oncogene-driven signaling cascades might
be one mechanism by which they initiate cancer cell death. The effects of
diverse microtubule targeting agents on two microtubule-dependent
processes essential for cancer cell survival were evaluated;
TGF--mediated SMAD2/3 transport into the nucleus and the internalization
and endocytosis of the EGFR. The ability of diverse microtubule targeting
agents including paclitaxel, taccalonolide AJ, laulimalide and
vinblastine that bind within different sites on tubulin/microtubules to
interrupt TGF--mediated signaling pathways that promote cell growth,
invasion and metastasis was evaluated. Using a variety of microscopy
techniques, we show that microtubule stabilizers inhibit this pathway by
preventing SMAD2/3 nuclear accumulation and subsequent activation of
target genes. On the other hand, vinblastine caused an apparent increase
in nuclear SMAD2/3 as compared to vehicle-treated cells. These effects,
however, were not seen in cell lines driven by TGF- pathways. Our results
suggest that in cell lines with amplified TGF- signaling, the microtubule
regulatory component is lost.The effects of the microtubule targeting
agents on EGFR internalization and endocytosis were also evaluated in
A549 NSCLC cells and BT549 triple negative breast cancer cells; both of
which overexpress EGFR. Taccalonolide AJ initiated distinct changes in
the localization of the EGFR, impaired its internalization and endosomal
sorting, leading to faster internalization and enhanced sorting to late
endosomes. The data suggest that taccalonolide AJ causes premature
degradation of EGFR and thus inhibited downstream signaling. Vinblastine
on the other hand, did not impair the internalization of the EGFR or its
degradation. Surprisingly the microtubule targeting agents had different
effects on AKT phosphorylation, suggesting that they modulate EGFR
dependent pathways in distinct ways. Identification of the specific
signaling pathways and downstream targets interrupted by the different
microtubule targeting agents might identify new rational drug
combinations. This has the potential to identify patient populations that
might respond better to certain microtubule targeting agents and begins
to shed some light into the complex and subtly different mechanisms of
action of these drugs.

