Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elongation factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K) promotes cell invasion and
epithelial mesenchymal transition through regulation of TG2-mediated
signaling in human pancreatic cancer cells


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) accounts for the majority of
pancreatic cancer (PaCa) cases and is currently uncurable with poor
prognosis/survival rates (4% 5-year survival). The extensive local tumor
invasion, early metastasis/systemic dissemination and resistance to
existing cancer therapies are the major characteristics of PaCa and the
impediment to effective cure of this disease. Although PaCa has a
well-defined spectrum of highly oncogenic lesions (e.g, mutations in
K-RAS, p53, p16ink4a, and SMAD4/DPC4), effective therapies have not yet
been developed. Therefore, novel molecular targets-based therapeutic
strategies are urgently needed. Recently, we discovered that eukaryotic
elongation factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K) is dramatically up-regulated in
different PaCa cells, promoting their survival, and that
targeted-silencing of eEF-2K led to significant cell death (Ashour et al,
2013). However, the role of eEF-2K in the pathways regulating
invasion/metastasis and drug-resistance remains largely unknown. Here, we
show that siRNA-mediated knockdown of eEF-2K markedly inhibits the
invasion of PANC-1and MIAPaCa-2 cells. Furthermore, rottlerin, which we
found to down-regulate eEF-2K expression, also significantly reduced the
invasion of both cell lines. We later investigated the involvement of
tissue transglutaminase (TG2), a multifunctional enzyme implicated in
regulation of cell survival, migration and invasion. We found that eEF-2K
regulates TG2 at the transcription level, as evidenced by eEF-2K
knockdown-mediated down-regulation of TG2 protein and mRNA levels by
Western blot and RT-PCR, respectively. Importantly, siRNA-mediated
knock-down of eEF-2K or TG2 separately, suppresses the downstream key
cellular pathways supporting PaCa invasion, and recapitulates
rottlerin-induced invasion inhibition and correlated events. We also
found that inhibition of eEF-2K/TG2 axis suppresses the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through the modulation of ZEB1
zinc finger transcription factors, and tight junction proteins, claudins.
Moreover, eEF-2K overexpression, by lentivirus-based expression system,
led to increased TG2 expression, with concomitant induction in the
invasion capability of PaCa cells. eEF-2K overexpression also rescued the
cells from rottlerin-induced suppression of invasion and
invasion-supporting machineries, suggesting that eEF-2K is a prominent
target of rottlerin, and is a central regulator of PaCa cell invasion. We
are currently treating PANC-1 tumor xenografts in nude mice with eEF-2K
siRNA-nanoparticles to demonstrate the role of eEF-2K in invasion and
tumor progression, in order to establish eEF-2K as a potential novel
therapeutic target in PaCa. Collectively, our data suggest, for the first
time, the pivotal role of eEF-2K in PaCa invasion/progression and
possibly tumor growth.

