Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple combination of bevacizumab, anti-DLL4 (delta like ligand 4)
and trebananib gives enhanced therapeutic effects in three xenograft
tumor models


Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody targeting VEGF that is clinically
approved for the treatment of multiple indications in oncology, including
colorectal, lung and renal cancer as well as glioblastoma. Clinical
activity has also been demonstrated in breast and ovarian cancer as well,
however, the time periods of benefit for all of these indications is in
months (1-5). Multiple pathways are known to participate in the process
of angiogenesis, and the limited effects of bevacizumab may represent the
maximum activity of targeting just one of them. The purpose of the
present study was to examine the effect of simultaneously targeting
multiple angiogenic axes including angiopoietins 1 and 2, Dll4 and VEGF.
Trebananib is a recombinant peptide-Fc fusion protein that selectively
blocks the Tie2 interactions of both Ang1 and Ang2. Trebananib, as well
as a recombinant antibody to Dll4 were produced at Amgen, Inc., Thousand
Oaks, CA. Bevacizumab was purchased from a local pharmacy. These reagents
were employed in the combination treatment of three different preclinical
murine tumor models (U87, glioblastoma; MiaPaca and BxPC3, pancreatic
carcinoma), one of which (BxPC3) was specifically selected for its
relative resistance to VEGF/KDR inhibition. Harlan Athymic nu/nu female
mice at 6-7 weeks of age were injected subcutaneously on the right flank
with 5 x 106 tumor cells in the presence of Matrigel and treated when the
tumors were approximately 300 mm3. The results, as supported by
histomorphometric analysis (percent blood vessel area, viable tumor
burden), demonstrate that under conditions of optimal biological dosing,
the addition of trebananib to a two-way combination of bevacizumab and
anti-Dll4 resulted in a statistically significant enhancement of
therapeutic effect for the three-way combination, an observation made
consistently over 3 different tumor models and 3 different dose levels of
bevacizumab and anti-Dll4 (p = or Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody
targeting VEGF that is clinically approved for the treatment of multiple
indications in oncology, including colorectal, lung and renal cancer as
well as glioblastoma. Clinical activity has also been demonstrated in
breast and ovarian cancer as well, however, the time periods of benefit
for all of these indications is in months (1-5). Multiple pathways are
known to participate in the process of angiogenesis, and the limited
effects of bevacizumab may represent the maximum activity of targeting
just one of them. The purpose of the present study was to examine the
effect of simultaneously targeting multiple angiogenic axes including
angiopoietins 1 and 2, Dll4 and VEGF. Trebananib is a recombinant
peptide-Fc fusion protein that selectively blocks the Tie2 interactions
of both Ang1 and Ang2. Trebananib, as well as a recombinant antibody to
Dll4 were produced at Amgen, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA. Bevacizumab was
purchased from a local pharmacy. These reagents were employed in the
combination treatment of three different preclinical murine tumor models
(U87, glioblastoma; MiaPaca and BxPC3, pancreatic carcinoma), one of
which (BxPC3) was specifically selected for its relative resistance to
VEGF/KDR inhibition. Harlan Athymic nu/nu female mice at 6-7 weeks of age
were injected subcutaneously on the right flank with 5 x 106 tumor cells
in the presence of Matrigel and treated when the tumors were
approximately 300 mm3. The results, as supported by histomorphometric
analysis (percent blood vessel area, viable tumor burden), demonstrate
that under conditions of optimal biological dosing, the addition of
trebananib to a two-way combination of bevacizumab and anti-Dll4 resulted
in a statistically significant enhancement of therapeutic effect for the
three-way combination, an observation made consistently over 3 different
tumor models and 3 different dose levels of bevacizumab and anti-Dll4 (p
= or < 0.0024; RMANOVA). Furthermore, the therapeutic effect in all three
models approximated prolonged stasis, the ultimate theoretical goal of
antiangiogenesis in the treatment of cancer.1. NEJM, vol. 350, p. 2335,
2004.2. NEJM, vol. 355, p. 2542, 2006.3. Lancet, vol. 370, p. 2103,
2007.4. NEJM, vol. 357, p. 2666, 2007.5. J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 30, p.
2039, 2012.

