Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RET fusions identified in colorectal cancer PDX models are
sensitive to the potent RET inhibitor ponatinib


Background: Chromosomal translocations resulting in formation of
activating RET fusion genes have been identified in papillary thyroid
cancer and 1-2% of NSCLC. We have previously shown that ponatinib, a
pan-BCR-ABL and multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), potently
inhibits the most common NSCLC fusion variant, KIF5B-RET, at
clinically-achievable concentrations. Here we used patient-derived (PDX)
tumor models to explore the potential involvement of RET fusions, and the
efficacy of ponatinib, in other cancers.Results: To identify potential
RET fusion-positive PDX tumor models, we examined RET mRNA levels in 273
PDX tumors (Crown Bioscience) from various cancer types, looking for
models with outlier RET expression. To search for RET fusions, we
performed RNAseq on 4 tumors that had the highest RET levels.
Interestingly, RET fusions were detected in tumors from 2 colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients (pts) and not in tumors from 2 NSCLC pts that
expressed similar levels of RET. The fusions detected in CRC pts,
NCOA4-RET and CCDC6-RET, had previously been observed in NSCLC pts. Both
CRC tumors were negative for other major hotspot mutations, including
KRAS, BRAF and PI3K, suggesting that these RET-fusions might be primary
oncogenic drivers in these tumors. To evaluate the cellular activity of
ponatinib, we generated cell lines that were dependent on the activity of
these fusions. Ponatinib potently inhibited the viability of Ba/F3 cells
expressing NCOA4-RET and CCD6-RET with IC50s of 6 and 22 nM,
respectively. Consistent with these effects being due to inhibition of
RET, ponatinib inhibited RET phosphorylation with similar potency. Other
TKIs with RET activity, vandetanib (IC50s: 564-1000 nM), cabozantinib
(60-386 nM), sunitinib (277-584 nM), sorafenib (105-494 nM), and
lenvatinib (68-257 nM), also inhibited viability of the Ba/F3 lines, but
with potencies substantially reduced compared to ponatinib. Finally, we
examined the efficacy of ponatinib in the RET fusion positive PDX
colorectal models, compared to 2 RET fusion negative colorectal models.
In the RET-negative models, daily oral dosing of ponatinib (20 mg/kg)
inhibited tumor growth by 24-41%. In contrast, ponatinib exhibited much
greater efficacy in the RET-fusion positive models, inhibiting tumor
growth by 79% in the NCOA4-RET model and inducing near complete
regression in the CCDC6-RET model.Conclusion: We identified, for the
first time, oncogenic RET fusions in CRC patient samples, suggesting RET
may be a driver in a subset of CRC patients. Ponatinib effectively
inhibited these fusions with potency substantially exceeding that of
other RET inhibitors and demonstrated significant anti-tumor activity in
PDX models. These results provide strong support for the clinical
evaluation of ponatinib in patients with RET-fusion positive cancers,
including colorectal cancer.

