Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional differences of actinin isoforms in the formation of
invadopodia by invasive cancer cells


Invadopodia are ventral membrane protrusions that are formed by invasive
cancer cells cultured on physiological substrates. They are actin-based
structures and promote the degradation of the extracellular matrix by
focally localizing matrix metalloproteinases. Accumulating evidence
suggests that invadopodia play an important role in local invasion and
distant metastasis of malignant tumors. Actinin is an actin-binding
protein that forms dimers and crosslinks actin filaments. There are four
isoforms of actinin in mammals and they are divided into the muscle type
(actinin-2 and -3) and the non-muscle type (actinin-1 and -4). Actinin-1
is ubiquitously expressed and involved in the formation of focal
adhesions, while actinin-4 is strongly expressed at the invading front of
advanced cancers and its expression is correlated with poor prognosis.
Although actinin-4 is thought to regulate cell motility and invasion, the
detailed molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Moreover, functional
differences between the two isoforms have yet to be fully defined. In
this study, we studied the roles of and functional differences between
actinin-1 and -4 in invadopodia formation to determine the impact of
actinin-4 expression on cancer cells. Immunofluorescence analysis showed
that both actinin-1 and -4 clearly localized at invadopodia in RPMI-7951
human melanoma cells and there was no obvious difference in their
localization patterns. Likewise, invadopodia formation and degradation of
fluorescent gelatin matrix were blocked by siRNA-mediated knockdown of
either actinin-1 or -4. In contrast, only actinin-4, but not actinin-1,
promoted invadopodia-mediated gelatin degradation activity when
overexpressed in RPMI7951 cells. Similar results were obtained when
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells and SCC61 human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cells were analyzed in the same manner. These
results indicate that both actinin-1 and -4 are essential components of
invadopodia, but only actinin-4 possesses an ability to promote
invadopodia formation. Therefore, further analysis is conducted now to
identify the unique functions actinin-4 in invadopodia formation.

