Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen stimulates cell cycle progression dependent on Src kinase
activity and IMP1 stabilization of myc mRNA in estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer cells


Estrogen (E2) stimulation promotes proliferation in estrogen
receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer, which accounts for 60-75% of all
breast cancer. E2 signals through the ER via three pathways: the
classical genomic pathway involving transcriptional activation of the ER,
crosstalk between ER and other transcription factors, and non-genomic
signaling cascades, which do not involve the transcriptional activity of
the ER. This non-genomic pathway likely involves Src family kinases
(SFKs) and has been implicated in cell cycle progression in fibroblasts
engineered to express the ER (Castoria 1999). While not typically
amplified or mutationally activated in ER+ breast cancer, Src is
hyperactive in most breast cancers.To test whether SFK activity is
required for G1/S cell cycle progression in breast cancer cells, we
pretreated quiescent ER+ MCF7 cells with a selective SFK inhibitor
(SU11333) prior to stimulation with E2. Inhibition of SFK activity
blocked progression from G1 to S phase. Previous data from our laboratory
has demonstrated that G1/S progression in response to peptide growth
factor stimulation of quiescent fibroblasts is dependent upon
SFK-mediated stabilization of myc mRNA (Bromann 2005). We therefore
tested whether SFK activity also regulates myc expression in breast
cancer cells. Our data suggest that SFK activity is required for
accumulation of myc mRNA in quiescent MCF7s after E2 stimulation, and
that E2 stimulated stabilization of myc mRNA is dependent on SFK
activity.One potential myc mRNA stabilizer is IMP1 (IGF2BP1, ZBP1, CRDBP)
an RNA binding protein that is primarily expressed during development and
in stem cells, and re-expressed in some cancer types, including breast
cancer. IMP1 has previously been shown to stabilize myc mRNA in stem
cells as well as osteosarcoma cells. While the signaling pathways that
mediate this stabilization have not been well studied, previous work has
identified a Src phosphorylation site on IMP1 which regulates IMP1
function (Sasaki 2010). We hypothesized that IMP1 may play a role in
E2-mediated stabilization of myc mRNA. Indeed, MCF7 cells require IMP1 to
accumulate myc mRNA after E2 stimulation. In summary, E2 stimulation
activates SFKs, which then promote G1/S cell cycle progression in part by
stabilizing myc mRNA levels, through the activity of IMP1.Bromann et al
JBC, 2005Castoria et al. EMBO J, 1999Sasaki et al. J Neurosci, 2010

