Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly sensitive and specific digital quantification of cancer
genetic aberrations


Genetic aberrations play a major role in tumor development and
progression. As these clinically relevant genetic aberrations are
discovered, it becomes of pressing urgency to efficiently, rapidly and
sensitively detect these targets in individual patient tumor
samples.Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) is a robust technology for
quantitating genetic variation with high sensitivity from minimal amounts
of nucleic acid. Compared to the highly variable quantitative real-time
PCR (qRT-PCR), ddPCR eliminates relative standards and has the advantage
of measuring mutant and wild-type targets within the same well. Commonly,
this is achieved with the use of a two-color fluorescent oligonucleotide
probe (TaqMan) design, where the mutant is represented by a FAM probe and
the wild type by a VIC or HEX probe. However, this approach is cumbersome
and requires a significant amount of optimization.In this study we
present an alternate quantification method for assessing CNVs and SNVs
using a non-specific DNA binding dye. Instead of two colored probes, our
design manipulates the length of the region of interest (ROI) and control
amplicons to distinguish between their fluorescent signals. The dye binds
in greater amount to the longer length target giving a higher fluorescent
signal than the mutant target and both populations are easily
quantifiable. This flexible and cost-effective method of independent DNA
quantification proves to be a robust alternative to the commercialized
TaqMan assay.The ability to customize this assay for a variety of
functions is a major advantage of using a single-color dye and thus we
can create highly sensitive assays for any gene. Here, we demonstrated
the effectiveness of this method by assessing copy number of the
proto-oncogene FLT3, a target for the small molecule inhibitor Sunitinib.
We established accurate quantitation of a FLT3 copy number change in a
tumor sample harboring a 1.5-fold amplification diluted to 20% in a
normal sample. Additionally we explored the common V600E point mutation
in BRAF and an activating mutation in HER2, a potential therapeutic
target for cancers lacking HER2 amplification. Our assay was able to
detect a mutation comprising less than 1% of an otherwise wild-type
sample and in the case of HER2, distinguish between wild-type and two
different mutant alleles. Aside from single base pair mutations and copy
number analysis we used this assay to detect single base pair insertions
and deletions. Finally, due to the sensitivity of ddPCR, the applications
of this technique include the targeted analysis of small biopsies and
circulating nucleic acid. We are also determining the improvement in
performance with the incorporation of locked nucleic acids (LNA) in
increasing specificity and sensitivity in lower quality samples.

