Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of secreted proteins that reflect intracellular
autophagy dynamics in melanoma


Autophagy, a catabolic process that maintains cellular homeostasis, is a
primary therapy resistance mechanism in cancer. Emerging studies indicate
that autophagy is involved in secretion through non-classical mechanisms.
However, the effects of autophagy-mediated secretion on the tumor
microenvironment are poorly understood. Further, while autophagy is a
potential cancer therapeutic target, efforts to inhibit autophagy in
clinical trials have been hampered by sub-optimal methods to
quantitatively monitor tumor autophagy levels. Here, we leveraged the
recent findings that autophagy is implicated in non-classical secretion
to identify secreted proteins associated with autophagy in melanoma. The
conditioned media of low autophagy WM793 melanoma cells was compared to
its highly autophagic metastatic derivative, 1205Lu, using quantitative
proteomics. These comparisons identified secreted proteins associated
with high autophagy, such as IL-1, IL-8, LIF, FAM3C, and DKK3, which have
previously been implicated in tumorigenesis. These proteins were shown to
be elevated in supernatants of an independent panel of high autophagy
melanoma cell lines compared with low autophagy cells, suggesting a
mechanistic link between autophagy level and secretion of these proteins.
In addition, secretion of these proteins increased when melanoma cells
with intrinsically low autophagy levels were treated with an
autophagy-inducing tat-Beclin 1 peptide. Further supporting a mechanistic
link, Atg7 silencing in an intrinsically high autophagy cell line
resulted in significantly decreased secretion. Finally, serum collected
from untreated metastatic melanoma patients with high tumor autophagy
levels exhibited higher levels of these proteins than serum from low
autophagy patients. These results suggest that autophagy-related
secretion affects the tumor microenvironment and that measurement of
extracellular autophagy-associated secreted proteins in tumors and in
plasma can serve as surrogates for intracellular autophagy dynamics in
tumor cells.

