Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intrinsic and acquired resistance mechanisms of alectinib in ALK
rearranged cells


BackgroundHowever potency of Alectinib, a selective ALK inhibitor, for
ALK rearranged NSCLC and for that with secondary mutation have been
reported, intrinsic and acquired resistance are likely to emerge. Recent
study showed tumor microenvironment triggered resistance to Crizotinib
and TAE684. In this study, we examine whether emerging of intrinsic and
acquired resistance are affected by tumor microenvironment in H3122,
EML4-ALK positive lung cancer cell line, and in Alectinib-resistant clone
of H3122 (AFR) which is generated in vitro. Elucidating intrinsic
resistant mechanisms and preceding development of acquired resistance to
understand its mechanisms will provide beneficial information for the
development of novel therapeutic strategies in clinical
practice.MethodsWe examined the effect of EGF produced by endothelial
cells on Alectinib sensitivity of H3122 cell line, and EGF and HGF
produced by fibroblasts on Alectinib sensitivity of H3122AFR by
clonogenic assay. Downstream pathways of ALK in both cells were analyzed
by western blotting. Combination treatments of Alectinib and other TKI
were tested both in vitro and in vivo.ResultsH3122 cells which had been
cultured with EGF acquired resistance to Alectinib treatment. Combination
treatment of Alectinib and Erlotinib overcome EGF induced resistance and
showed down-regulation in phosphorylation of AKT and ERK1/2. H3122AFR
cells were also reduced their sensitivity to Alectinib at 100 uM or
higher concentration when the media contained EGF or HGF. Erlotinib or
Crizotinib combined with Alectinib canceled the EGF-induced or
HGF-induced resistance by down-regulating phosphorylation of AKT and
ERK1/2. In vivo, tumor xenografts of nude mice which had been orally
administered Alectinib and Erlotinib showed tumor regression in both
H3122 and H3122AFR, and those received Alectinib and Crizotinib showed
regression in H3122AFR.ConclusionIn our study, we showed ligands produced
by tumor microenvironment, such as EGF and HGF, contributed the emerging
of intrinsic resistance and acquired resistance by activating survival
pathway. Further, the efficacy of combination treatment of Alectinib with
Erlotinib or that with Crizotinib was shown. Collectively, Alectinib
combined with EGFR-TKI would be an effective strategy for
Alectinib-resistant lung cancer, and Alectinib with crizotinib is another
considerable strategy.

