Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Host-tumor immune response for early breast cancer patients
treated with radiofrequency ablation therapy


[Background] We demonstrated immune suppression of regulatory T (Treg)
cells in preoperative breast cancer (BC) patients at AACR 2011. Last year
we also reported at this meeting that Th17 cells might have some
potential to control tumor progression in the same cohort. Modern
treatment of operable BC consists of breast surgery, drug therapy and
radiation therapy. [Aim] To explore new strategy of BC treatment, we
conducted a phase II study on radiofrequency ablation (RFA) in early BC
between 2009 and 2013. Twenty patients were enrolled. To examine
host-tumor immune response under thermal ablation therapy, Treg cells in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and plasma IL-17A were
measured. [Patients and methods] Blood samples were collected from 13
patients before RFA and at the time of 1 month after RFA. Treg cells were
examined by counting CD4+CD25highCD127low/-cells in PBMC. Plasma IL-17A
was measured using cytometric beads array system. Statistical
significance was analyzed using Mann-Whitney U-test. [Results] As of
November 2013, all patients were free of recurrence. The percentages of
Treg cells had no significant change in 13 patients before and after RFA
(2.8% versus 2.7% of CD4-positive cells at mean value). In addition,
there was no statistical difference in levels of plasma IL-17A before and
after RFA (76 pg/ml versus 116 pg/ml at mean level). [Discussion]
Unexpectedly, RFA had no favorable immune response in BC patients,
because we observed significant decrease in percentages of Treg cells
after breast surgery. The reason is that most patients had T1 tumor and
Luminal A-like BC. They had lower percentages of Treg cells in comparison
to those of tumor-bearing patients reported previously (2.8% versus
4.2%). [Conclusion] RFA is a promising alternative to breast surgery.
However, it may make little effect on host-tumor immune response in
favorable subtype of early BC.

