Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sub-fractions of conditioned medium, from hypoxia-induced cells
with multipotent potential, exhibit a significant anti-oncogenic activity


We have previously shown that a human soluble cell conditioned media
(CCM) from hypoxia-induced, potentially multipotent cells, grown in a
perfusion bioreactor system inhibits tumor cell growth in vitro and in
two animal models. Here we present data that indicate that a low
molecular weight sub-fraction from the CCM has an increased
anti-oncogenic activity. This activity was demonstrated in orthotopic
pancreatic models, nRAS melanoma assays and over 10 additional human
cancer cell lines in vitro. In an orthotopic BxPC3 pancreatic cancer
model, there was a statistically significant improvement in survival
following weekly intravenous injections of 0.1ml of sub fractioned CCM,
as well as a significant improvement with 0.5ml intraperitoneal
injections post-resection, as measured by Kaplan Meier analysis (pWe have
previously shown that a human soluble cell conditioned media (CCM) from
hypoxia-induced, potentially multipotent cells, grown in a perfusion
bioreactor system inhibits tumor cell growth in vitro and in two animal
models. Here we present data that indicate that a low molecular weight
sub-fraction from the CCM has an increased anti-oncogenic activity. This
activity was demonstrated in orthotopic pancreatic models, nRAS melanoma
assays and over 10 additional human cancer cell lines in vitro. In an
orthotopic BxPC3 pancreatic cancer model, there was a statistically
significant improvement in survival following weekly intravenous
injections of 0.1ml of sub fractioned CCM, as well as a significant
improvement with 0.5ml intraperitoneal injections post-resection, as
measured by Kaplan Meier analysis (p<0.05) (figures below). Uveal and
nRAS melanoma cancer cell growth was inhibited by greater than 90% in
in-vitro proliferation assays. The mechanism of action of the CCM is the
induction of apoptosis through the upregulation of Caspase 3 and 9, as
demonstrated by immunostaining of Annexin V and immunoblot ayalysis. In a
Miapaca nude mouse daily dose study, tumor mass and metastatic extent was
substantially reduced in treated mouse versus the control. Further, in a
BXPC3 nude mouse daily dose study, 60% (pWe have previously shown that a
human soluble cell conditioned media (CCM) from hypoxia-induced,
potentially multipotent cells, grown in a perfusion bioreactor system
inhibits tumor cell growth in vitro and in two animal models. Here we
present data that indicate that a low molecular weight sub-fraction from
the CCM has an increased anti-oncogenic activity. This activity was
demonstrated in orthotopic pancreatic models, nRAS melanoma assays and
over 10 additional human cancer cell lines in vitro. In an orthotopic
BxPC3 pancreatic cancer model, there was a statistically significant
improvement in survival following weekly intravenous injections of 0.1ml
of sub fractioned CCM, as well as a significant improvement with 0.5ml
intraperitoneal injections post-resection, as measured by Kaplan Meier
analysis (p<0.05) (figures below). Uveal and nRAS melanoma cancer cell
growth was inhibited by greater than 90% in in-vitro proliferation
assays. The mechanism of action of the CCM is the induction of apoptosis
through the upregulation of Caspase 3 and 9, as demonstrated by
immunostaining of Annexin V and immunoblot ayalysis. In a Miapaca nude
mouse daily dose study, tumor mass and metastatic extent was
substantially reduced in treated mouse versus the control. Further, in a
BXPC3 nude mouse daily dose study, 60% (p<0.05) of treated mice were
tumor free after four weeks of treatment, while only 10% were tumor free
in the control group . Little or no apparent drug toxicity was observed.
These results indicate that the CCM sub-fraction could be a useful raw
material for a treatment for a large range of neoplastic diseases.

