Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting colorectal and pancreatic cancer stem cells with the
LGR5 monoclonal antibody BNC101


BNC101 is a monoclonal antibody (mAb) targeting LGR5 currently undergoing
IND-enabling studies in preparation for Phase I clinical studies in 2014.
LGR5 is a validated cancer stem cell (CSC) receptor overexpressed in
colorectal cancer (CRC), pancreatic cancer and most other solid tumors.
Loss and gain-of-function studies indicate that LGR5 is a functional
cancer receptor involved in the growth and survival of colon cancer cells
in vitro and in vivo. Sorted LGR5+ primary CRC are highly tumorigenic
compared to LGR5- cells in limiting dilution in vivo xenograft studies.
Using Bionomics' CSC Rx Discovery platform, a panel of high affinity LGR5
mAbs were generated and screened for in vitro and in vivo activity
against CSCs from patient-derived CRC tumors. LGR5 mAb therapeutic drug
candidates were first screened and identified based on their ability to
inhibit the formation of CRC CSC colonies in vitro. Top LGR5 mAb
candidates were then tested as single agents and in combination with
standard of care (SOC) chemotherapy in primary xenograft efficacy
studies. Tumors from these studies were also harvested and re-implanted
in limiting dilution assays (LDA) to assess in vivo anti-CSC activity of
anti-LGR5 mAbs. A number of functional LGR5 mAbs with significant
anti-tumor and anti-CSC activity were identified through this process. A
lead BNC101 mAb clone was selected for clinical development based on its
ability to inhibit CSC growth and key signaling pathways from multiple
patient tumors both in vitro and in vivo. In LDA studies using two
different CRC patient tumors, 5/8 (63%) and 6/8 (75%) mice implanted with
serially diluted cells from BNC101 treated tumors remained tumor free,
compared to 1/8 (13%) and 2/8 (25%) in the control groups. Combination
with SOC chemotherapy was shown to further improve BNC101 activity in one
CRC model, where 8/8 mice re-implanted for LDA remained tumor-free in a 6
month follow-up. BNC101 was also found to be highly active as a single
agent and in combination with SOC in multiple pancreatic models and the
MDA-MB-231 triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) xenograft model. In one
primary pancreatic model, BNC101 combined with SOC completely eradicated
3/7 established tumors, compared to 0/7 tumors eradicated with control
SOC alone. Additional translational data in CRC, pancreatic and TNBC
supporting our hypothesis that BNC101 targeting of CSCs will
significantly improve survival and increase duration of response in
cancer patients will be presented.

