Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDE10, a novel therapeutic target for lung cancer


Phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10) is a relatively new PDE isozyme that has
been mostly studied in the brain as a therapeutic target for certain
psychiatric and neurological conditions, but has not been associated with
tumorigenesis. While other investigators have reported low levels of
PDE10 in most adult peripheral tissues, we found a large percentage of
human lung tumors express high levels of PDE10 compared with normal lung
tissue as determined by real-time PCR analysis of cDNA arrays.
Statistical analysis revealed that 68% of lung tumors (n=19) displayed
more than two-fold increase compared with normal lung tissue, while 26%
showed greater than a 10-fold difference. High levels of PDE10 mRNA and
protein were also found in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines compared with normal airway epithelial cells. PDE10 knockdown by
small interference RNA significantly suppressed lung tumor cell growth,
as did PDE10 selective inhibitors, papaverine, PQ-10 and Pf-2545920. A
novel PDE10 inhibitor, MCI-020 also inhibited the growth of NSCLC cells
with a high degree of selectivity for tumor cells. Consistent with a
mechanism involving PDE10 inhibition, PQ-10 and MCI-020 increased cGMP
levels in a concentration-dependent manner as determined using a cGMP
biosensor assay. MCI-020 also activated cGMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKG) in NSCLCs as evident by increased phosphorylation of
VASP-Serine239. With attractive pharmacokinetic properties, MCI-020 was
studied further and found to display an unusual characteristic of
achieving high concentrations in lung tissue compared with other tissues
and plasma following oral administration. MCI-020 was well tolerated in
mice at a dose of 250 mg/kg bid and strongly inhibited tumor formation in
an orthotopic model of lung cancer at a dose of 150 mg/kg bid. These
observations suggest that PDE10 is essential for lung tumor cell growth
and represents a novel therapeutic target for lung cancer.

