Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the novel Notch1-Sox9 signaling axis in NSCLC
progression and EMT


Sox9 plays critical roles in the specification and differentiation of
numerous progenitor and differentiated cell types during embryonic and
fetal development. Sox9 is overexpressed in 40 - 50% of lung
adenocarcinomas and associated with poor prognosis in lung cancer
patients. We set out to identify upstream pathways that regulate Sox9
expression in lung cancer, as well as the role of Sox9 in lung
adenocarcinoma progression. Several developmental and stem cell pathways
are known to induce Sox9 transcription during carcinogenesis, including
the TGB-, Wnt/-catenin, Sonic Hedgehog, and NF-B signaling. Sox9 has also
been shown to be a transcriptional target of the Notch pathway during
mouse development, although the binding sites for Notch within the mouse
Sox9 promoter are not conserved in humans. We mined gene expression data
from three publicly available datasets and found that Hes1, a known Notch
target gene, is co-expressed with Sox9 in lung adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore, Sox9 mRNA and protein levels were upregulated over 100-fold
as early as 14 days after Notch1 induction in the Notch1-induced mouse
model of lung cancer, suggesting that Sox9 overexpression is an early
event during lung cancer development. Through a series of in vitro
assays, we determined that Sox9 is downstream of Notch1 in lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines. By ChIP we determined that Sox9 is a direct
target of Notch1 and using luciferase reporter assays, we located the
previously unidentified human RBP-J binding site, the principle effector
of canonical Notch1 signaling, immediately upstream of the Sox9
transcriptional start site. We also examined TGF-, a known inducer of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in lung cancer. We determined
that induction of Sox9 expression by Notch1 is independent of TGF-
signaling and that TGF- and Notch1 cooperate in their regulation of Sox9
expression. Loss of Notch1 expression led to an induced MET phenotype,
characterized by decreased cell invasion/migration, MET-like
morphological changes, and increased E-cadherin expression, which were
rescued by Sox9 overexpression. Our data also demonstrate that Sox9
contributes to Notch1-induced EMT in lung adenocarcinoma. These results
establish Sox9 as a key Notch1 target gene mediating Notch1-induced EMT
independent of TGF-, leading to poor survival in lung adenocarcinoma.

