Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semi-synthetic peptibodies are a novel personalized therapeutic
with activity against lymphoma in vitro and in vivo


The complementarity determining region, or idiotype, of the surface
immunoglobulin receptor is a true tumor-specific marker on B-cell
lymphomas unique to each patient. Antibodies against idiotype can induce
complete regression of lymphoma in patients, but since this requires the
generation of a custom monoclonal antibody for each patient, it has not
been practical.We have developed a method for targeting idiotype using a
novel construct that we refer to as a semi-synthetic peptibody. It
consists of a synthetic peptide ligand for idiotype that is covalently
linked to the amino terminus of a recombinant IgG Fc domain. Peptide
ligands for idiotype can be identified by high throughput screens of
random peptide libraries and produced inexpensively by solid-phase
synthesis. Linkage of these idiotype ligands to the Fc domain enhances
their pharmacokinetics and augments their anti-tumor effect by activating
innate immune effectors. Since each patient-specific synthetic peptide
can be chemically linked to a common IgG Fc domain, this modular design
yields a custom therapeutic that may be more practical to produce than a
unique biologic monoclonal antibody.We demonstrate that semi-synthetic
peptibodies bind specifically to the idiotype of tumor cells and induce
apoptosis by crosslinking surface immunoglobulin. Additionally, they
trigger antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity, antibody mediated
phagocytosis, and complement-mediated lysis of opsonized lymphoma cells
in vitro. They possess a favorable pharmacokinetic profile and are
sufficient to clear tumor in SCID mice challenged intravenously with a
luciferase-labeled human lymphoma cell line. Tumor clearance in vitro and
in vivo mediated by peptibody was superior to that achievable with an
anti-idiotype monoclonal antibody.Thus, semi-synthetic anti-idiotype
peptibodies demonstrate multimodal activity against lymphoma cells in
vitro and clear human lymphoma in a disseminated xenograft model. This
modular, semi-synthetic design may enable a personalized and targeted
therapy that is feasible to produce for patients with B-cell lymphoma.

