Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated genomic characterization of the target of a small
molecule identifies a novel cancer dependency


Recent large sequencing and cancer dependency studies have accelerated
the identification of candidate targets for precision medicine. However,
the current drug development paradigm starting with target identification
and validation can be slow and has thus far yielded a limited variety of
successful targets. We sought to return to an empirical approach to drug
discovery and performed a high throughput screen to identify small
molecules that were both potent and selective. In a primary screen of
2000 compounds in two cell-lines: A549 and H1734, three compounds only
affected H1734 viability. One of which validated in a dose-response
experiment with great potency and specificity, we called this small
molecule Compound 1B.In an effort to identify the target of Compound 1B,
we profiled 766 genomically-characterized cancer cell lines and found
that approximately 4% were sensitive to our compound. Sensitivity was not
restricted to a particular tissue of origin. Interestingly, expression of
Phosphodiesterase 3A (PDE3A) correlated with cytotoxicity. We further
showed that Compound 1B specifically inhibited the enzymatic activity of
PDE3A and PDE3B in a panel of 11 different phosphodiesterase family
members. However, only a subset of other PDE3 inhibitors shared the same
cytotoxic phenotype of Compound 1B. In a rescue screen of 1600 bioactive
compounds, we identified the non-lethal PDE3 inhibitors as compounds that
were able to rescue cell death induced by Compound 1B. Biochemical assays
showed that both Compound 1B, cytotoxic and non-cytotoxic PDE3 inhibitors
compete for binding to PDE3A. Knockdown of PDE3A did not affect cell
viability and inhibited response of sensitive cell lines to Compound
1B.Thus we have identified a potent and selective small molecule that
likely acts through PDE3A to induce cancer cell-line cytotoxicity. Our
data suggest a hyper- or neomorphic function of PDE3A induced upon
binding of Compound 1B. By cross-referencing integrative datasets with
compound-sensitivity data, we show that reversal of the current
drug-development paradigm can elucidate novel cancer targets, which are
not yet identifiable by analysis of large next-generation sequencing
datasets.

