Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of obesity in Leptin-Notch crosstalk (NILCO) in endometrial
cancer from African American and Chinese women


Introduction: Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecological
malignancy of the female reproductive tract. Endometrial cancer is
classified into two groups: Type I, which is estrogen dependent, and Type
II, which is usually associated with endometrial atrophy and is estrogen
independent. Type II is the more aggressive form with a poor prognosis
and is often observed more in African American women. Obesity,
characterized by high levels of leptin, is a major risk factor for
endometrial cancer, which suggests that leptin may play a role in
endometrial cancer pathogenesis. Over-expression of Notch, IL-1 and
leptin and the signaling crosstalk (NILCO) among these pro-angiogenic
factors is associated with metastasis and decreased survival rates in
breast cancer patients. However, much is unknown whether this association
is found in endometrial cancer.Objective: In this investigation, we aim
to determine whether NILCO components are differentially expressed in
Type I and Type II endometrial cancer. We hypothesize that there is a
positive correlation between endometrial cancer etiology and higher BMI
and NILCO expression. We further hypothesize that the correlation is more
evident in Type II endometrial cancer.Methods: Expression levels of
Notch1, 2, 3 & 4, Jagged-1, DLL4, Survivin, Hey2, IL-1R tI, Leptin, and
Ob-R were determined via immunohistochemistry (IHC) in endometrial cancer
from overweight/obese African American patients and compared to
endometrial cancer tissue array from Chinese women (70 cases of carcinoma
and 5 cases of non-malignant duplicated cores per case, US Biomax, Inc).
Staining intensity was assigned using semi-quantitative HSCORE [pi (i+1),
where i is the intensity with a value of 1, 2, or 3 (weak, moderate or
strong, respectively and pi is the percentage of stained cells for each
intensity] calculated by two independent observers in 3 different fields
(100 cells/each). Western Blot and qPCR analyses of tissue lysates from
cancer samples and benign surrounding tissues were also used to examine
the expression levels of NILCO components.Student t-test was used to
determine statistical differences between samples.Results: IHC results
showed that Notch1 and 4, DLL4, Survivin, and Jagged-1 were expressed
higher in Type II endometrial cancer patients. IL-1R tI was expressed
higher in non-malignant compared to malignant tissue samples. Western
blot and qPCR analyses further corroborated these results.Conclusion: The
results support our hypothesis that obesity affects the expression of
NILCO components, which could be involved in endometrial cancer
progression and aggressiveness. [Partially supported by NIH/NCI
1SC1CA138658-05; NIH RR03034,1C06 RR18386, NIH/NCRR 1G12RR026250-03 and
MSM/Tuskegee Univ/UAB Cancer Center Partnership grant 5U54CA118638. The
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the NIH Award
UL1TR000454].

