Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional control of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
the context of changing tumor microenvironment


The ability of cancer cells to detach from their neighbors, invade
through local tissues, and establish distant metastases is a major
contributor to cancer mortality. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
describes a developmental process by which cells break cell-cell
adhesions and gain motility. The interaction between a cancer cell and
the tumor microenvironment is emerging as a critical component of this
process. EMT is triggered by a number of cellular signaling pathways that
can be modulated by the properties of the surrounding extracellular
matrix (ECM). Defining how genetic networks regulate cellular signaling
in response to changes in ECM interactions would allow design of
treatment strategies that target the tumor microenvironment in order to
halt cell invasion.Transcriptome sequencing on MDCK cells, a tissue
culture model system that undergoes EMT in response to HGF stimulation,
can be used to define how changes in gene expression drive the cellular
events of metastasis. Since these cells can be grown on different ECM
substrates, how cellular signaling is altered by substrate composition
can be determined. Through differential expression analysis of a
time-series, a timeline for the transcriptional events that drive
metastasis can be established. Comparing the timeline of transcriptional
events on different substrates will determine the contribution of
regulatory pathways associated with conditions where the ECM alters EMT.
In short, differential expression analysis of HGF-stimulated MDCK cells
will define, one, a timeline for the changes in gene expression that
drive EMT and, two, the differences in gene expression between substrates
that are responsible for their ability to affect EMT.Being a
well-characterized model for EMT makes MDCK cells an attractive model for
studying cancer metastasis. Validation of findings in this line will be
confirmed in a panel of human cancer cell lines. This can be done by
comparing phenotypic and molecular (transcriptional and protein level)
changes associated with EMT in MDCK cells to those of EMT in HepG2 cells.
The cell lines morphological changes and actin rearrangement can be
compared using live cell imaging and fluorescence microscopy techniques.
In addition, a panel of genes/proteins that are up- or down-regulated
during EMT can be used to compare the two lines at the molecular level
using qPCR and Western blotting. This has the additional advantage of
further characterizing the MDCK model and demonstrating its utility for
understanding transcriptional events in EMT more generally.

