Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Mixed Lineage Kinase-3 activity by Her2 and its
implication in death or survival


Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (Her2) is a receptor tyrosine
kinase that regulates cell growth and differentiation signaling pathways.
The protein Her2 is significantly overexpressed in 20-30% of breast
cancer. The available clinical data proves that Her2 amplification in
breast cancer is associated with worst overall survival. Therefore, Her2
has become a very important candidate for drug targeting and currently
Her2 positive patients are treated with humanized monoclonal antibody,
Trastuzumab (Herceptin) and a small molecule, Lapatinib that blocks Her2
tyrosine kinase activity. It is reported that Her2 amplification leads to
activation of multiple survival pathways, including PI3K-Akt. However, it
is not clearly known how Trastuzumab promotes cell death and what
pro-apoptotic pathways are activated downstream of Her2 blockage? It is
also reported that patients on Trastuzumab develop subsequent resistance
to the therapy.Previously we published that in breast cancer tumors, a
pro-apoptotic kinase, Mixed Lineage Kinase-3 (MLK-3) was inhibited,
specifically in estrogen receptor (ER) positive tumors. The kinase
activity of MLK-3 was down regulated by estrogen and this prevented
MLK-3-mediated cell death. Since Her2 serves as a drug target in breast
cancer, therefore, we asked whether Her2 plays any role in regulating
MLK-3 kinase activation and whether MLK-3 plays any role in Trastuzumab
resistance.Our results showed that the endogenous MLK-3 kinase activity
was up-regulated in SkBr3 cells upon treatment with Trastuzumab and
Lapatinib. Whether the activation of MLK-3 upon Her2 blockage leads to
cell death or survival is still not known and experiments are underway to
investigate these aspects. We also observed that Her3 was the
dimerization partner of Her2 in Trastuzumab- or Lapatinib- mediated MLK-3
activation. Not knowing any role of MLK-3 in Trastuzumab resistance, we
used Trastuzumab sensitive and resistant BT474 cell model to investigate
the role of MLK-3 in Trastuzumab resistance. Our data clearly showed that
knockdown of MLK-3 caused spontaneous cell death in resistant cells. The
Trastuzumab treatment further amplified cell death in MLK-3 knockdown
resistant cells. The Akt1 activation in these cells was also diminished
upon MLK-3 knockdown.Taken together, our data demonstrate that like ER,
the Her2 also down regulates MLK-3 kinase activity and perhaps promote
cell survival. Furthermore, paradoxically, the MLK-3 knockdown promoted
cell death in Trastuzumab resistance BT474 cells, suggesting that MLK-3
could also serve as survival factor in resistant cells. Whether MLK-3
serves as a pro-apoptotic kinase or survival kinase in Trastuzumab
mediated pathway needs to be extensively examined in near future.

