Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of the 9p22 locus implicates the
transcriptional regulation of BNC2 as a mechanism in ovarian cancer
predisposition


An ovarian cancer Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) identified 9p22.2
as a novel susceptibility locus with the most statistically significant
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in an intergenic region
near the Basonuclin 2 (BNC2) gene, which codes for a putative
transcription regulator containing three pairs of zinc finger (ZF)
domains. The minor alleles are protective in terms of ovarian cancer
susceptibility. However, the molecular mechanisms by which these SNPs
modify susceptibility remain largely unknown. The significant SNPs in the
9p22.2 locus lie in non-coding regions and therefore are hypothesized to
affect the activity of regulatory elements and modify the expression of a
target gene(s). In order to test this hypothesis we conducted fine
mapping for the locus which delimited a 74kb region containing SNPs with
a p-value less than 10-8. FAIRE-Seq and ChIP-Seq experiments for histone
markers conducted in immortalized ovarian surface epithelial cells (IOSE)
and fallopian tube epithelial cells (IFTE) were used to prioritize
functional SNP candidates which overlap with regulatory elements.
Luciferase assays tested the ability of these regulatory elements to
activate transcription. Chromosome conformation capture (3C) experiments
demonstrate a physical interaction between the BNC2 promoter and
candidate regulatory elements containing risk-associated SNPs.
Methylation Quantification at Trait Loci (mQTL) revealed an association
between decreased methylation at the BNC2 promoter and the protective
minor alleles. Expression analysis shows decreased expression of BNC2 in
cancer versus normal tissue implicating tumor suppressor function of
BNC2. Therefore the protective minor allele likely increases expression
of BNC2 which in turn contains tumor suppressing properties that decrease
ovarian cancer risk. BNC2 protein is in complex with transcriptional
regulatory proteins, in particular the NURD complex components. Moreover,
BNC2 acts as a transcriptional repressor in in vitro transfection assays
indicating that it functions in transcriptional repression. We then used
protein binding microarrays and CHIP-Seq experiments to identify its
putative DNA binding motifs and its downstream target genes. Analysis of
this data suggests that BNC2 functions in a regulatory transcription
network that impacts on genes implicated in ovarian cancer with
enrichment for genes in the TGF-beta response pathway.

