Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of microRNA-122 to the homeostasis of liver energy
metabolism


MicroRNA-122 (miR-122) is a liver specific miRNA known to regulate lipid
metabolism and to prevent liver tumorigenesis. Recent data suggest that
miR-122 regulates the metabolism of mitochondria but its mechanistic role
is unclear. We investigated how energy metabolism is regulated by miR-122
using the Mir122a-/- mouse model. We identified a distinctive expression
profile of mitochondrially localized genes between WT and Mir122a-/- mice
by both microarray and proteomics. KEGG and IPA database analysis further
showed decreased mitochondrial respiration activity and Acetyl-CoA
synthesis. Besides, the expression of genes involved in antioxidant
mechanism is increased.The primary hepatocytes were used to study the
energy metabolism. The physiological activities measured by XF-24
extracellular flux analyzer revealed a higher mitochondrial respiration
activity (OCR) accompanied with a proton leak in the mitochondrial inner
membrane of the Mir122a-/- hepatocytes. In addition, a higher glycolytic
activity (ECAR) was detected in Mir122a-/- hepatocytes. Poor ATP
production was detected from Mir122a-/- mitochondria. Several lines of
evidence demonstrated that Mir122a-/- hepatocytes have low mitochondria
membrane potential: excess cytosolic reactive oxygen species, less
mitochondrial superoxide anion and lower staining with Rhodamine 123 and
Mitotracker red. We further treated cells with mitochondrial inhibitors
and found an excellent antioxidant capacity and ATP homeostasis in
Mir122a-/- primary hepatocytes. Interestingly, we detected lower protein
expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex subunit E1, which may partly
contribute to the defective mitochondrial activity. The liver homeostasis
of Mir122a-/- mice, however, is stabilized by a vigorous antioxidant
activity and higher glycolysis capacity. As a result, the livers of young
Mir122a-/- mice appear to have switched to aerobic glycolysis (Warburg
effect), which is the hallmark of cancer cells. Therefore, correction of
mitochondrial dysfunction is likely to become one of new therapeutic
means for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

