Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expressions of autophagy-related proteins positively correlate
with infiltration of immune cells and disease progression in oral
squamous cell carcinoma


Introduction: Autophagy is an endogenous process that degrades bulk
proteins and organelles to maintain energy homeostasis under cellular
stress and nutrient starvation. It has been still unclear whether
autophagy promotes or suppresses tumor progression in various cancer
patients. To date, several studies have shown that autophagy-related
molecules such as LC3 and Beclin-1 play important roles in tumor
progression; however, few studies regarding immunological significance of
these autophagy components in tumor microenvironment exist. The objective
of this study is to clarify association between the expression of
autophagy-related proteins and immune infiltrates by immunohistochemistry
(IHC).Patients and methods: Expression of two representative
autophagy-associated molecules, LC3 and Beclin-1, and CD1a (dendritic
cell), CD3 (T cell) and CD56 (NK cell) cells were examined by IHC in 74
patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). HLA class I heavy
chain, HLA class II, Ki-67 and p53 were also stained and assessed. Two
regions, central site and peripheral site in tumor tissues were
evaluated, separately. Moreover, the association with various
clinicopathological parameters including progression free and overall
survival was evaluated.Results: LC3 and Beclin-1 were accumulated in both
27 of 74 cases (36.5%) OCCC examined. LC3 expression in peripheral margin
was significantly associated with increasing dendritic cell (DC) and T
cell infiltration. Interestingly, peripheral Beclin-1 expression showed
statistically significant relation to increasing HLA class II expression
on tumor cells. On the other hand, LC3 and Beclin-1 significantly
correlates with several unfavorable clinicopathological parameters
including short overall survival. In addition, LC3 and Beclin-1
expression in OSCC significantly related to lymphatic invasion by tumor
cells.Conclusion: Significant association between LC3 and DC/T cell
infiltration suggests that autophagy is likely to actively participate in
immunological phenomena within tumor microenvironment. Furthermore,
peripheral Beclin-1 may contribute to antigen presentation by tumor
cells, while these two autophagy components also relates to unfavorable
prognosis. Taken together, autophagy seems to promote immunogenicity of
cancer cells, whereas it facilitates tumor progression.

