Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cell expression analysis using highly
multiplexed qPCR to quantify a panel of 624 common cancer genes


Introduction: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have the potential to
advance personalized care by yielding a ready source of cancer tissue for
characterization. While genomic analysis of CTCs has gained momentum,
efforts to measure gene expression have been hampered by the need capture
ultra-pure CTCs (i.e. no white blood cell contamination) and reliably
amplify and measure transcript levels from these rare cells. To address
this need, we developed a cell micromanipulation technique coupled with
multiplexed qPCR analysis to isolate ultra-pure CTCs for amplification
and measurement of a large panel of common cancer genes.Methods:
Experiments were conducted in parallel, under IRB approval, using
peripheral blood from cancer patients (prostate, kidney) as well as LNCaP
prostate cancer (PCa) cells spiked into blood samples from healthy
donors. Blood samples were depleted of white and red blood cells using
the EasySep and RosetteSep kits (Stem Cell Tech, Inc.). After depletion,
epithelial cells were identified by staining for cell surface epithelial
cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and recovered under fluorescent microscopy
using an xyz motorized micropipette device configured for this purpose
(Zeiss, Eppendorf). Recovered cells were lysed for RNA extraction and
reverse transcription. Pooled primer multiplexed preamplification was
performed, followed by qPCR expression profiling by Taqman Open Array
human cancer panel of 624 cancer-related genes. Gene expression relative
quantities (RQ) were normalized to unspiked LNCaP PCa cells.Results:
Multiplexed preamplification from as little as 100pg LNCaP RNA yielded a
gene expression profile with correlation coefficient (R2) of 0.71 when
compared with gene expression from abundant, unamplified LNCaP RNA.
Ultrapure CTCs were recovered from a patient with PCa (1 CTC) and a
patient with kidney cancer (6 CTCs), and their respective RNA quality was
confirmed by cancer-specific single-gene preamplification and qPCR
measurement: androgen receptor for PCa (Ct 25.7) and HIF1- for kidney
cancer (Ct 19.0). Then, high throughput parallel cancer gene expression
was measured using the Open Array 624 Cancer Gene Panel. The RQ profile
from the PCa CTC closely resembled that of LNCaP PCa cells spiked and
recovered from normal blood, whereas the RQ profiles of the kidney cancer
CTCs and of white blood cells were progressively less similar, as
expected.Conclusions: These results demonstrate the feasibility of
querying gene expression in a high throughput manner from rare, ultrapure
CTCs. This capability, once validated in expanded studies, can be
leveraged to identify gene pathways which drive cancer resistance and
progression in individual patients. Such real time transcriptional
profiling, in conjunction with genomic analysis, can harness the full
liquid biopsy potential of CTCs to guide personalized cancer treatment.

