Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of autophagy and senescence in DNA repair in
irradiated tumor cells


Radiotherapy is used along with other modalities such as surgery,
chemotherapy, and immunotherapy to either shrink tumors before surgery or
kill surviving tumor cells post surgery. Although radiation may induce
different modes of cell death, recurrence of cancer may occur. It has
been shown that DNA damage can induce cells to undergo both autophagy and
senescence where both responses can function either as a pro-survival
mechanism or in promoting loss of self-renewal capacity in the tumor
cell. The relationship between autophagy, senescence, and the DNA repair
system has not been well-characterized. The primary aims of this work
were to understand whether autophagy and senescence might be permissive
for DNA repair thereby allowing the tumor cells to overcome the
persistent DNA damage and recover. Studies were performed using M059K
(DNA-PK proficient) and M059J (DNA-PK deficient) human glioma cells to
assess the kinetics of DNA repair after radiation in the absence and
presence of autophagy inhibitors. M059J cells were observed to lose their
capacity to proliferate as they undergo growth arrest followed by delayed
cell death, whereas M059K cells showed proliferative recovery 72 hours
post-treatment. Both irradiated cells showed an enlargement in cell size
and accumulation of acidic vacuoles, indicating the induction of
autophagy. Both cell lines also demonstrated reduced p62 level after
radiation, indicative of autophagic flux. Inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA
showed a radio-sensitization in M059K cells but not in M059J cells,
indicating that radio-induced autophagy in M059K cells might be
cytoprotective. Additional studies were performed in HCT116 cells that
lack ligase IV to demonstrate a correspondence between the extent of drug
or radiation induced senescence and the persistence of DNA damage foci.
Ligase IV deficient cells were more sensitive to low radiation doses (2
Gy), whereas the ligase proficient cells showed recovery 96 hrs
post-treatment. Both parental HCT116 colon carcinoma cells and Ligase IV
deficient cells demonstrated significant increases in senescent
populations at low doses of radiation based on -galactosidase staining
and enlargement and extensions of treated cells; senescence was more
pronounced in the Ligase IV deficient cells. HCT116 cells were then
treated with a dose of radiation (8 Gy) that induces 75% of senescence
after 96 hrs and then reirradiated with half of that dose (4 Gy) to
monitor the ability of senescent cells to repair the DNA damage. Although
the majority of the cells were in a state of senescence, we found that
these cells were able to repair the DNA damage induced by the second
dose.Taken together, it seems that autophagy has an important function in
the enhancement of DNA repair during exposure to genotoxic stress, but
the role of autophagy may differ according to the status of DNA repair.
Also, persistent DNA damage could be a determinant for senescence, and
senescent cells might be able to repair these breaks.

