Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anti-tumor activity of lenalidomide with the BET
bromodomain inhibitor CPI203 in bortezomib-resistant mantle cell lymphoma


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B lymphoid neoplasm
genetically characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32) leading to the
overexpression of cyclin D1. As a consequence of its poor responses to
conventional chemotherapy and relatively short patient survival, new
therapeutic strategies are required. Despite the promising introduction
of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in the treatment of MCL, not all
the patients respond and relapse frequently occurs. To unravel the
factors involved in the acquisition of bortezomib resistance in vivo,
immunodeficient mice were engrafted with a set of MCL cell lines with
different levels of sensitivity to the drug, followed by gene expression
profiling of the tumors and functional validation of the identified gene
signatures. We observed an increased tumorigenicity of
bortezomib-resistant MCL cells in vivo, that was associated with
plasmacytic differentiation features, like IRF4 and Blimp-1 upregulation.
As the immunomoduladory drug lenalidomide has been shown to modulate IRF4
expression in various B-cell malignancies, we assessed its activity in in
vitro and in vivo settings by means of flow cytometry, western blot,
antibody array, real-time PCR, immunofluorescence, in vivo imaging, and
immunohistochemistry. In vitro, lenalidomide as single agent was found to
exert antitumor activity in 4/11 MCL cell lines, corresponding to those
cells with either primary or acquired resistance to bortezomib.
Lenalidomide-treated cells showed decreased IRF4 expression, increased
cytosolic amounts of p27 and caspase-dependent apoptosis. Accordingly,
mice bearing bortezomib-resistant tumors and treated for 3 weeks with a
lenalidomide regimen of 10-50 mg/kg/day, showed a 30 to 45% reduction in
tumor burden when compared to vehicle-treated mice (p=0.04), with several
hallmarks of lenalidomide activity, like downregulation of IRF4 and its
target gene MYC, decreased mitotic index, p27 cytosolic accumulation and
caspase-3 processing. Importantly, the inhibition of tumor growth induced
by the combination of lenalidomide with bortezomib (0.15 mg/kg, twice a
week) was 37% and 66% greater than that for lenalidomide alone and
vehicle arms, respectively (p=0.02). Moreover, repression of MYC in
bortezomib-resistant cells by gene knockdown or treatment with CPI203, a
BET bromodomain inhibitor, synergistically induced cell death when
combined with lenalidomide therapy. Accordingly, co-treatment of mice
with lenalidomide plus CPI203 synergistically reduced MYC and IRF4
expression and tumor burden, and induced caspase processing. Together,
these results suggest that exacerbated IRF4/MYC signaling is associated
to bortezomib resistance in MCL in vivo and warrant clinical evaluation
of lenalidomide plus BET inhibitor combination in MCL cases refractory to
proteasome inhibition.

