Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular biomarkers for cancer biospecimen integrity


Successful implementation of personalized health care requires the
availability of biospecimens of sufficient quality to ensure accurate
downstream test results, which will in turn determine optimal patient
management. Cancer biospecimens of known quality with appropriate
clinical annotation are also critical to the process of biomarker
discovery and validation that lead to the development of clinical tests.
Due to widely varying methods of biospecimen collection, processing, and
storage, numerous pre-analytical factors can affect human biospecimen
integrity for biomarker research. Such pre-analytical variability can
affect the integrity of research biospecimens including plasma/serum and
fixed cancer tissues used for biomarker analysis. The National Cancer
Institute (NCI) Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research Branch (BBRB)
was established to address the scientific and policy issues that affect
the procurement of and access to high quality specimens for research. The
NCI Biospecimen Research Network (BRN) was established to sponsor and
conduct research on biospecimen pre-analytical factors and their affect
on molecular integrity, to support the development and adoption of
evidence-based standardized biospecimen handling procedures. In this
presentation we will summarize BRN-supported studies to identify
biomarkers that may be used as sentinel markers of plasma stability using
mass spectroscopy proteomics and analysis of circulating miRNA, and the
development of intrinsic controls for FFPE tissues. In one of the
projects, identification of protein biomarkers using mass-spectrometry
and Illumina arrays in plasma led to the development of a biomarker panel
for serum/plasma integrity; these biomarkers are currently being
validated. A second project studied the effects of pre-analytical
variables on circulating miRNA and identified and validated new and
improved housekeeping miRNA, as well as novel biomarkers associated with
breast cancer. In another study, a series of biomarkers have been
validated by construction of tissue microarrays from 93 breast cancer
specimens with known time to fixation delays. A tissue quality index
(TQI) model was generated to predict the time to fixation and tissue
quality by measuring a subset of biomarker proteins in breast cancer
tissues using AQUA technology. The progressive efforts taken by BRN
investigator-led projects to identify and validate biomarkers for sample
integrity will be incorporated into efforts to develop new biospecimen
evidence-based practices for clinical biomarker research.

