Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hardwiring mechanism into predicting cancer phenotypes by
computational learning


Rationale. Despite promising beginnings, molecular classifiers derived
from statistical learning do not yet appear to be sufficiently mature for
clinical use. Besides known limitations, the nearly universal absence of
mechanistic underpinnings for such signatures represents as major barrier
toward successful implementation of clinically useful biomarkers. To
overcome this limitation we constrained the search for predictive models
to those with mechanistic justification, by incorporating microRNA (miR)
and transcription factor (TF) gene regulatory networks directly into the
learning process of cancer phenotypes.Methods. To illustrate the impact
of embedding such regulatory motifs into computational learning, we
analyzed the ability to predict estrogen receptor (ER) status from
transcriptional data. We applied this approach to two independent breast
cancer studies used as training and validation sets respectively. This
analysis provided a test case with well-characterized clinical
attributes, in which the ER itself is a TF engaged in regulatory miR/TF
motifs. We built our predictors using Top Scoring Pair (TSP), a two-gene
parameter-free classifier returning one class (ER positive) or the other
(ER negative) based on the relative ordering of the two genes. We
compared classification performance between TSPs chosen from all possible
gene pairs and TSPs constructed under network-based constraints - random
and mechanistic TSPs respectively hereafter. Each mechanistic TSP
consists of a gene pair: the first gene regulates a miR or a TF hub,
which in turn regulates the second gene. We started from a network of 200
TFs, 373 miRs, and 2772 target genes based on regulatory information from
the miRgen v2.0 and TarBase v5.0 databases.Results. We assessed the
classification accuracy of the TSP classifiers derived from the training
dataset in the validation set and nearly all top-performing predictors
were based on regulatory motifs. A Wilcoxon rank-sum test comparing the
random classifiers with either TF or miR based TSPs had P-values of 1014
and 1026, respectively. Most of such top mechanistic predictors involved
the ER gene (ERS1), consistent with the underlying biology. The
mechanistic predictor also paired ERS1 expression with genes relevant to
the biology. For instance, TSP selected POU2F1 _ a TF member of the POU
family also known as OCT1 _ which physically interacts with the ER itself
and BRCA1, recruiting BRCA1 to the ESR1 promoter modulating ER
expression. Consistent with the classifier, BRCA1-mutant breast tumors
are typically estrogen ER negative.Conclusions. We have implemented a
novel class of mechanistic predictors by hardwiring gene regulatory
network information into statistical learning of cancer phenotypes. This
approach has intrinsic added value for knowledge discovery and disease
treatment design, and will ultimately move the field towards a successful
transition to personalized health care.

