Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Six1 overexpression promotes malignant progression in models of
cervical and colon cancer


The overexpression of Six1, a member of the Six family of homeodomain
transcription factors, has been found in various human cancers, and is
associated with increased tumor progression and metastasis. Previous
studies in our laboratory discovered that the expression of Six1 mRNA
increased during in vitro progression of human papillomavirus type 16
(HPV16) immortalized human keratinocytes (HKc/HPV16) toward a
differentiation-resistant (HKc/DR) phenotype. The overexpression of Six1
induced Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) by the activation of p38
MAPK in HKc/DR. Although immortalized and resistant to serum and
calcium-induced differentiation, HKc/DR are not tumorigenic. To further
explore the role of Six1 in HPV16 immortalized cells we determined
whether overexpression of Six1 in HKc/DR resulted in malignant
conversion. We found that HKc/DR overexpressing Six1 (DR-Six1), but not
HKc/DR controls (DR-Ctrl), formed squamous cell carcinomas in nude mice.
Cancer stem cells are proposed to drive tumor initiation and progression;
for this reason we analyzed cancer stem cell markers in DR-Ctrl and
DR-Six1. We found that DR-Six1 had an increased CD24-/CD44+ population
and increased aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) expression as compared to
DR-Ctrl, indicating a cancer stem cell-like phenotype in Six1
overexpressing cells. We then used the human cervical cancer cell line
HeLa to further explore the enhanced tumorigenic and malignant properties
associated with Six1 overexpression. We determined that overexpressing
Six1 in HeLa increased their ability to form spheroids in vitro and
increased tumor size in vivo. As an extension of this work, we
investigated the role of Six1 on tumorigenesis and metastasis in colon
cancer in vivo and in vitro by using the murine colon cancer cell line
MC38. We found that Six1 promoted colon cancer tumorigenesis, progression
and metastasis, and increased the population of cancer stem cell-like
cells. Taken together, our studies demonstrate that Six1 overexpression
increases the cancer stem cell-like cell population, and promotes
malignant progression in models of cervical and colon cancer.Supported by
grant P20MD001770 from the National Institute on Minority Health and
Health Disparities.

