Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Irradiation promotes a mesenchymal switch in small cell lung cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most aggressive form of lung cancer,
with little improvement in therapy options and prognosis over the last
few decades. Tumors initially respond well to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy; however, when patients relapse, tumors have typically
developed resistance to treatment. The aims of this study were to
determine how irradiation treatment affects the phenotype of SCLC cells
and in particular the neuroendocrine features of SCLC.Xenografts were
established by subcutaneous injection of DMS 79 cells into nude mice,
before exposure to ionising radiation (IR). Xenograft tumors and IR
treated DMS 79 cells were analysed by immunohistochemistry and qPCR for
markers of neuroendocrine, mesenchymal and epithelial phenotype.
Circulating pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), a neuroendocrine biomarker, was
quantified by ELISA developed in our lab.Irradiation of xenograft tumors
led to increased levels of the mesenchymal marker, N-cadherin, unchanged
epithelial markers (cytokeratin and E-cadherin), as well as decreased and
distinctly heterogeneous expression of POMC. We have previously described
POMC as a novel biomarker in SCLC patients and xenografts. However,
circulating POMC and tumor POMC protein levels and mRNA were drastically
reduced in the irradiated animals. To determine whether the changes in
phenotype were associated with resistance, DMS 79 cells were made
irradiation resistant (IR-res) through repeated exposure to IR in vitro
(total 21Gy). The IR-res cells acquired dramatic changes in morphology
and adherence, showed increased proliferation and increased resistance to
challenges with both small and larger doses of IR. In addition, cells
exhibited increased expression of the mesenchymal markers; N-cadherin and
1 integrin. IR-res cells also showed a significant decrease in expression
of the neuroendocrine marker POMC. However, there was no change in
expression of other neuroendocrine markers; neuron-specific enolase
(NSE), chromogranin A and neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM), or the
epithelial marker E-cadherin.In summary, irradiation causes a distinct
mesenchymal switch in DMS 79 small cell lung cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo that does not resemble a classical epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Therefore, although irradiation is an important
treatment paradigm in patients, our data suggests it may promote a
phenotype that encourages metastasis. In addition, we have highlighted
the need for caution when using biomarkers, as irradiation has modified
POMC biomarker expression and secretion so that it no longer predicts
tumor burden in relapsed SCLC.

