Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum microRNAs as diagnostic biomarkers for early colorectal
neoplasms


Objectives: Early detection of precancerous lesions and early-stage
cancers are essential to reduce mortality from colorectal cancer
(CRC).Serum/plasma microRNAs (miRs) have been reported as diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers of CRC, but their utility in detecting patients
with early lesions has not been fully explored. The aim of this study is
to identify serum miRs which are potentially useful as diagnostic
biomarkers for early colorectal neoplasms, and potential confounders in a
blood test.Methods: Candidate biomarker miRs were selected from
previously published studies. Serum samples were collected from patients
with low-grade intraepithelial neoplasias (LGINs) including tubular
adenomas and tubulovillous adenomas, high-grade intraepithelial
neoplasias (HGINs), early cancers, and healthy volunteers, and divided
into discovery and validation sets. Total RNA was extracted from serum
samples and levels of candidate miRs were measured by real-time RT-PCR.
To evaluate the impact of hemolysis on serum miR levels, serially diluted
hemolysed controls were prepared from stock solution made by hemolysing
the red blood cells in distilled water. Levels of candidate miRs in
hemolysed controls were also examined by real-time RT-PCR. Absorbance of
serum samples at 560 nm, 576 nm, and 592 nm was measured by
spectrophotometry and hemoglobin levels were estimated from a standard
curve.Results: Fourteen miRs were selected as candidate diagnostic
biomarkers of early colorectal neoplasms from a review of the literature.
Serum levels of five miRs were too low to be accurately quantified by
real-time RT-PCR, and excluded from further evaluation. Sera from 12
patients with LGINs, 8 patients with HGINs, 4 patients with cancers, and
25 healthy volunteers were included in the discovery phase. Of 9 miRs
examined, miR21 (p = 0.0007), miR29a (p Objectives: Early detection of
precancerous lesions and early-stage cancers are essential to reduce
mortality from colorectal cancer (CRC).Serum/plasma microRNAs (miRs) have
been reported as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers of CRC, but their
utility in detecting patients with early lesions has not been fully
explored. The aim of this study is to identify serum miRs which are
potentially useful as diagnostic biomarkers for early colorectal
neoplasms, and potential confounders in a blood test.Methods: Candidate
biomarker miRs were selected from previously published studies. Serum
samples were collected from patients with low-grade intraepithelial
neoplasias (LGINs) including tubular adenomas and tubulovillous adenomas,
high-grade intraepithelial neoplasias (HGINs), early cancers, and healthy
volunteers, and divided into discovery and validation sets. Total RNA was
extracted from serum samples and levels of candidate miRs were measured
by real-time RT-PCR. To evaluate the impact of hemolysis on serum miR
levels, serially diluted hemolysed controls were prepared from stock
solution made by hemolysing the red blood cells in distilled water.
Levels of candidate miRs in hemolysed controls were also examined by
real-time RT-PCR. Absorbance of serum samples at 560 nm, 576 nm, and 592
nm was measured by spectrophotometry and hemoglobin levels were estimated
from a standard curve.Results: Fourteen miRs were selected as candidate
diagnostic biomarkers of early colorectal neoplasms from a review of the
literature. Serum levels of five miRs were too low to be accurately
quantified by real-time RT-PCR, and excluded from further evaluation.
Sera from 12 patients with LGINs, 8 patients with HGINs, 4 patients with
cancers, and 25 healthy volunteers were included in the discovery phase.
Of 9 miRs examined, miR21 (p = 0.0007), miR29a (p < 0.0001) and miR125b
(p = 0.0198) showed significantly higher levels in sera from early
colorectal neoplasms compared to those from healthy volunteers. Higher
levels of miR29a and miR125b in sera from early colorectal neoplasms were
confirmed in the validation phase using independent set of samples.
Levels of miR21, 29a, and miR125b in sera significantly correlated with
the degree of hemolysis.Conclusions: Serum miRs may be useful biomarkers
to detect patients with early colorectal neoplasia, including adenomas.
Hemolysis affects serum miR levels, and will confound measurement. Since
hemolysis occurs frequently during blood collection, its impact on serum
miRs should be further investigated.

