Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat shock transcription factor-1 and heat shock protein 60 are
important for lung carcinoma anoikis resistance


Metastasis of cancer cells to distant sites leads to poor prognosis and
comprises approximately 90% of cancer mortalities. It is evident that
metastasis requires resistance to anoikis, an apoptotic program induced
by detachment from the extracellular matrix. Heat shock proteins (HSPs)
are molecular chaperones whose major functions include protein folding
and suppression of apoptosis, and are transcriptionally regulated by heat
shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1). HSF1 has been linked to metastasis
and promotes anchorage-independent proliferation of breast cancer cells.
HSP60 is a chaperone found in both the mitochondria and cytosol and is
linked to metastasis and regulation of tumor cell apoptosis. To
investigate whether HSF1 and HSP60 are necessary for anoikis resistance,
anchorage-dependent lung carcinoma (A549, H460) and normal lung
epithelial (Beas-2b) cells were suspended by plating on
poly-2-hydroxyethyl-methacrylate-coated culture dishes. Anoikis induction
was measured by executioner caspase-7 cleavage and PARP cleavage by
western blot. Protein expression was measured by western blot.
Small-interfering RNAs were used to inhibit hsf1 and hsp60. We show here
that upon detachment for 24-48h, lung cancer cells resisted
caspase-dependent anoikis in contrast to normal lung epithelial cells,
with A549 cells showing the highest level of anoikis resistance. After
24h detachment there was increased phosphorylation of HSF1 on activating
serine 326 in lung cancer cells. Antisense inhibition of hsf1 and hsp60
in attached lung cancer cells had minimal effects on caspase-7 and PARP
cleavage. In contrast, hsf1 and hsp60 knockdown in cancer cells that were
suspended for 24-48h initiated caspase-dependent anoikis. Furthermore,
knockdown of hsf1 resulted in inhibition of HSP72, HSP40, and HSP27.
HSP60 was not significantly inhibited with loss of HSF1. This data
suggests that HSF1 and HSP60 are necessary for lung carcinoma anoikis
resistance. Our work adds to evidence suggesting HSF1 and HSP60 are
promising therapeutic targets for metastasis prevention. Although more
detailed mechanistic evaluation is necessary, a therapeutic approach to
induce anoikis in circulating tumor cells by modulating HSF1 or HSP60 may
be promising.

