Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix components direct chromatin texture and
nuclear morphological changes in epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Background: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with
metastasis in human prostate cancer (PCa). As metastatic tumors are the
major cause of death in most cancer patients, identifying instances of
EMT in patients may serve as a good prognostic indicator of progressive
disease. Abnormal morphologic deformation of the cell nucleus is strongly
associated with an aggressive cancer phenotype and computer-aided
quantitative nuclear morphometry (QNM) has been used to quantify this
deformation. In the present study, we go further to investigate the
association of nuclear morphologic features between an epithelial PCa
phenotype and an EMT-induced mesenchymal PCa phenotype across a panel of
extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates on which cells are grown in
vitro.Methods: PC3 epithelial cells (PC3-Epi) are established human PCa
cultures from bone metastatic lesions. M2 macrophages induced PC3-Epi
cells to undergo EMT and become mesenchymal PC3 cells (PC3- EMT). PC3-Epi
and PC3-EMT cells were cultured independently on glass tissue-culture
slides and also on a panel of ECM component substrates, including
collagen 1, poly-D-Lysine, and various molecular weight hyaluronic acid
polymers. Slides were stained with Feulgen or hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E). The images were digitized with a slide-scanning microscope.
Computer aided image processing software measured a total of 41
non-redundant features. This included nuclear size, shape, and texture
features. Features were statistically analyzed using both supervised and
unsupervised machine learning algorithms.Results: Statistical
classification between PC3-Epi and PC3-EMT was performed on a panel of
ECM substrates. The PC3-Epi and PC3-EMT morphological features were
characterized by the type of ECM substrate on which cells were cultured.
Chromatin texture and shape features, such as Feret diameter, were among
the most significant in contributing to separation of the PC3-Epi and
PC3-EMT. In contrast, the morphological features could not be separated
when cells were grown on glass surfaces.Conclusions: The PC3-Epi and
PC3-EMT cells were statistically separated more effectively with
extracellular matrix substrates than with glass. Furthermore, our
findings suggest that ECM components affect chromatin texture, a function
of chromatin organization, and nuclear morphology. Our results also
indicate quantitative nuclear morphometric analysis may be a viable tool
for demonstrating instances of EMT in clinical samples, potentially
adding quantitative prognostic value to this technique.Nuclear
morphometric factors, such as those used here, have also found
applications to distinguish aggressive human prostate cancers in fixed
biopsy samples (See review: Veltri, R.W., et al. Nuclear morphometry,
nucleomics and prostate cancer progression. Asian Journal of Andrology
(2012) 14, 375-384.)

