Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of metastasis-associated microRNAs in oral squamous
cell carcinoma using high-throughput sequencing


MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs involved in the initiation and
progression of human cancers. Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck is among the leading cancers in the world, whereas suitable
screening markers or personalized therapy are currently unavailable.
MicroRNAs are being tackled as biomarkers with potential to improve
outcomes of this disease. The presence of cervical lymph node metastases
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is currently its strongest
prognostic factor and, thus, markers associated with this phenotype are
of great interest for the clinical setting. In this study small RNA
libraries from 18 oral squamous cell carcinomas were sequenced for the
quantification of known microRNAs possibly linked with cervical lymph
node metastases. Small RNA populations are especially suitable to
analysis using high throughput sequencing technologies since multiple
samples can be completely sequenced in a single instrument run. Patients
were smokers and heavy drinkers and tumors were grouped according to the
presence (N+) or absence (N0) of cervical lymph node metastases at the
time of diagnosis. Analysis of the resulting sequences identified 984
distinct mature microRNAs mapping to miRBase (v.19). We observed
heterogeneity in regard to microRNA expression among samples from the
same group, indicating that microRNA expression patterns associated with
cervical metastases in oral cancer is not readily established. For
instance, miR-21 and miR-205 were highly expressed throughout samples, in
agreement with their role in epithelial cell biology, but disagreeing
with studies associating both molecules with cancer invasion. MiR-184,
previously detected in high levels in metastatic oral cancer, was
detected at low levels at all instances. On the other hand, miR-133a,
previously described as a repressor of tumor growth and metastasis, and
miR-31, presenting an ability to inhibit several steps in the metastatic
process, were both found consistently over-expressed in N0 samples.
Abnormal expression of microRNAs is emerging as an important biomarker in
cancer and high-throughput sequencing is becoming the technology of
choice for the identification and quantification of these molecules.
Despite the great potential, we demonstrate that microRNA gene expression
varied greatly among patients and across studies. Genetic heterogeneity
is a characteristic of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, impairing
consistency in biomarker discovery. We were able to pinpoint two
molecules, miR-31 and miR-133a, with coherent differential expression in
our dataset. Financial Support: FAPESPNote: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

