Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating the angiogenic potential of human microvascular
endothelial cells by an endogenous zinc finger transcription factor, ZNF24


Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from preexisting ones,
is an indispensible process under normal physiological conditions such as
embryonic development, certain stages of the female reproductive cycle
and placenta formation during pregnancy as well as under pathological
conditions such as wound healing, diabetic retinopathy, and cancer
initiation, progression and metastasis. We have previously identified the
molecular mechanism by which a zinc finger transcription factor, ZNF24,
functions as a new inhibitor of tumor angiogenesis. ZNF24 represses the
transcription of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in breast
cancer cells via direct binding to an 11-bp fragment within the VEGF
proximal promoter. In the current study, we have focused on the role of
ZNF24 in modulating the angiogenic potential of the endothelial
compartment of the tumor microenvironment. Utilizing primary human
microvascular endothelial cells, we have found that silencing ZNF24 in
these cells leads to significantly decreased endothelial cell
proliferation. Quantitative real-time PCR array analyses have identified
multiple cell cycle regulators as potential downstream targets of ZNF24,
which may be responsible for the decreased proliferation in these cells.
Moreover, knockdown of ZNF24 in microvascular endothelial cells leads to
significantly decreased cell migration and invasion. Consistently, we
found that VEGFR2 signaling and the proteolytic activity of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) were significantly downregulated in these
cells. We also determined the effect of ZNF24 silencing on the levels of
major regulators of MMP2 proteolytic activity such as the tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) and other MMPs. Knockdown of
ZNF24 does not induce significant changes in levels of these TIMPs and
MMPs, suggesting that ZNF24 regulates MMP2 at the transcriptional level.
Indeed, the mRNA level of MMP2 is significantly decreased in cells
transfected with ZNF24 siRNA, indicating that ZNF24 may be potentiating
endothelial cell invasion by positively regulating MMP2 transcription. In
a pilot in vivo angiogenesis assay, knockdown of ZNF24 in microvascular
endothelial cells leads to the significantly decreased formation of
vascular networks when co-implanted with bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
progenitor cells in immunodeficient mice. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that ZNF24 may be playing an essential role in modulating the
angiogenic potential of microvascular endothelial cells by regulating the
proliferation and motility of these cells. (Supported by NIH P01 CA045548
and the Breast Cancer Research Foundation)

