Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-translational modifications of Akt isoform in chemoresistance
of endometrial cancer


Endometrial cancer is ranked fourth in importance among all types of
cancer in women. This cancer is the most prevalent gynecological cancer.
Akt is an inactive cytosolic serine/threonine kinase that plays a crucial
role in cell fate by promoting cellular survival and proliferation. There
are three Akt isoforms (1,2 and 3). This protein acts as a key regulator
of numerous cellular phenotypes associated with cancer, such as cell
proliferation, growth, metabolism, angiogenesis, malignant transformation
and chemoresistance. It has been shown that Akt polyubiquitination is
increased in cells treated with IGF-1. This ubiquitination is associated
with an augmentation in the phosphorylation status of Akt. More and more
evidence show that ubiquitination plays a pivotal role in kinase
activation. In this study we observed ubiquitinated Akt (Ub-Akt) in the
nucleus following IGF-1 treatment in the nucleus of endometrial cell
lines (Ishikawa and KLE). We have established the ubiquitination pattern
for the three Akt isoforms and their location in the cells. We also
showed a cleaved fragment of Akt following cisplatin treatment in the
same cell lines.Using western blot analyses, we observed a band at 60kDa
corresponding to Akt and also other upper bands corresponding to Ub-Akt,
in the nucleus of different endometrial cell lines. We have analyzed the
pattern of two endometrial carcinoma (KLE and Ishikawa) and a cervical
cancer cell line (HeLa). We found that both Akt1 and Akt3 were
ubiquitinated in most of the cell lines. On the other hand, Akt2 was not
ubiquitinated in any cell lines. We have used siRNA technology to
knockdown each Akt isoform and characterized the loss of each isoform on
the ubiquitination pattern for each cell line. We also treated cell lines
with cisplatin to see which one of the three isoforms could be involved
in chemoresistance and if Akt ubiquitination status could be involved in
this process. We have separated fractions of the cytosol from the nucleus
for each sample to investigate distribution of Ub-Akt isoforms in each
cell line and confirmed the presence of Ub-Akt1 and -3 in the nucleus. We
have also co-immunoprecipitated each Akt isoform and Ubiquitin to
determine the exact ubiquitination pattern in cancer cells. KLE and
Ishikawa had similarities in their pattern. Using immunoprecipitation, we
observed that Akt1 was cleaved following cisplatin treatment. We observed
that chemosentisitive cells had more cleaved Akt then chemoresistant
lines. In conclusion, we are the first to establish a difference in the
ubiquitination pattern for the different Akt isoform in the nucleus of
endometrial cancer. We are also the first to show a cleavage of Akt
isoforms linked to chemosensitive status of endometrial cancer. This
study will form the basis for future investigations to determine the role
of specific post-translationnal modifications of Akt isoforms in the
endometrial cancer.

