Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma proteins characterize second-line therapy response in
progressive renal cell carcinoma


Introduction & Objectives: For patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC) vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted
therapy represents a promising first-line therapy after tumour
nephrectomy. For patients who progress during first-line therapy,
inhibitors of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) represent an option
for second-line therapy. Within the framework of the MARC-2 clinical
trial, the aim of our study is the identification and validation of
marker proteins associated with second-line therapy (Everolimus)
response.Material & Methods: We included blood plasma samples from 19
mRCC patients receiving Everolimus. Therapy response was defined as
stable disease and partial remission. We analysed the samples by
surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (SELDI-TOF MS) using CM10 and Q10 arrays. For the
identification of potential marker proteins, 2-dimensional gel
electrophoresis followed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) and antibody array
screening are on-going.Results: We identified 20 mass peaks by SELDI-TOF
MS with Q10 and 16 with CM10 chips for the discrimination between
responders (defined as stable disease or partial remission after two
month of therapy) and non-responders (defined as progressive disease
after 2 month of therapy). With the Q10, but not with the CM10 chip, we
obtained five peaks for the discrimination between both patient groups
before the first drug application. These peaks could be useable to
preselect patients for the second-line therapy with Everolimus. For
therapy monitoring, we found seven mass peaks (four with Q10 and three
with CM10 chips) after two weeks and 24 mass peaks (11 with Q10 and 13
with CM10 chips) after four weeks of therapy to differentiate between
responders and non-responders. These mass peaks could be useful to
estimate the therapy response for the patients.Conclusion/Outlook: Our
preliminary results argue for the presence of blood plasma proteins which
potentially predict therapy response to Everolimus before as well as
during therapy. The confirmation and identification of the SELDI-TOF MS
outcomes by 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis and MALDI-TOF MS is
on-going as well as the antibody array screening for angiogenesis related
proteins.Sponsored by: iOMEDICO AG

