Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implications of inhibition of steroid receptor co-activator-1 in
human prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is still the most commonly diagnosed
cancer and 2nd leading cause of death in the USA and the 3rd leading
cause of death behind lung and colorectal cancers in Europe,
respectively. Depending on the stage of the tumor different therapy
options exist. Initially, those therapies show success and lead to tumor
regression but eventually castration-resistant PCa (CRPC) develops.
Androgen receptor (AR) is still active in CRPC through various
mechanisms. One possibility of targeting the AR axis is inhibition of its
co-regulators such as SRC-1, needed for efficient transcription of AR
downstream genes.SRC-1, a member of the p160 coactivator family, is known
to promote the transcriptional activity of steroid receptors like the AR
as well as that of other non-steroidal transcription factors. Due to the
fact that SRC-1 staining is increased in metastatic tissue of patients
samples compared to clinically localized PCa our goal is to investigate
the specific role of SRC-1 in PCa progression and metastatogenesis.
Moreover, the question whether SRC-1 could be a target for a novel
therapeutic approach will be addressed.Methods: Knock-down cell lines
were generated using lentiviral-based RNAi technology. Western Blotting
and qRT-PCR analysis were performed to verify knock-down efficiency. The
proliferation of the different cell lines was addressed by 3H thymidine
incorporation assays. Scratch (wound healing) and Boyden chamber assays
were used to investigate the migratory and invasive behavior of the cell
lines.Results: Immortalized benign and malignant prostate cell lines were
screened for SRC-1 expression on mRNA and protein level, revealing that
SRC-1 is expressed in all tested cell lines. Furthermore, knock down of
SRC-1 in LNCaP and MDA PCa 2b (AR+) led to a markedly reduced AR
transcriptional activity, which was verified by a reduced transcription
of a downstream target gene prostate specific antigen. Whereas SRC-1
knockdown in MDA PCa 2b and PC3 cells did not show any effect on
proliferation, depletion of SRC-1 negatively influenced cell
proliferation of LNCaP cells. Moreover, we investigated the role of SRC-1
in the migratory and invasive behavior. While depletion of SRC-1 in PC3
and MDA PCa 2b cells significantly diminished migration, it had no effect
on invasiveness.Conclusion: Together these findings demonstrate that
SRC-1 is not only an important regulator of AR transcriptional activity
but also affects other signaling pathways. Furthermore, SRC-1 seems to
play a crucial role in migration but not in invasion and proliferation,
depending on the cell lines used. Thus, SRC-1 may be a possible
therapeutic target in metastatic prostate cancer, although its specific
role has to be further investigated.

