Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of angiogenesis pathway-related gene expression impacted
by MDM2 using PCR array


The Murine Double Minute 2 (MDM2) gene encodes an oncogenic MDM2 protein,
which is a negative regulator of the p53 tumor suppressor. MDM2
amplification or over expression is found in many tumors that eventually
lead to the inactivation of the cell cycle control and loss of
pro-apoptotic functions that are typically exerted by wild type p53. Many
of the oncogenic effects of MDM2 are resulting from the inactivation of
p53 through direct binding or degradation of p53 following E3 ligase
mediated ubiquitination. However, our recent findings have indicated that
MDM2 over expression can also promote tumor angiogenesis through p53
independent pathways and thereby enhance the metastatic potential of
cancer cells. In this respect increasing the levels of pro-angiogenic
factors such as VEGF has been confirmed as one of the mechanisms
regulated by MDM2. However, the actual cluster of genes or pathways
regulated by MDM2 leading to such increase in the metastatic potentials
of cancer cells have not been clearly identified. Therefore, the main
purpose of our study was to understand the impact of MDM2 over expression
on the levels of angiogenesis related genes that can also increase growth
rate and metastatic potential. Hence, for our study we used the Human
Angiogenesis PCR Array to compare the gene expression profile of LNCaP
(prostate cancer cells) and LNCaP-MST (MDM2 transfected prostate cancer)
cells. The MST cells expressed at least 10 fold increase in the levels of
MDM2 after transfection. As a result of the elevated levels of MDM2 in
LNCaP-MST cells the expression of genes such as THBS1 (125 fold), TNF-
(14 fold), MMP-9 (1.4 fold) were found to be significantly up-regulated
compared to the MDM2 non-transfected cells. Cluster analysis further
confirmed that these gene expression profiles are positively correlated
with the pro-angiogenic potential of the LNCaP-MST cells compared to the
non-transfected cells. In addition, the levels of EREG, TIMP1 and CXCL3
were down regulated significantly that favors the suppression of
anti-angiogenic mechanisms. Our results offer a conclusive evidence that
MDM2 can impact the cancer growth and metastatic potential of cancer
cells by shifting the balance towards pro-angiogenic mechanisms (The
financial support from the Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft.
Lauderdale, Florida is gratefully acknowledged).

