Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian low grade serous cancer: Mutation analysis with a
comprehensive 409 cancer gene panel


Patients with ovarian serous cancer are usually younger and survive
longer than patients with high-grade serous cancer. Unfortunately, most
low-grade serous cancer patients eventually die of the disease because
recurrent low-grade serous carcinoma is relative chemoresistant. So far,
the known mutations identified in low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas and
their putative precursor ovarian serous borderline tumors are BRAF and
KRAS mutations. BRAF and KRAS mutations together have been identified in
approximately 60% of serous borderline tumors and early stage low-grade
serous carcinomas. However, BRAF mutation is rare in advanced-stage
low-grade serous carcinomas. To further investigate the molecular
pathogenesis of low-grade serous carcinoma, mutation analyses of 409
cancer related genes were performed in 21 low-grade ovarian serous
carcinoma, 8 ovarian serous borderline tumors and one ovarian cystadenoma
using next generation sequencer. A total of nineteen missense mutations
were identified in 20 samples but ten samples had no detectable
mutations. BRAF mutation was detected in 3 serous borderline tumors and
one low-grade serous carcinoma. KRAS mutations were detected in three
low-grade serous carcinomas. Other than BRAF and KRAS mutations, we also
detected other prevalent mutations: ATRX mutations were detected in 3
low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas and a cystadenoma; KMT2C mutations
were detected in 3 low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas; ATM mutations
were detected in 2 low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas. Interestingly,
both ATRX and MLL3 genes are involved in the chromatin remodeling.
Moreover, both ATRX and ATM are involved in DNA damaging response. Thus,
the pathogenesis of low-grade serous carcinoma may involve de-regulation
of chromatin remodeling pathway and DNA damaging response. Further
analysis of a large cohort of low-grade serous carcinomas for these
prevalent mutations is ongoing.

