Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPNMB cooperates with Neuropilin-1 and Integrin a5b1 to promote
breast cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis


Deaths attributed to breast cancer primarily occur following metastasis
to distant organs such as bone, lung, liver and brain. In a screen for
metastasis modulators, our lab has identified GPNMB as a gene whose
overexpression in weakly metastatic breast cancer cell lines enhances
primary tumor growth, promotes endothelial cell recruitment, drives lung
and bone metastasis in vivo and induces the acquisition of an invasive
phenotype in vitro. We have shown that elevated GPNMB levels in the
breast tumor epithelium strongly correlate with decreased disease-free
and overall survival, even within the basal/triple-negative breast cancer
subset, associated with a high grade and poor prognosis. Based on our
research findings, CDX-011, an antibody-drug conjugate that selectively
targets GPNMB, was investigated in a multi-centre Phase II clinical trial
for patients with metastatic breast cancer and showed promising activity
in TNBCs, where treatment options are limited.Gene expression profiling
of 66cl4 murine mammary carcinoma cells and BT549 basal breast cancer
cells revealed that Neuropilin-1 (Nrp1) levels are increased in response
to GPNMB overexpression. Using a panel of GPNMB-domain mutants (GPNMB CYT
and GPNMB RGD), we show that GPNMB forms a complex with Nrp1, and that
this association requires the cytoplasmic tail of GPNMB and the
PDZ-binding motif of Nrp1. The presence of a GPNMB/Nrp-1 complex
potentiates the VEGF signaling cascade in a manner that depends on GPNMB
association with Nrp1.We demonstrate that GPNMB enhances adhesion of
breast cancer cells to fibronectin, increases the expression of 51 and
associates with this receptor through its RGD integrin-binding domain.
The recruitment of GPNMB into integrin complexes activates downstream Src
and Fak signaling pathways and, reciprocally, induces phosphorylation of
GPNMB on its half-ITAM motif. Using a spontaneous model of breast cancer
tumor formation, we show that both the RGD domain and the cytoplasmic
tail of GPNMB are required to increase primary tumor formation. However,
only the GPNMB RGD mutant showed a decrease in metastatic burden when
compared to WT GPNMB, indicating that GPNMB association with 51, but not
Neuropilin-1 is required to promote lung metastasis. A survey of RNAseq
datasets reveals that GPNMB is strongly correlated with Nrp1 and 5 in
breast cancer and emphasizes the clinical relevance of our data. These
findings outline the importance of novel GPNMB/51 and GPNMB/Nrp1
complexes in potentiating breast cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis.

