Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown ARID5A suppresses proliferation of LNCaP prostate cancer
cell through the inhibition of global protein synthesis


AT-Rich Interaction Domain-containing protein 5a (ARID5A; also known as
Modulator Recognition Factor 1(MRF1)) was first cloned in our laboratory
by screening a cDNA library of Tera-2 mRNA with an oligonucleotide probe
from the major immediate early gene of human cytomegalovirus. It has been
reported that ARID5A forms a complex with androgen receptor (AR) in yeast
two hybrid assays and suppresses the transcriptional activity of AR in
transient transfection assays. In this study, we report that the
knockdown of Arid5a expression inhibits proliferation of LNCaP cells on
the contrary to the expectation from the transient transfection assay. We
found that proliferation of cells stimulated by the treatment with
dihydro-testosterone (DHT) was suppressed when Arid5a expression was
down-regulated by siRNA technology. Flow cytometer analysis showed that
DHT-stimulated cell cycle was arrested at G1 phase after the knockdown of
Arid5a expression. Oil Red O staining assays showed that the inhibition
of Arid5a expression led to decreased DHT-induced lipid accumulation. Our
data further proved that the knockdown of Arid5a expression inhibited the
protein expression of DHT-induced sterol regulatory element binding
transcription factor 1 (SREBP-1). In addition, Western blot analysis
revealed that the down-regulation of Arid5a decreased the expression of
cell survival/proliferation and cell cycle regulation proteins, such as
hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1a), cyclin D1 and cyclin D3. Real
time PCR data revealed that the knockdown of Arid5a expression did not
affect the steady level of HIF1a, cyclin D1 and cyclin D3 mRNA. These
suggested that knockdown of Arid5a expression affected protein expression
at translational and/or post-translational level. Mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a well-known factor in regulating the
cap-dependent protein synthesis. Western blot analysis indicated that the
suppression of Arid5a expression had no effects on the activity of
mTORC1. However, knockdown of Arid5a expression increased the
phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a)
which inhibited translation initiation. S35 labeling assay confirmed that
the knockdown of Arid5a expression suppressed the global protein
synthesis. In order to find out the mechanisms of Arid5a-dependent
phosphorylation of eIF2a, we tested four known kinases which were
responsible for the phosphorylation of eIF2a. Two of the four eIF2a
kinases, general control non-derepressible 2 (GCN2) and RNA-dependent
protein kinase (PKR)-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), were
activated by the suppression of Arid5a expression. We are currently
studying on the mechanisms by which ARID5A regulates GCN2 and PERK kinase.

