Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of both physiological and aberrant Wnt/-catenin
signaling activities associated with stemness in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


We previously demonstrated that basic or physiological levels of -catenin
signaling and tissue context play decisional roles in the regulation of
self-renewal networks in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) HONE1 cells.
Introduction of physiological levels of -catenin signaling in HONE1
hybrid cells plays a central role in the control of other pathway
activities, such as TGF-, Activin, and pluripotency maintenance (LIFR and
IL6ST), during the stemness transition process. These results revealed
novel regulatory relationships among Wnt signaling, stemness,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), tumor suppressive pathways and
expression of common cancer stem cell surface markers, such as CD44 and
CD133, in human tumor cells. In current studies, we found that several
NPC cell lines, including CNE1, HK1, HNE1, SUNE1, and C666-1, have
aberrant and significant up-regulation of -catenin expression, when
compared to HONE1 cells that have low levels endogenous -catenin
expression. In these NPC cells with aberrant -catenin signaling
activities, the Wnt pathway (Axin2, APC, TCF1 and TCF3), stemness factors
(Nanog, and Oct4) and pluripotency markers (IFITM1 and GRB7) are strongly
overexpressed, compared to HONE1 cells. Our findings suggest that
aberrant Wnt/-catenin signaling activities may play a prominent role in
promoting tumor progression in NPC cells. To further verify the role of
aberrant -catenin signaling in NPC, we utilize shRNA to knock down
-catenin expression in these cells, including CNE1 and HK1. As found in
HONE1 hybrids, the diminished expression of core stem cell factors
(Nanog, Oct4, Klf4, and Sox2) is also detected in both CNE1 and HK1 cell
lines. Concomitantly, the gene expression of EMT markers (E-cadherin and
Zeb1) is also inhibited when -catenin is knocked down by shRNA -catenin
infection. These preliminary results suggest that -catenin signaling
plays a dominant role in regulating both physiological and aberrant
Wnt/-catenin signaling activities as well as EMT events in NPC
development.

