Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of SEL24-B489, a dual PIM/FLT3
inhibitor for the treatment of hematological malignancies


PIM kinases represent an emerging therapeutic target in multiple
hematological malignancies, as exemplified by currently ongoing phase I
clinical trials by Astra Zeneca (AZD1208) and Novartis (LGH447) in acute
myeloid leukemia and multiple myeloma. Selvita has developed a potent and
selective dual PIM/FLT3 mutant kinase inhibitor - SEL24-B489 showing high
inhibitory activity on all three PIM kinase isoforms and FLT3 kinase
mutants. We have previously reported that PIM kinases are important
downstream effectors of FLT3 signaling and play a crucial role in cell
survival and inhibition of apoptosis upon expression. Due to
heterogeneous nature of AML, dual inhibition of FLT3 mutant kinase and
PIM kinases led to improved efficacy of our compound in comparison to
selective inhibitors of either PIM of FLT3 kinases.Herewith, we would
like to report further progress of characterizing the B489 inhibitor
beyond AML. We assessed PIM kinase expression levels in a panel of
lymphoid malignancies and found that PIM1 and PIM2 exhibit high
expression levels in a fraction of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), diffuse
large-B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), follicular lymphoma (FL), Hodgkin's
lymphoma (HL), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and mucosa associated
lymphoid tissue-type (MALT) lymphoma cell lines and primary tumors . High
levels of PIM kinases were associated with certain established adverse
prognostic factors and clinical outcome of the patients and correlated
with aggressiveness of the disease in some of these tumors. Inhibition of
PIM kinases with tool inhibitors was shown to influence cellular
proliferation and, translational inhibition of 4EBP1 as reported in the
literature. In addition, SEL24-B489 inhibited NFB activity and decreased
CXCR4 expression. Comparison of SEL24-B489 to competitive PIM inhibitors
revealed higher cellular activity and biomarker response, as shown by
inhibition of phospho-S6 phosphorylation in sub-microM concentrations.
The presented data will further validate SEL24-B489 as a successful
example of rational drug design and present a promising therapeutic
approach in multiple hematological malignancies, both stand alone and in
combination with standard of care and targeted therapies in clinical
development.

