Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the eukaryotic elongation factor eEF1A in the mechanism of
action of Aplidin


Aplidin is a cyclic depsipeptide of the family of didemnins, originally
isolated from the colonial tunicate Aplidium albicans. Aplidin is being
evaluated in a phase III clinical trial in patients with relapse or
refractory multiple myeloma. As part of its antitumor activity, Aplidin
induces rapid oxidative stress, activation of Rac1 and phosphorylation of
p38 and JNK1 stress kinases, which together trigger the apoptotic death
of tumor cells. Didemnin B (DB), a molecule closely related to Aplidin,
has been previously shown to interact with the GTP-bound conformation of
the eukaryotic elongation factor eEF1A, an interaction that was related
to the didemnin's B ability to inhibit protein synthesis (J. Biol. Chem.
1994, 269:15411-14). A structural model for this interaction has been
proposed (J. Med. Chem. 2004, 47:4439-52). We wanted to investigate
whether eEF1A had any role in the mechanism of action of Aplidin. Using
the DARTS technique, we observed that Aplidin treatment of tumor cells
and subsequent digestion of the cellular extracts with different
proteases, resulted in a significant increase in the stabililty of eEF1A
against protease digestion, suggesting a direct effect of Aplidin on this
protein. We previously generated, by continuous exposure to increasing
concentrations of the drug, a HeLa derivative cell line (HeLa-APL-R) that
showed specific resistance to Aplidin as well as to other related
didemnins and tamandarins (Br. J. Cancer 2004, 91:1405-13). We
investigated whether there was any difference in the expression levels of
eEF1A between HeLa-wt and HeLa-APL-R cell lines. Since two isoforms of
the elongation factor are expressed in tumor cells, eEF1A1 and eEF1A2, we
checked the relative amount of both proteins at the mRNA and protein
levels using DNA microarrays and iTRAQ, respectively. Remarkably, we
observed that the mRNA and protein levels of eEF1A2 isoform were lower in
HeLa-APL-R resistant cells as compared to their parental cell line. No
significant changes were seen in the levels of eEF1A1. The reduced levels
of eEF1A2 protein in HeLa-APL-R cells were further confirmed by western
blotting using isoform-specific antibodies. To explore the effect of the
restoration of the eEF1A2 levels in the HeLa resistant clone, we
generated two cell lines stably overexpressing eEF1A1 or eEF1A2 and
checked their sensitivity to Aplidin in dose-response cytotoxicity
experiments. Both cell lines partially recovered the sensitivity to
Aplidin, with the eEF1A2-overexpressing cell line having an even slightly
higher sensitivity to the compound. In eEF1A overexpressing cells,
Aplidin induced a robust cytostatic effect. At the molecular level,
Aplidin induced the phosphorylation of p38 as well as ERK MAPKs, but not
JNK phosphorylation or PARP cleavage, two key events in the cytotoxic
signaling of the drug. These results could indicate a role of eEF1A in
the biological activity of Aplidin in tumor cells.

