Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parallel functions of the endoplasmic reticulum chaperone protein
GRP78 in tumorigenesis and the induction of pluripotency


Increasing evidence supports the concept that instances of cancer
recurrence may be due to a subpopulation of cells within a tumor that
behave as stem cells. Previous studies have demonstrated that pathways
critical in oncogenesis parallel those necessary for the induction of
pluripotency, suggesting that similar mechanisms regulate both processes.
By therefore understanding the mechanisms that govern reprogramming, we
may gain insight into the methods by which cancer cells acquire and
exploit stem cell properties, and enable more strategic targeting of
these cell populations to prevent malignant relapse. Members of the
TGF-beta superfamily (e.g. activin/Nodal), which regulate many important
normal cellular responses including cell growth and differentiation, have
also been shown to promote tumorigenesis. Cripto, a regulator of TGF-beta
superfamily ligand signaling expressed on human embryonic stem cells, is
overexpressed in many types of cancer, and has also been shown to promote
tumor growth and metastasis. Previous work has demonstrated that Cripto
regulates TGF-beta function in tumor cell lines by forming a complex with
GRP78, a protein generally restricted to the endoplasmic reticulum in
normal tissues, but expressed at the cell surface in many types of
tumors. Targeting GRP78 in mouse models suppresses tumor growth, and cell
surface GRP78 has been shown to be a molecular target on human tumor
samples. Although these studies have suggested an important role for
GRP78 in promoting tumorigenesis, the mechanisms are not yet fully
understood. We have discovered that GRP78 expression is induced during
reprogramming, and becomes localized to the cell surface in pluripotent
cells, where it co-localizes with Cripto. Overexpression of GRP78 in
somatic cells induced their reprogramming efficiency. We further found
that a GRP78 antibody, that disrupts cell surface GRP78/Cripto binding
and Cripto-mediated TGF-beta superfamily signaling, inhibited
reprogramming. Treatment of pluripotent stem cell populations with this
GRP78 antibody also decreased proliferation, but did not impact
pluripotency. These combined findings suggest that GRP78 may be localized
to the cell surface during reprogramming where it functions to inhibit
TGF-beta signaling and promote stem cell proliferation and/or survival.
Interestingly, overexpression of GRP78 in human breast cancer cell lines
caused an increased resistance to cisplatin. Furthermore, inhibiting cell
surface function of GRP78 in these breast cancer lines resulted in a
higher susceptibility to cisplatin treatment, demonstrating a specific
function for cell surface GRP78 in cisplatin resistance. These combined
stem cell functions of GRP78 therefore parallel many of the functions of
GRP78 for cancer cells, and thus provide insight into understanding how
cancer cells acquire and exploit stem cell properties.

