Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tolfenamic acid enhances the therapeutic efficacy of certain
chemotherapeutic agents in medulloblastoma cell lines


Tolfenamic acid (TA), a small molecule NSAID exhibits anti-cancer
response in several malignancies. Recently we demonstrated for the first
time that TA inhibits medulloblastoma (MB) cell proliferation and tumor
growth in mice xenografts. Since MB requires intensive therapy that often
causes long-term side-effects, we tested the efficacy of TA for enhancing
the response of chemotherapy. Initial experiments were performed using MB
cell lines, DAOY and D283 to test the anti-proliferative response of
individual agents, TA, Irinotecan (IRI), Topotecan (TOPO), Temozolomide
(TZM) and Doxorubicin (DOXO). Subsequently, the combination of TA with
TOPO was tested using the optimized doses. DAOY and D283 cells were
treated with DMSO or increasing concentrations of TA (5-50 g/ml) or
chemotherapeutic agents TOPO (10-500 nM), TZM (100-500 M), IRI (0.5-5 M)
and DOXO (10-500 nM). Cell viability was measured at 24, 48, and 72 h
post-treatment using CellTiter Glo kit and all agents caused a dose and
time-dependent inhibition of cell viability. To assess the effect of
combination therapy, MB cells were treated with optimized doses of TA (10
g/ml) or TOPO (DAOY: 20 nM; D283: 25 nM) or both and the cell viability
was measured at 48 h and 72 h post-treatment. The combination of TA and
TOPO caused significantly higher inhibition when compared to either TA or
TOPO alone confirming the efficacy of this combination therapy in
pre-clinical models for MB. The effect on cell apoptosis was evaluated at
48 h post-treatment. Apoptotic cells were measured by flow cytometry
using Annexin V-PE/7-AAD kit. The results showed a significant increase
in the apoptotic fraction (annexin V positive) of both MB cell lines
following the combination therapy when compared to individual treatment
of TA or TOPO. These results were further supported by determining the
activity of effector caspases. Consistent with Annexin V staining,
combination therapy significantly upregulated caspase 3/7 levels when
compared to individual treatment. DAOY and D283 were treated with DMSO or
10 or 20 g/ml TA for 48 h. Whole cell lysates were prepared and the
expression of Sp1, survivin and c-PARP was determined by Western blot
analysis. TA inhibited both Sp1 and survivin in MB cell lines. Consistent
with annexin V staining and caspase 3/7 results, TA augmented the PARP
cleavage confirming the activation of apoptotic pathways. In order to
evaluate the precise molecular markers/pathways associated with the
beneficial (higher) efficacy of TA and TOPO combination therapy, we are
conducting molecular profiling analysis. Overall, these results
demonstrate that the combination of anti-cancer small molecule, TA and
standard chemotherapeutic agents such as TOPO effectively inhibits MB
cell growth. These preliminary results strongly demonstrate the efficacy
of the proposed combination therapy in enhancing therapeutic response in
pre-clinical models of MB.

