Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A universal marker for the detection of epithelial-mesenchymal
transitioned circulating tumor cells and their prognostic relevance in
epithelial cancers


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are the tumor cells shed from the primary
tumor tissues into the bloodstream or lymphatic vessels. These CTCs are
considered to be emerging tools for the detection and prognosis of
several types of metastatic cancers. At present, CTC markers are limited
to epithelial cancers and there are no specific markers available to
detect mesenchymal and epithelial-mesenchymal transformed (EMT) CTCs. EMT
cells are characterized by increased motility and invasiveness and are
known to escape detection technologies that use EpCAM and cytokeratins as
CTC markers. We have previously reported the detection of mesenchymal
cancer cells from blood of sarcoma cancer patients for the first time
using a novel monoclonal antibody 84-1. Here we report the detection of
EMT CTCs from colon, breast and prostate cancer patients using 84-1
monoclonal antibody. Isolated EMT CTCs were characterized for EMT
phenotype by staining for Snail, Slug, Twist-1 and FOXC2. To analyze the
efficiency of CTC detection, we compared the CTC counts obtained using
84-1 antibody to that of the FDA approved CellSearch method. We collected
blood samples from breast and prostate cancer patients and isolated a)
EMT CTCs using 84-1 and b) Epithelial CTCs using Cell Search. For
validation purposes, we analyzed an experimental set of patient samples
that included normal, non-metastatic and metastatic samples to derive a
threshold of detecting CTCs in these patients. After validating a
threshold value of the CTC, we used an experimental set that was
randomized to evaluate CTCs from different patient sets. Since the
experimental set consisted of randomized set of patients with different
stages of disease progression and treatments, we evaluated the
association between CTC count and therapeutic outcome (progression/
stable & responding). Our results indicated that patients with 5 EMT
CTCs/7.5 mL as detected by 84-1 antibody were independent predictors of
therapeutic outcome in breast and prostate cancer patients. Detection
using 84-1antibody was much more sensitive and specific when compared
with CellSearch method. Collectively, our observations provide a novel
technology to selectively detect and isolate EMT CTCs. Detection and
molecular characterization of CTCs is one of the fastest growing areas of
translational cancer research. Utilizing 84-1, we can enumerate and
isolate rare EMT CTCs that will aid as prognostic indicators of
therapeutic outcome, metastasis, and relapse and will contribute to the
development of specific targeted therapies, an ultimate goal of
personalized medicine.

