Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CDK1 in human stem cell biology


Self-renewal and pluripotency of stem cells (SC) is maintained by
well-characterized transcriptional factors that assemble a core
regulatory network, although less defined auto- and cross-regulatory
signaling pathways are also critical. Accumulating evidence indicates
that cell cycle regulators play an important role in control of
pluripotency and differentiation that goes beyond their roles in cell
cycle regulation. Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) is essential for cell
cycle progression and embryonic development, and has recently been
implicated in a signaling network with pluripotency proteins.In this
study, we investigated the potential role of CDK1 in regulation of
pluripotency and differentiation. CDK1 expression is enriched in the
pluripotent state of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and down
regulated during differentiation. shRNA knockdown of CDK1 or a selective
CDK1 inhibitor (RO-3306) promoted hESC differentiation, shown by the
reduced expression of the pluripotency markers Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2, and
the up-regulation of the mesendoderm transcripts Brachyury, Eomes,
Goosecoid, and MixL1. Interestingly, down-regulation of CDK1 by both
shRNA and RO-3306 could not block ES cells at G2/M or other phases of the
cell cycle, suggesting that relatively milder knockdown of CDK1 did not
induce hESC cell cycle arrest or impair overall proliferation but was
enough to promote differentiation. Knockdown of CDK1 also decreased
phosphorylation of Akt at Thr308 and Ser473, one of the key regulators of
pluripotency signaling. Further, JNJ-770621, a dual inhibitor of
CDK1/CDK2 and Aurora kinases but not Akt or Erk, induced human embryonal
carcinoma cell (NCCIT) differentiation accompanied by reduced
phosphorylation of Akt. Addition of UO126 and SB431542, which inhibit
MEK/ERK and TGF/Smad2/ respectively (downstream of PI3K/Akt signaling),
reversed the differentiation induced by shCDK1 or RO-3306 treatment.
Moreover, phosphorylation of PDK1 (upstream of Akt) was notably reduced
in CDK1 knockdown cells but not in serum-induced differentiation,
indicating that the inhibition of activation of PDK1 or Akt could be the
primary effect of CDK1 down-regulation. The results suggest that
threshold levels of CDK1 might direct- or cross-regulate key signaling
pathways, such as that operating through PI3K-PDK1-Akt.In summary, CDK1
is required for maintenance of stem cell pluripotency, in a manner that
is distinct from its role in regulation of cell cycle progression,
potentially through direct or indirect cross-regulation of fundamental
pluripotency signaling of PI3K/PDK1/Akt-ERK-GSK3 and TGF/Smad.

