Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin represses cancer cells via alternate pathways in
N-Cadherin wild-type and N-Cadherin-deficient cells


BACKGROUNDMetformin, one of the most commonly used medications for
treatment of type 2 diabetes, has emerged as a potential anticancer
agent. The molecular mechanisms associated with the antitumor effect of
metformin are still poorly understood. In this study, we show that
Metformin represses cancer cells via alternate pathways in N-Cadherin
Wild type and N-Cadherin deficient cells.METHODSCell viability and
apoptosis were determined by MTT, TUNEL and FACS. Various stable cell
lines were generated in vitro and then injected into both flanks of nude
mice to generate xenografts. Mice were treated with i.p. doxorubicin
(every 5 days 4 cycles with 4 mg/kg) or p.o.metformin (200 ug/ml, diluted
in the drinking water). Xenograft tumor volume was measured every 5
days.RESULTSWe found that metformin represses N-cadherin, independent of
AMPK, in wild-type N-cadherin cancer cells. Ectopic expression of
N-cadherin rendered cells resistant to metformin. Silencing or
over-expression of AMPK did not alter sensitivity of cancer cells to
metformin in N-cadherin wild-type cells. In metformin-resistant cancer
cells, N-cadherin level did not change with metformin treatment.
Suppression of N-cadherin changed the phenotype of metformin-resistant to
metformin-sensitive cells. We also demonstrated that NF-kB is a
downstream molecule of N-cadherin and metformin regulated NF-kB signaling
via inhibiting N-cadherin, rather than direct modulation of NF-kB.
Silencing of NF-kB in resistant cells sensitized the cells to metformin.
We also found that metformin down-regulated N-cadherin and TWIST1
concurrently. Ectopic expression of TWIST1 regulated N-cadherin/NF-kB
signaling and made cells more resistant to metformin. Suppression of
TWIST1 sensitized resistant cells to metformin. Metformin inhibited
growth of tumor xenografts, and high levels of N-cadherin made tumors
more resistant to metformin, while suppression of N-cadherin made tumors
more sensitive.In N-cadherin deficient cancer cells, metformin activated
AMPK. Suppression of AMPK compromised metformin-mediated inhibition of
NF-kB and changed the cells to a more metformin-resistant phenotype. In
the deficient cells, Ectopic expression of N-cadherin attenuated AMPK's
ability to suppress NF-kB, leading to a more metformin resistant
phenotype. Similarly, a specific AMPK inhibitor, compound C, inhibited
the therapeutic effects of metformin. Similar to the in vitro findings,
suppression of AMPK in xenografts rendered tumors resistant to
metformin.CONCLUSIONS:We suggest that metformin's anti-cancer therapeutic
effect in N-cadherin wild-type cells may be mediated through repression
of the TWIST/N-cadherin/NF-kB signaling pathway, independent of AMPK.
However, in N-cadherin deficient cells, metformin activates AMPK.
Elucidating the molecular pathways responsible for metformin's
anti-cancer effect may help delineate its role for cancer therapies.

