Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An oncogenic metabolic switch mediates resistance to NOTCH1
inhibition in T-ALL


Activating mutations of NOTCH1 are common in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL), making NOTCH signaling a promising target for drugs
such as -secretase inhibitors (GSIs), which block a proteolytic cleavage
required for NOTCH activation. Aberrant activation of the PI3K-AKT
pathway due to mutational loss of PTEN is found in 20% of human T-ALLs
and has been linked with in vitro resistance to GSIs. Still, the specific
mechanisms driving the antileukemic effects of NOTCH inhibition and the
role of PTEN loss in resistance to anti-NOTCH therapies in T-ALL remain
poorly understood. Here we used a mouse model of NOTCH1-induced leukemia
built into conditional-inducible Pten knockout mice to demonstrate that
genetic loss of Pten results in GSI resistance, accelerated mortality and
progression under therapy in vivo. Importantly, gene expression profiling
of tumor cells upon NOTCH inhibition showed that while NOTCH direct
target genes are downregulated in both Pten-positive and Pten-deleted
tumors, Pten loss results in global reversal of much of the
transcriptional effects of NOTCH inhibition. Thus, Pten loss rescued the
downregulation of genes involved in anabolic pathways and the
upregulation of genes involved in catabolic pathways and autophagy
induced by GSI treatment in Pten wild type leukemias. Consistently,
electron microscopy and LC3 analysis demonstrated increased autophagy in
NOTCH1 induced tumors upon GSI treatment, which was reversed upon Pten
deletion. Moreover, global metabolomics analyses demonstrated that NOTCH
inactivation induces a global anabolic shutdown in T-ALL with a marked
block of glycolysis and glutaminolysis in Pten wild type tumor cells. Of
note, flux studies using 13C-labeled glucose and 13C-labeled glutamine
pointed to decreased metabolism with a specific block in glutaminolysis
as critical effectors of the antileukemic effects of GSIs in T-ALL.
Notably, each of the metabolic effects associated with NOTCH inhibition
was effectively reversed upon genetic loss of Pten, supporting that
metabolic rescue induced by Pten loss may mediate resistance to GSI
therapy. Consistently, treatment with methyl pyruvate, a membrane soluble
metabolite, effectively rescued the antileukemic effects of NOTCH
inhibition, while, inhibition of glutaminolysis with a glutaminase
inhibitor (BPTES) strongly and synergistically enhanced the antileukemic
effects of NOTCH inhibition in T-ALL.Overall, these results formally
demonstrate that loss of PTEN induces in vivo resistance to NOTCH
inhibition in T-ALL; highlight the fundamental role of NOTCH1 in the
control of tumor cell metabolism; implicates sustained carbon metabolism
induced by Pten loss as mechanism of resistance to GSI therapy; and
provide the framework for the development of novel therapies targeting
glutaminolysis and cell metabolism in T-ALL.

