Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent antitubulin and antitumor activities influenced by the 3-D
conformational shape of bicyclic fused pyrimidines


Compounds that bind to the tubulin colchicine site cause microtubule
depolymerization, inhibit the polymerization of purified tubulin and
cause cancer cells to accumulate in mitosis. Some colchicine-site agents
additionally have the ability to overcome multiple drug resistance
mechanisms, including those mediated by the expression of P-glycoprotein
(Pgp) or expression of the -III isotype of tubulin. We have reported a
series of aniline substituted pyrimidines and fused bicyclic and
tricyclic pyrimidine compounds that bind to the colchicine site. These
compounds are single to triple digit nanomolar inhibitors of cancer cell
proliferation. We hypothesized that the conformational orientation of the
4-aniline and the fused pyrimidine scaffold plays an important role in
the biological activity of these compounds. In this study, we utilized
NMR (NOESY) and molecular modeling to compare the lowest energy
conformation of different 4-substituted 2-methyl cyclopenta[d]pyrimidines
and their microtubule depolymerizing, colchicine site binding and
antiproliferative activities. Among the 4-position substituents were
N-methyl-4-methoxynaphthyl-1-amino (1),
N-methyl-6-methoxynaphthyl-1-amino (2) and N-methyl-5-methoxy-2-amino
(3). The IC50 values towards the MDA-MB-435 tumor cell line were 250 nM
for 1 and 10 nM for 3. NMR (NOESY) demonstrated that compound 2 lost the
free rotation of the naphthyl ring attached to the
cyclopenta[d]pyrimidine ring due to 5-H steric hindrance and did not
cause microtubule depolymerization. Compounds 1 and 3 retain the ability
to rotate the naphthyl ring even though they adopt slightly different
stable conformers. The stable conformational differences of these three
compounds afford different binding poses in docking to the colchicine
site on tubulin (PDB: 1SA0, MOE 2012), which explains the significant
differences in antiproliferative activity, microtubule depolymerizing and
inhibition of colchicine binding. This study affords a lead compound that
defines a 104o (orthogonal) orientation of the naphthyl ring to the
cyclopenta[d]pyrimidine scaffold for the best biological activities.

