Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-CD20 therapy prevents protumor regulatory T-cell expansion
and triggers a memory Th1 response in tumor-bearing mice


The long-lasting clinical response by lymphoma patients to anti-CD20
treatment has been attributed to a vaccinal-type effect through the
induction of an anti-tumor adaptive immunity. Using a model where C57Bl/6
mice were injected intravenously with EL4 tumor cells expressing human
CD20, we previously showed that CD4 cells are central to the host
protection induced by anti-CD20 therapy. Here, we have first shown that
the transfer of highly purified CD4+ T cells induces a long-term
protection, demonstrating that this T-cell subset plays indeed a key role
in the induction of an adaptive memory response. In addition, CD4+
effector memory T cells were detected in surviving animals. We have then
analyzed the changes occurring in various T cell subsets in tumor-bearing
animals receiving anti-CD20 treatment. On the one hand, untreated animals
exhibited a large expansion of CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs),
with reduced survival. Depletion of these cells using anti-CD25 injection
led to long-term survival, indicating that a Treg-dependent
immuno-suppressive environment is established after tumor injection in
this model. On the other hand, anti-CD20 therapy, that induces a
long-lasting protection, reversed the initial expansion of Tregs one week
after the end of anti-CD20 treatment, and was accompanied by a marked
increase in the number of Th1 cells. Concomitantly, an increase in the
serum levels of interleukin-12 was observed, as well as an increased in
the number of activated myeloid dendritic cells producing this cytokine.
Moreover, a strong decrease in the survival was observed when Natural
Killer cells were depleted using anti-asialo GM1 antibodies or following
neutralization of interferon-. Thus, the host protection elicited by
anti-CD20 treatment involves a network of cells from both innate and
adaptive immunity that both are needed for long-term protection. In
conclusion, our work demonstrates that anti-CD20 therapy promotes a
strong anti-tumor adaptive immunity, opposes Treg expansion, and that a
pro-tumor immune contexture shaped by the presence of growing tumor cells
can be reversed by antibody treatment.

