Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of continuous combined oral contraceptives on mouse
mammary gland structure and tumor progression


The breast goes through cycles of cell growth, differentiation and
regression with every estrous/menstrual cycle, driven by hormonal
stimulation followed by hormone withdrawal. The number of cycles over a
lifetime is positively associated with breast cancer risk. This increased
risk may be the result of hormone-stimulated epithelial growth,
inflammatory tissue remodeling processes during hormone withdrawal, or
both. The use of cyclic combined oral contraceptives (cyclic COC), which
incorporates a hormone withdrawal period in each cycle, has been
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, particularly in
African American women, current COC users, and women who initiated COC
use early in life. In contrast, the effect of extended-use (i.e.,
continuous) COC on breast cancer risk has not been evaluated. The purpose
of the current study was to test the hypothesis that continuous exposure
to COC is not associated with the increased risk observed with cyclic
COC, and may even provide protection against breast cancer, by removal of
the hormone withdrawal phase. Starting at day 50 of age (to mimic COC
exposure in young women), BALB/C mice were fed liquid diets +/-
supplementation with 0.0041 mg/kg ethinyl estradiol and 0.0185 mg/kg
levonorgestrel (dose calculated by surface area conversion from the human
COC dose of 20 g ethinyl estradiol and 90 g levonorgestrel). After 28
days, 10 mice per group were sacrificed and mammary glands dissected for
whole mount and histologic analysis. An additional 20 mice per group were
injected orthotopically with 10e5 syngeneic TM2H mammary epithelial tumor
cells, and tracked for tumor latency, growth and tumor burden. The
extended COC group showed 65% increase in mammary gland epithelial
density compared to control. However, this increased epithelial density
was associated with an increased alveolar branching and a decrease in
carcinogen-sensitive terminal end buds. These results suggest that short
term exposure to continuous COC can induce a more differentiated state in
nonparous mouse mammary glands. In mice transplanted with tumor cells,
the continuous COC group showed significantly increased tumor latency and
decreased tumor burden, compared to controls. These results demonstrate
that continuous COC administration, despite the higher levels of hormone
exposure, can render the mouse mammary gland less susceptible to the
growth of transplanted tumor cells. Mechanistic studies are ongoing.

