Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro & in vivo analysis of indocyanine green-labeled
panitumumab for optical imaging: a cautionary tale


Indocyanine green (ICG), the only clinically approved near-infrared
fluorophore, is attractive to researchers for the development of targeted
optical imaging agents when conjugated to monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) or
their fragments. However, ICG is amphiphilic and readily facilitates
aggregation of mAb that is not easily separable. Complications
originating from this behavior are frequently overlooked by researchers.
This study, for the first time, examines the chemical and biological
characteristics of an ICG-labeled mAb (panitumumab). Reverse-phase HPLC
and native polyacrylamide gel analysis indicated that the ICG-sulfo-OSu
itself, the routinely used commercial product, forms aggregates in
aqueous buffers. Size-exclusion HPLC analysis of the conjugation
reactions performed at molar ratios of dye to mAb of 5, 10, or 20,
indicated the percentages of ICG-panitumumab conjugate were 50, 30, 15,
respectively with the remainder (30%, 50%, 60%, respectively) consisting
of aggregates (>150 kDa). The aggregates were successfully separated from
the conjugated product and were found to be composed of ICG dye with 1 to
14 panitumumab units. The purified ICG-panitumumab products were analyzed
by native- and SDS-PAGE followed by optical imaging. As evidenced by
SDS-PAGE, free ICG remained associated with the purified ICG-panitumumab
products, in increasing amounts with the increasing molar ratio of dye in
the reaction. A competitive radioimmunoassay demonstrated that the
targeting moiety of the ICG-mAb conjugates was conserved. Target-specific
uptake of the purified bioconjugates was observed with excellent
fluorescent intensity in in vitro and in vivo studies. In summary, the
preparation of well-defined bioconjugate products labeled with commercial
ICG-sulfo-OSu dye is not a simple process and controlling the conjugation
reaction ratio and conditions is crucial. Furthermore, purification and
characterization of the products is necessitated prior to in vivo optical
imaging of tumors. Preliminary data indicate that the degree of aggregate
formation during the conjugation reaction with ICG-sulfo-OSu is also
dependent on the targeting vehicle, i.e., mAb, hence the need to
empirically determine the conjugation conditions for each targeting
vector. Using validated and characterized bioconjugate products should
facilitate the development of clinically viable and reproducible
ICG-conjugated mAb for optical imaging applications. The ability of SDS
to dissociate the noncovalently bond ICG provides promise that this
property can be exploited in the development of a purification scheme for
ICG-conjugates.

