Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mistletoe extract inhibits the proliferation of human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells by induction of apoptosis and
downregulation of c-MYC


Mistletoe extracts including Viscum Fraxini (extract of mistletoe growing
on ash trees) have been used extensively in European medical clinics to
treat various cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Results
from a phase II clinical trial have shown that subcutaneous
administration of Fraxini leads to either complete or partial response in
20% of chemo-nave patients with HCC. However, how mistletoe extract
exerts its antitumor activity in HCC is largely unknown. We examined the
effect of Fraxini on the growth of human HCC Hep3B and HepG2 cells by MTT
assay, apoptosis by PI and Annexin V staining and molecular mechanisms
using Reverse Phase Proteomic Array (RPPA). All three mistletoe extracts,
Fraxini, Iscador Q and M (growing on oak and maple trees, respectively),
exerted relatively strong antiproliferative activity in the Hep3B cells,
with IC50 values at 0.5, 6.49, and 5.7 g/ml, respectively. A slightly
weaker anticancer effect was observed in the HepG2 cells treated with the
above three extracts. The antiproliferative effect of Fraxini was almost
10 and 6 times stronger than that of Iscador M and Iscador Q,
respectively, in both Hep3B and HepG2 cells. Intriguingly, the
water-soluble fraction of Fraxini exerted similar anticancer activity as
Fraxini, but no inhibitory effect of lipid soluble fraction of Fraxini
was observed. Treatment with Fraxini induced Hep3B cells to undergo
apoptotic cell death, evidenced by the increased number (5-fold) of
subG1/G0 phase cells in the Fraxini-treated (5 g/ml) Hep3B cells than in
the control cells and increased apoptotic cell population (by Annexin V
staining). Additionally, notable ultrastructural changes i.e. extremely
condensed mitochondria in perinuclear positions by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), were observed in Fraxini-treated (10 g/ml) Hep3B cells
compared to control treated cells. Proteomic array analysis suggested
that Fraxini dose-dependently inhibited expression of Bcl-xl, BCl-2, Bim,
and pRB proteins while increased cleaved caspase 7 and 8 as well as CHEK
1 and 2, suggesting that the apoptotic effect of Fraxini was mediated
through regulation of BCL-2 family proteins and caspase activation, which
correlated with the mitochondrial changes observed in the TEM study.
Strikingly, c-Myc protein was strongly downregulated in a dose dependent
fashion in the Hep3B cells treated with Fraxini (> 84% at 5 g/ml), as
examined by both RPPA and Western blotting, suggesting that the c-Myc
protein could be an important target for Fraxini-elicited anticancer
activity in HCC. Given that HCC is one of the few cancers whose death
rate nearly equals its incidence and c-Myc is required for hepatocyte
proliferation and liver tumorigenesis, Fraxini could have great potential
in HCC treatment and therefore warrants further investigation.

