Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matriptase-mediated proteolytic regulation of biological activity
and spatial distribution of PDGF-D


The oncogenic roles of platelet-derived growth factor D (PDGF-D) and its
proteolytic activator, matriptase, have been strongly implicated in human
prostate cancer. The latent full-length PDGF-D consists of N-terminal CUB
domain, C-terminal growth factor domain, and hinge region in between.
Matriptase processes the full-length PDGF-D dimer (FL-D) into PDGF-D
growth factor domain dimer (GFD-D) in a step-wise manner, involving
generation of hemidimer (HD), which is an intermediate product containing
one full-length PDGF-D subunit and one growth factor domain subunit. In
this study, we showed that HD acts as a dominant-negative ligand of
PDGF/PDGFR signaling in fibroblasts whereas it has its own unique
function in pre-osteoclasts. The regulation of PDGF-D's activity by
matriptase is biphasic as demonstrated by the event that active PDGF-D
GFD-D can be further cleaved into a smaller and yet inactive form if the
enzymatic action of matriptase persists. By mutagenesis analyses, we
identified amino acid residues R340R341GR343A at the C-terminus of PDGF-D
growth factor domain to be the matriptase cleavage site through which
PDGF-D is inactivated. Based on the sequence analysis in comparison with
the published crystal structure of PDGF-B, we suggest that R340R341GR343A
is within the loop III of PDGF-D growth factor domain, a critical domain
for its binding to the PDGF receptor. When the positively charged
arginine residues of R340R341GR343A were mutated to alanine residues,
PDGF-D GFD-D lost its biological activity in activating -PDGFR. Further,
we found that proteolytic processing of latent PDGF-D to remove CUB
domain and hinge region is tightly linked with the storage of PDGF-D
GFD-D within extracellular matrix (ECM) in vitro. These results indicate
the increased affinity to the ECM from FL-D, HD, to GFD-D and also
suggest that CUB domain and hinge region of PDGF-D prevent the
sequestration of PDGF-D in ECM. Interestingly, the matriptase cleavage
site R340R341GR343A within the growth factor domain is also critical for
PDGF-D association with ECM. Taken together, the present study reports
structural elements crucial to the biologically function of PDGF-D and
its association with ECM, suggesting that proteolytic processing is a
crucial mechanism for PDGF-D to establish its tissue gradient.

