Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association between seasonality, vitamin D and calcium intake
and mammographic density in Norwegian postmenopausal women


Background:Mammographic density (MD) is one of the strongest known breast
cancer risk factors. The role of vitamin D in breast cancer etiology is
unclear. The evidence of an association between Vitamin D and MD is
limited and inconsistent, as is the seasonal variation of MD. We
evaluated the association between MD and season/month the mammogram was
obtained, as well as vitamin D intake, energy and calcium intake in a
population of women from Norway, a country with limited sunlight exposure
for a large part of the year.Methods:We studied 2662 postmenopausal women
aged 50-69 who participated in the Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening
Program (NBCSP) in 2004 or 2006/07. Women completed risk factor and food
frequency questionnaires (FFQ). Vitamin D and calcium intake was assessed
with and without taking supplements into consideration. Month of
mammogram was recorded from the mammogram. MD was assessed using a
computer assisted method (Madena, University of Southern California). We
used linear regression to determine the association between month of
mammogram and MD, as well as vitamin D and calcium intake (assessed from
the FFQ) and MD, adjusting for age, education, body mass index (BMI),
parity and postmenopausal estrogen and progestin therapy. We also
examined the association between vitamin D, calcium and MD by season
(month) the mammogram was obtained.Results:Age, BMI and parity were
inversely associated with MD, while education and postmenopausal estrogen
and progestin therapy were positively associated\ with MD. There was no
association between quartiles of vitamin D or calcium intake and MD,
regardless of whether the nutrients were estimated with our without
supplements. We found no association between season (month) and MD. There
was no evidence for an inverse association between vitamin D intake and
MD when women were stratified by the month the mammogram was
obtained.Conclusion:Our results provide no support for a protective
effect of dietary vitamin D intake against increased MD. We found no
evidence that season or month the mammogram was obtained, was associated
with MD.

