Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The EGFR pathway as the Achilles heel for human
papillomavirus-induced tumors: EGFR/MAPK pathway inhibitors exhibit
antiviral activities and limit tumor growth in vivo


Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are etiological agents of many anogenital
and oropharyngeal cancers. HPV[+] oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas
(OPSCCs) typically respond more favorably to current treatment regimens
(including radiotherapy combined with cisplatin or cetuximab, an EGFR
monoclonal antibody), than do HPV-negative OPSCCs. The discrepancy in
patient outcomes has been attributed, in part, to substantially fewer
genetic mutations present in HPV[+] cancers. Paradoxically, an increasing
body of literature notes lower EGFR expression in HPV[+] vs. HPV[-]
OPSCC. Yet, HPV oncoproteins E5, E6 and E7 each work to increase EGFR
signaling, and MAPK-regulated AP-1 transcription factors direct HPV early
gene expression. The goal of this work is to test the hypothesis that
upon infection, HPV establishes a feed-forward loop with the EGFR pathway
to drive viral gene expression independent of EGFR levels. We modeled
early neoplasia with cell lines maintaining episomal HPV16 genomes, and
cancers using SCC lines with integrated HPV16 genomes. Cells treated with
EGF, EGFR inhibitors (cetuximab, erlotinib), or MEK antagonists (PD98059,
trametinib) were evaluated for signaling and viral responses. Consistent
with our hypothesis, we found increased EGF-dependent EGFR activation
levels in HPV[+] cell lines, as well as heightened MEK1/2 activity
independent of EGFR activation in HPV[+] cell lines compared to
uninfected cells. RT-qPCR revealed that HPV oncogene transcription was
enhanced by EGFR activation, whereas EGFR and MEK inhibitors led to
significant declines in HPV transcription. In cells with episomal HPV
genomes, lower viral genome levels accompanied inhibitor-reduced viral
transcription. These data suggest EGFR/MAPK pathway interference leads to
anti-viral affects, which are expected to restore p53 and pRb function
and prevent tumorigenesis in vivo. As predicted, cell proliferation and
tumor growth in NOD/SCID-gamma mouse HPV[+] SCC xenografts were
significantly reduced with EGFR and MEK inhibitors. Experiments are
underway to quantify the restored function of p53 and pRb in drug-treated
cells and determine if these cells become sensitized to lower doses of
cisplatin or radiation. In summary, our results reveal HPV infection
creates a feed-forward loop with the EGFR/MAPK proliferation pathway, and
EGFR and MEK antagonists have anti-viral effects, including reduction in
the E6 and E7 oncoproteins needed to maintain the transformed phenotype
in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, the ability of the drugs to reduce
episomal viral genome levels suggests a potential curative effect if
administered prior to viral genome integration. Lastly, this work reveals
an anti-viral molecular mechanism which may account for the favorable
outcomes of patients with HPV[+] OPSCC treated with
cetuximab-radiotherapy.

