Meeting: 2014 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engagement of myelomonocytic siglecs by tumor-associated ligands
modulates innate immune responses to cancer


Sialic acids are dominant glycans on vertebrate cell surfaces, mediating
roles as diverse as influenza infection, leukocyte trafficking and neural
plasticity. It has long been known that malignant cells upregulate sialic
acids, but few reasons for this have so far been elucidated. In
apparently unrelated work, we have recently found that certain pathogenic
bacteria coat themselves with sialic acids, thereby dampening innate
immune responses, via engagement of inhibitory Siglecs (sialic acid
binding Ig-like lectins). We therefore hypothesized that hypersialylated
carcinoma cells might similarly engage Siglecs and modulate immune cell
function. Confirming this hypothesis, we now have the first demonstration
of the involvement of Siglecs in cancer progression in vivo.Siglec-9 is
the most abundant inhibitory Siglec on human neutrophils and
monocytes/macrophages. We first demonstrate that ligands for Siglec-9 are
strongly upregulated in human carcinomas. We further provide evidence
that ligands on carcinoma cells can inhibit neutrophil activation and
killing of tumor cells by neutrophils. We then show that mice lacking
Siglec-E (the murine functional equivalent of Siglec-9) have an increased
immunosurveillance in autochthonous and transplantation models, which
could be reversed by transgenic expression of Siglec-9 in myelomonocytic
cells. Studies of later phases of tumor progression however showed that
Siglec-E/-9 inhibits polarization of M2 macrophages and therefore impairs
angiogenesis and tumor growth. In keeping with this dualistic role of
myelomonocytic Siglecs during different phases of cancer progression,
survival of non-small cell lung cancer patients with a polymorphism that
reduced ligand binding to Siglec-9 had initially an improved survival,
suggesting an increased immunosurveillance, but this effect was lost
during longer followup.Our results identify inhibitory CD33-related
myelomonocytic Siglecs as important players in cancer biology and as
potential targets for immunomodulatory therapy. We show that
hypersialylated carcinoma cells modulate the innate immune response by
engaging Siglec-9 and inhibit either immunosurveillance or cancer-related
inflammation. Our data also exemplify the dualistic role of innate immune
cells and their receptors in cancer progression depending on the context
and the microenvironment, i.e., growth control by immunosurveillance or
growth support by cancer-related inflammation.

