Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression and functional impact of the alternatively
spliced transcripts of Extracellular matrix protein 1 in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has an especially
high incidence in China, with five-year survival rates in Hong Kong being
of 14%. An oligonucleotide microarray was utilized to identify
differentially-expressed genes in ESCC using 31 pairs of matched
normal/tumor samples from Hong Kong and Henan, China. Extracellular
matrix protein 1 (ECM1) was among the top down-regulated genes,
indicating a potential tumor-suppressive role. Public cDNA microarray
data also shows significant down-regulation of ECM1 expression in ESCC.
Interestingly, this gene has been extensively studied in breast cancer
and thyroid cancer for its oncogenic role. There are three
alternatively-spliced variants of ECM1. Therefore, this gene was selected
for further variant expression and functional analysis in ESCC.Results:
RNA sequencing analysis of matched normal/ESCC samples showed that ECM1b
(NM_022664) is the dominant expressed variant in esophagus, followed by
ECM1a (NM_004425). In tumor samples, the expression of ECM1a is
down-regulated and that of ECM1b is down-regulated or lost, as compared
to normal counterparts. Expression of ECM1c (NM_001202858) is not
detected in either normal or tumor samples. Quantitative PCR using
variant-specific primer sets confirms the findings of microarray and RNA
sequencing analyses. When re-expressed in ESCC cell lines after
lentiviral transduction, ECM1b expression shows a trend of tumor
suppression in the orthotopic ESCC mouse tumorigenicity model; ECM1a
shows no tumor-suppressive effect in either. ECM1b expression also shows
a metastasis inhibitory effect in a tail vein experimental metastasis
model. Immunohistochemical staining shows E-cadherin up-regulation in
orthotopic tumors re-expressing ECM1b.Conclusions: These results suggest
differential roles of variants of ECM1 in ESCC. Unlike the cases in other
types of cancer, both expression of ECM1a and ECM1b is down-regulated in
ESCC compared to normal esophageal tissues. ECM1b represents the
dominantly expressed variants in esophagus epithelium, and its expression
is highly reduced in esophageal carcinoma. ECM1b plays a potential
suppressive role in tumorigenesis and metastasis.Acknowledgement: We
acknowledge the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region for funding support (HKU 774413M to M.L.L).

