Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of snail in cancer-bone microenvironment interactions


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer death in
American men and African Americans are twice as likely to get PCa as
their Caucasian counterparts. As with most forms of cancer, PCa patients
mortality is mainly attributed to complications caused by metastasis of
the disease to organs critical for survival such as bone. As such, it is
important to understand cancer-bone microenvironment interactions in
order to develop therapeutics that will slow or halt the process of
cancer metastasis. It is also known that African Americans have a higher
bone mineral density compared to any other race. Snail1 is a zinc-finger
transcription factor that induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
which is associated with cell migration and metastasis in cancer cells.
In preliminary studies, cancer cells co-cultured with bovine bone discs
led to increased calcium release that was higher in cancer cells
overexpressing Snail, as well as in bone discs of higher density. We
hypothesized that cancer cell-bone interactions would promote higher
calcium release from bone by cancer cells overexpressing Snail, which
would lead to increased paracrine cell migration. For this study, we
utilized prostate (ARCaP) or breast (MCF-7) cancer cells stably
overexpressing Snail as well as prostate (C4-2) cancer cells with stable
Snail knockdown. Cancer cells were co-cultured with bovine bone disc or
Hydroxyapatite (HA; inorganic component of bone) of different densities
to represent the African American vs Caucasian bone ratio. The
conditioned media was then used for to assay calcium levels, test
paracrine cell viability and migration assays using C4-2 parental cells.
We observed that calcium levels were elevated in conditioned media from
cancer cell-bone co-cultures, compared to media alone or media plus bone,
and this could be antagonized by EGTA, a calcium chelator. It was
increased with higher bone density as well as with bone co-cultured with
MCF-7-Snail, ARCaP-Snail and C4-2 cancer cells as compared to MCF-7 Neo,
ARCaP-Neo or C4-2 with Snail knockdown. When we utilized the conditioned
media for a paracrine cell viability assay, there was no significant
differences. However, C4-2 cancer-bone co-culture conditioned media
increased paracrine cell migration which was decreased by Snail knockdown
as well as lower bone density. Hence Snail expressing PCa cells
co-cultured with HA led to increased paracrine cell migration. We are
currently studying the signaling mechanism(s) involved in this
cancer-bone interactions. In conclusion, our study shows that Snail can
mediate cancer-bone microenvironment interactions that can possibly
promote increased cell migration towards bone of high mineral density
such as is found in African Americans.GRANT SUPPORT: 1P20MD002285

