Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug resistance gene expression pathways in primary refractory
breast cancer


Purpose/Objective:Breast cancer is a collection of diseases with distinct
molecular subtypes with differing prognoses. Clinically, there is a group
of therapy resistant breast cancers characterized by resistance to
conventional chemo- and radiotherapy with short overall survival and poor
prognosis, which we termed primary refractory breast cancer (PRBC). We
hypothesized that PRBC is characterized by specific genomic changes that
may contribute to therapy resistance. The aim of this study was to
identify changes in gene expression profiles of PRBC compared to triple
negative (TNBC) and ER+/-PR positive (HR) breast cancer
cohorts.Methods:PRBC was defined as patients with an initial diagnosis of
Stage I-III breast cancer who either I) developed metastatic disease
within 6 months of completing treatment or II) died of breast cancer
within two years of initial diagnosis. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) tissue was obtained under an IRB approved protocol 01-13-43c. RNA
was extracted from macro-dissected FFPE tumor tissue. Gene expression
profiling was performed with Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 and
gene signatures were analyzed using a single sample gene set enrichment
methodology. Gene signatures of PRBC patients were compared to signatures
of two TNBC and HR cohorts with gene expression data generated by
identical methodology.Results:A total of nineteen samples from eight
patients had sufficient tumor material to obtain RNA. The median age at
diagnosis was 44.3 years, 62.5% were triple negative. At initial
diagnosis the stage ranged from IA to IIIC. Sixty-three percent received
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The median time to relapse was 8.4 months and
median time to death 1.7 years. Genomic analysis identified highly
significant (pPurpose/Objective:Breast cancer is a collection of diseases
with distinct molecular subtypes with differing prognoses. Clinically,
there is a group of therapy resistant breast cancers characterized by
resistance to conventional chemo- and radiotherapy with short overall
survival and poor prognosis, which we termed primary refractory breast
cancer (PRBC). We hypothesized that PRBC is characterized by specific
genomic changes that may contribute to therapy resistance. The aim of
this study was to identify changes in gene expression profiles of PRBC
compared to triple negative (TNBC) and ER+/-PR positive (HR) breast
cancer cohorts.Methods:PRBC was defined as patients with an initial
diagnosis of Stage I-III breast cancer who either I) developed metastatic
disease within 6 months of completing treatment or II) died of breast
cancer within two years of initial diagnosis. Formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue was obtained under an IRB approved
protocol 01-13-43c. RNA was extracted from macro-dissected FFPE tumor
tissue. Gene expression profiling was performed with Affymetrix Human
Transcriptome Array 2.0 and gene signatures were analyzed using a single
sample gene set enrichment methodology. Gene signatures of PRBC patients
were compared to signatures of two TNBC and HR cohorts with gene
expression data generated by identical methodology.Results:A total of
nineteen samples from eight patients had sufficient tumor material to
obtain RNA. The median age at diagnosis was 44.3 years, 62.5% were triple
negative. At initial diagnosis the stage ranged from IA to IIIC.
Sixty-three percent received neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The median time to
relapse was 8.4 months and median time to death 1.7 years. Genomic
analysis identified highly significant (p<10-6) increased expression of
ABC transporters, hypoxia, interferon, DNA repair and AKT signatures
compared to control cohorts.Conclusions:PRBC is characterized by
significant upregulation of multiple gene expression signatures important
in drug resistance including ABC transporters, hypoxia, AKT and DNA
repair pathways. Confirmation of these results would allow the
development of alternative treatment strategies for PRBC to help improve
the devastatingly poor prognosis of this subgroup of patients.

