Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of SETD family genes in breast cancer patients


Epigenetic alterations have recently been recognized to play an important
role in the progression of many tumor types. Protein methyltrasferases
are among the most relevant epigenetic effectors. Dysregulation in the
expression or activity of these enzymes is among the major epigenetic
alterations involved in carcinogenesis. Methyltransferases of the SETD
family share a SET domain which is involved in the methylation of lysine
residues on histones and non-histone proteins. So far, little is known
about the relation of SETD family genes with mammary carcinogenesis. In
the present study we evaluated the relative expression of 10 SETD family
genes in 18 breast tumor samples and non-tumor breast tissues from
patients with breast cancer by real time qPCR. The comparative expression
profile of each gene was correlated with the most relevant
clinicopathologic prognostic information available from patients. We
found a significant increase in the expression of SETMAR in tumor samples
compared with the normal breast tissues. In addition, triple negative
tumor subtype (n = 7), when compared with a pool of normal tissue samples
(n = 13) presented an increased relative expression of SETMAR.
Interestingly, SETD8 was 10 times overexpressed when the angiolymphatic
invasion (n = 8) was present compared to the absence of this feature (n =
10). Patients with strong axillary tumor burden defined as the presence
of at least 10 axillary lymph nodes with cancer (n = 6), showed an
increased relative expression of SETD5 and SETD8 genes when compared to
the absence of this feature (n = 12). Evaluating the expression on paired
samples (normal tissue and tumor tissue from the same patient (n = 7), we
observed an increased relative expression of SETD1B. Also in the paired
samples, we found a strong correlation among the expression of the genes
SETD1B, SETD5, SETD8 and SETMAR in tumor samples with no correlation in
normal tissues. Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis revealed a
stronger expression of SETD5 and SETMAR in carcinomas in situ when
compared to normal tissues and invasive tumors. Taken together, these
data points to a likely role of SETMAR and SETD1B genes in mammary
carcinogenesis, with relevant clinical implications and with the possible
involvement of SETD5 and SETD8 genes in more advanced stages of the
disease. The correlation on the expression of these genes with relevant
clinical prognostic factors in breast cancer opens the way to exploit
them not only as therapeutic targets, but also as new prognostic
markers.Keywords: SETD gene family, expression profile, breast cancer

