Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPT1A-mediated lipid catabolism modulates growth, AR expression
and hypoxia survival of prostate cancer


Background: Androgen deprivation results in hypoxia in prostate cancer
(PCa) cells and subsequently enhances the transcriptional activity of AR
leading to more aggressive tumors. Concomitant with hypoxia, a
significant accumulation of lipids has been observed but its significance
remains unclear. Recent data indicate that lipid oxidation via carnitine
palmitoyltransferase (CPT1) results in decreased growth and apoptosis,
underscoring the role of lipid as a fuel for PCa growth. Since androgen
deprivation ultimately increases the activity of AR, we hypothesized that
dual targeting AR and lipid catabolism axes represents an attractive
therapeutic approach.Methods: To address the role of lipid use by PCa
cells we have used two experimental approaches that lead to lipid
accumulation: 1- Use of clinically relevant drugs etomoxir and
ranolazine: Etomoxir works by inhibiting CPT1, the rate-limiting step in
fat oxidation. Ranolazine is FDA-approved for angina and blocks lipid
oxidation in the mitochondria. 2- Hypoxia exposure followed by
re-oxygenation to mimic the dynamics of the tumor environment and induce
lipid accumulation. Enzalutamide was used by itself or in combination
with etomoxir to treat PCa cells, as well as CPT1-edited cells generated
in our lab. Drug effects on metabolism and AR expression were studied by
growth assays, LCMS, westerns, qRTPCR, and mouse xenograft
studies.Results: CPT1 is abundant in androgen-sensitive cells and tumors.
Treatment with etomoxir alone significantly decreased cell viability and
AR, including the ARv7 variant. Combinatorial treatment with enzalutamide
synergistically enhanced this effect on viability. Systemic treatment
with ranolazine alone in nude mice bearing enzalutamide-resistant cells
resulted in decreased xenograft growth over 21 days, underscoring the
therapeutic potential of blocking lipid catabolism to decrease CRPC tumor
growth. Lipids accumulated under hypoxia (especially arachidonic acid)
were used for growth following re-oxygenation. Pharmacologic inhibition
of lipid use or CPT1-knockdown significantly compromised this growth
following re-oxygenation, underscoring the role of lipids in supporting
aggressive growth. This was observed in sensitive and CRPC
models.Conclusions: Lipid accumulation and oxidation is a cyclical
phenomenon that modulates AR content and PCa growth. Combination of fat
burning inhibitors and enzalutamide may offer a novel approach to anti-AR
resistance in PCa, requiring less anti-androgen for more effective
therapy.

