Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Platelet microparticles infiltrating solid tumors transfer miRNAs
and modulate tumor angiogenesis and growth


Platelet-derived microparticles are associated with enhancement of
metastasis and poor cancer outcomes. Platelet microparticles can transfer
platelet microRNAs (miRNAs) to vascular cells upon co-incubation in
vitro, but the contributions of platelet microparticles and miRNAs to
tumor progression are still poorly understood. Tumor vasculature is
highly permeable, allowing the possibility of platelet
microparticle-tumor cell interaction in primary solid tumors. Here we
show that platelet microparticles infiltrate solid tumors in humans and
mice, attach to tumor cells, and transfer platelet-derived RNA, including
miRNAs, to tumor cells in vivo as well as in vitro. MiR-24 was a major
species in this transfer. We identified RNA targets of platelet-derived
miR-24 in lung carcinoma cells, which included mt-Nd2, a mitochondrial
mRNA which lacks a 3-UTR, and Snora75, a non-coding small nucleolar RNA.
These RNAs were depleted in platelet microparticle-treated tumor cells,
resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction and tumor cell growth inhibition,
in a miR-24-dependent manner. Blockade of miR-24 in tumor cells
accelerated tumor growth in vivo, and prevented tumor growth inhibition
by platelet microparticle transfusion. Thus, platelet microparticles
inhibit lung carcinoma cell proliferation and solid tumor growth via
transfer of miR-24. However, global depletion of platelet miRNAs by
platelet-specific deletion of Dicer1 inhibited tumor angiogenesis,
platelet microparticle infiltration, and delayed tumor growth in mice.
Thus, platelet-derived miRNAs transfer in vivo to tumor cells in solid
tumors via microparticles, regulate tumor cell gene expression, and
modulate tumor progression, whereas platelet miRNAs promote tumor
angiogenesis. These findings shed novel insight onto mechanisms of
horizontal gene transfer and add multiple layers to the regulatory roles
of miRNAs and platelet microparticles in tumor progression.

