Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum caffeine metabolites and prostate cancer risk in the ATBC
Study


Background: Etiologic studies of prostate cancer have shown inconsistent
associations with coffee consumption. We have previously shown increased
risk with number of cups/day, with the strongest association for men
consuming 4+ cups/day. The association was evident in the first 10 years
of cohort follow-up, however, suggesting possible reverse causality. We
conducted a serum metabolomic profiling study to biochemically
re-evaluate our coffee findings and determine whether caffeine
metabolites are similarly associated with prostate cancer risk.Methods: A
prospective, nested case-control analysis within the Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study cohort was conducted using
200 cases and 200 controls matched on age and date of baseline fasting
serum collection. Sera were analyzed using ultrahigh performance liquid
chromatography/mass spectroscopy (LC-MS) and gas chromatography/mass
spectroscopy (GS-MS) (Metabolon, Inc.) which identified 626 known
compounds, including 13 caffeine-related metabolites. Each metabolite was
assessed using conditional logistic regression that estimated odds ratios
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of prostate cancer associated with
a one standard deviation (1-S.D.) increment in metabolite signal
strength. The analysis was also stratified by median time from baseline
blood draw to prostate cancer diagnosis (Background: Etiologic studies of
prostate cancer have shown inconsistent associations with coffee
consumption. We have previously shown increased risk with number of
cups/day, with the strongest association for men consuming 4+ cups/day.
The association was evident in the first 10 years of cohort follow-up,
however, suggesting possible reverse causality. We conducted a serum
metabolomic profiling study to biochemically re-evaluate our coffee
findings and determine whether caffeine metabolites are similarly
associated with prostate cancer risk.Methods: A prospective, nested
case-control analysis within the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study cohort was conducted using 200 cases and 200
controls matched on age and date of baseline fasting serum collection.
Sera were analyzed using ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography/mass
spectroscopy (LC-MS) and gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GS-MS)
(Metabolon, Inc.) which identified 626 known compounds, including 13
caffeine-related metabolites. Each metabolite was assessed using
conditional logistic regression that estimated odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) of prostate cancer associated with a one
standard deviation (1-S.D.) increment in metabolite signal strength. The
analysis was also stratified by median time from baseline blood draw to
prostate cancer diagnosis (<10 years vs. 10 years).Results: Overall,
caffeine metabolite associations with prostate cancer risk showed null
results (e.g., caffeine OR 1.02, 95% CI 0.84-1.24, p = 0.82; paraxanthine
OR 0.99, 95% CI 0.83-1.20, p = 0.96). Similar to our findings for coffee
consumption, caffeine metabolites were positively associated with
prostate cancer risk for men diagnosed within 10 years of blood
collection. Theobromine and 1,7-dimethylurate showed the strongest
signals (respectively, OR 1.69, 95% CI 1.13-2.54, p = 0.01; OR 1.63, 95%
CI 1.14-2.32, p = 0.01). By contrast, in men diagnosed at least 10 years
from baseline, caffeine metabolites were non-significantly inversely
related to risk; e.g., 5-acetylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil (AFMU),
OR 0.77, 95% CI 0.56-1.06, p = 0.10). Caffeine metabolites were
positively correlated with both caffeine and coffee (median correlation
coefficients, 0.78 and 0.20, respectively). Including coffee in the
metabolite risk models led to little or no attenuation of the
associations in either the early or later 10 year observation
periods.Conclusions: In this prospective analysis, serum caffeine
metabolites were positively associated with risk of prostate cancer in
men diagnosed within 10 years of blood collection. The findings provide
biochemical corroboration of our previous findings for a positive
coffee-prostate cancer risk association, and appear to support the
possibility of reverse causality; i.e., men with subclinical tumors may
increase their coffee consumption as a result of their underlying disease

