Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering of hairpin loop enhances the loading of endogenously
expressed pre-miRNA into extracellular vesicles


Extracellular vesicles (EVs) hold tremendous potential as drug delivery
carriers for therapeutic nucleic acids such as microRNA (miRNA) due to
their natural composition and ability to be engineered to contain
targeting peptides on their surface. We have engineered HEK293T cells to
secrete EVs by overexpressing Lamp-2A protein containing liver cancer
targeting peptide PC94 and therapeutic pre-miR-199. The novel feature of
this system is that both the cargo and the microvesicles are synthesized
by the same cells, thus abrogating the need for loading synthetic
oligonucleotides into EVs. The pre-miR-199a loop region was modified such
that it resembled the HIV-1 transactivation response (TAR) RNA which was
engineered into the Lamp2A intron. Correct splicing of the intron portion
and processing of the mature miRNA was evaluated after its transfection
into HEK293T cells. Computational modeling was used to study the
interaction between the modified pre-miR-199a loop (TAR RNA) and the TAT
peptide. This study exhibited a stable interaction between the two and
also showed that the peptide is not bound to the stem portion of the RNA
loop, permitting the insertion of any pre-miRNA sequence. EMSA gel shift,
rDICER processing and luciferase assays were performed to study the
correct binding, processing and functionality of the modified sequence.
These results show that the modified loop is actively involved in binding
with the TAT peptide and it enables the modified miRNA to be loaded in
the microvesicles. In an effort to assess the loading of the therapeutic
miR-199a-3p relative to other endogenous miRNAs contained within the EVs,
we performed small RNA sequencing on RNA isolated from both the producing
cells and purified EVs. Triplicate samples of RNA isolated from 3
different HEK293T producing cells were sequenced: wild type HEK293T and
those stably transfected with the empty vector (empty) or the TAT/TAR
pre-miR-199a (full). The expression of the miRNAs were ranked from the
RNA sequenced in both the cells and EVs. Producing cells engineered to
express miR-199a-3p containing the TAT/TAR loading motif ranked third
when comparing the ratio of miRNAs loaded in the EVs from the full to
empty cells. Interestingly, certain mature miRNAs were preferentially
loaded into the EVs, including miR-451a, miR-122 and miR-1246. As
reported by Villarroya-Beltri, et al., (Nature Comm., 2013) in human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells, all three mature miRNAs contained 4
nucleotide exo motifs in their 3 end that likely caused preferential
loading into HEK293T EVs. Our data demonstrate that stably transfecting
HEK293T cells with vectors expressing therapeutic miRNAs dramatically
increases their loading into EVs. These mature miRNAs may be further
engineered to contain exo motifs that could conceivably enhance their
loading into EV drug carrier systems.

