Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide transcriptome analysis reveals the distinct gene
expression profiles and specific biological effects of fluorescent
polyamides, HxIP and azaHxPI


DNA-binding polyamides target predetermined sequences to inhibit specific
transcription factor-DNA interactions and modulate gene expression.
Inherently non-genotoxic, these non-covalent binding small molecules
exert their biological activity without inflicting DNA damage and provide
the basis for potentially less toxic DNA-targeting anticancer
therapeutics. However, the genome-wide specificity of polyamide binding
remains an outstanding issue in delivering the desired biological
response without inducing widespread off-target effects.In this study, we
used RNA-seq transcriptome analysis to assess the global effects of
fluorescent polyamides HxIP and azaHxPI, having previously shown that
they bind with high affinity and selectivity to their respective target
DNA sequences 5-WWCGWW-3 and 5-WCGCGW-3 (W = A/T)1,2. Changes to the
MDA-MB-231 breast adenocarcinoma transcriptome were measured following 24
h treatment with 2 and 5 M HxIP or azaHxPI. At 5 M, HxIP affected 349
genes by two-fold (p 100 M), whereas azaHxPI causes growth inhibition
(GI50 = 20.3 M) and induces apoptosis. Immunoblotting analysis of ;H2AX
showed no evidence of DNA damage, further corroborated by the absence of
chk2 phosphorylation. In addition, no ATR-chk1 activation was detected
suggesting that azaHxPI does not induce replication stress, despite
inhibiting DNA synthesis as shown using the BrdU incorporation assay.
Levels of phospho-AKT (Ser472) decreased in response to polyamide
treatment, whilst p21 is significantly upregulated and both may be
implicated in the mechanism of azaHxPI induced-apoptosis. Taken together
these results emphasise the potential application of polyamides as
apoptosis-inducing DNA-targeting agents benefiting from enhanced sequence
selectivity which in turn confers specific biological
activity.References:1. Kiakos. et al Chem. Biol. (2015) 22(7):862-75.2.
Satam. et al Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. (2015) 25(17):3681-5.

