Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Gli2 in mediating the progression of prostate cancer to
CRPC


Background: Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death in
the US men, largely due to the development of castration resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) in the patients treated with androgen deprivation
therapy. There is increasing evidence indicating that Hedgehog pathway is
involved in the malignancy of prostate cancer, which includes the finding
of two prostate tumors with loss-of-function mutations in the SuFu gene,
correlation of tumor grade with high expression of Sonic hedgehog, Gli2
and/or hedgehog target genes including Ptch1 and HIP, and increased Gli2
expression in therapy-resistant tumor cells from patients. In addition,
treatment of mice with hedgehog inhibitors significantly attenuated the
growth of prostate tumor xenografts. Some recent studies also implicated
a crosstalk between Hedgehog/Gli signaling and androgen signaling
pathways in prostate cancer. However, the role of Gli2 in CRPC
progression has not been investigated. Methods: A human Gli2 specific
small hairpin RNA (shRNA) expression vector was constructed using
Tet-PLKO-puro lentivector, which was delivered into the
androgen-dependent human prostate cancer LNCaP cells. RT-PCR, Western
Blot and Luciferase Reporter Assay were performed to confirm
doxycycline-inducible Gli2 knockdown. The effect of Gli2 knockdown on
anchorage-dependent or -independent growth was assessed with MTT and Soft
Agar Assays respectively. Cells were cultured in androgen depleted medium
or treated with the anti-androgen, Casodex, to mimic androgen deprivation
condition. Mouse xenograft models were used to assess the role of Gli2 in
the development of CRPC in vivo. Results: Androgen deprivation promoted
the expression of Hedgehog signaling components including Gli2 in the
LNCaP cells. Gli2 knockdown inhibited anchorage-dependent and
-independent growth of LNCaP cells. Casodex complemented the inhibition
of Gli2 knockdown on the growth of LNCaP cells. Gli2 knockdown prevented
the outgrowth of androgen-independent cells from LNCaP cells cultured in
androgen depleted medium. Induced-knockdown of Gli2 by doxycycline
inhibited the growth of castration-resistant tumors in vivo in mice.
Conclusions: Our study demonstrated the important role of Gli2 in the
development of CRPC. Therefore, it may have the potential to serve as a
novel therapeutic target for the prevention of CRPC.

