Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of HeLa cells as a cancer genetics education tool for
middle and high schools


Hands-on, inquiry based learning, and one-on-one mentoring are the most
effective methods of disseminating scientific information pertaining to
cancer. The Science Youth Initiative (SYI) is a K-12 science education
partnership between the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
in New Orleans (LSUHSC-NO) and local schools. The workshops are
coordinated with LSUHSC-NO faculty and school teachers to maximize the
level of student learning and complement their classroom curriculum and
academic level. Since 2009, the SYI has reached more than 2100 K-12
students to date, of which about 77% were middle and high school
students. A diverse group of trainees from the LSUHSC-NO Schools of
Medicine, Graduate Studies, Public Health, Allied Health Professions, and
Nursing help educate the K-12 students and serve as role models. The
benefit of having a variety of health care professionals with a range of
expertise is that students receive cancer information from multiple
perspectives. The program utilizes the book, The Immortal Life of
Henrietta Lacks by Rebecca Skloot, which is part of the curriculum in
many schools. During these workshops, middle and high school students are
able to stain and examine HeLa cell chromosomes, thereby learning about
chromatin instability commonly associated with cancer. Students also
learn about DNA isolation, PCR, restriction digestion, and gel
electrophoresis as they engage in workshop discussions on science
history, bioethics, the human papilloma virus (HPV), and cervical cancer.
Pre and post workshop surveys were developed to evaluate the participants
learning and retention of the material covered, self-confidence in the
academic material, awareness of science career options, and evaluation of
the program. Results of the current academic year demonstrate: (1) a 51%
increase in test scores based on the material covered (2) 59% of students
were interested in participating in a medical or research related
internship after the workshop (3) 54% of students were interested in
working part-time in the medical sciences after the workshop.
Participating schools included rural, urban, public/charter and private
schools. These varied in socioeconomic and ethnic backgrounds: some which
had almost 100% African American/Hispanic student body, while others had
a diverse distribution of African American, Hispanic, Asian, and
Caucasian students. The program's use of HeLa cells as a cancer genetics
education tool has been successful in making health sciences and cancer
research topics more interesting and accessible, motivating a variety of
students to improve their grades, and promoting various health science
related career opportunities.

