Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison and evaluation of somatic mutation using PGM and proton
platform in cell free DNA of non-small cell lung cancer patients


Non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are characterized by a unique pattern
of genetic driver mutations, and some of mutations may be used to predict
prognosis and targeted treatment such as EGFR TKIs. Cell free (cfDNA)
present in the blood stream shows much potential as a useful cancer maker
for early diagnosis and cancer progression monitoring. Especially,
analyzing the cfDNA with Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology
allows high through put examination of various genes concurrently at a
low cost. However, there are still no standardized methods to identify
mutations in cfDNA. In this study, we examined the viability of PGM and
Proton platforms. Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 (Ion Torrent),
covering 2800 COSMIC mutations from 50 cancer genes was used to analyze
cfDNA of 125 serum samples from NSCLC patients. The on target was 88% and
mean depth was 643x using PGM platform. And, the on target was 92% and
mean depth was 22,868x in Proton platform. To validate the results of two
NGS platforms, we analyzed EGFR status by sanger sequencing in available
100 tumor tissues. EGFR mutations were identified in 34 (34%) by sanger
sequencing. EGFR mutations were identified in 32 (25.6%) and 28 (22.4%)
by PGM and Proton platform. Interestingly, out of 34 mutations of tumor
tissue, EGFR mutations were matched to 11 and 26 in PGM and Proton
platform, respectively. These results showed concordance of 76.5% between
the tDNA (sanger sequencing) and cfDNA (Proton). In addition, KRAS (codon
12 and 13) mutations were 4 (3.2%) and 18 (14.4%), respectively. In our
study, we demonstrated that Proton platform of high depth is a useful
assay to identify somatic mutations of cfDNA in NSCLCs. [This research
was supported by the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the
Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the
Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (HI14C0066)]

