Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer cells acclimatize to low pH by increasing
glutamine metabolism


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer related
deaths in the United States. PC has a five-year survival rate of only 6%;
this is due to the lack of specific symptoms at the earliest stages of
disease progression. Currently, surgery is the only treatment option with
a reasonable hope of cure; however, due to late detection of the disease,
only 15-25% of patients are eligible for surgery. Pancreatic tumors are
characterized by increased glucose uptake, high glycolysis rate, and
reduced flux to the TCA cycle. This metabolic phenotype, also known as
the Warburg effect, is typical of rapidly dividing tumor cells and forms
the basis of imaging by utilizing [18F]-FDG-PET (glucose analog). The
consequence of this metabolic behavior is the continuous acidification of
the tumor microenvironment. Acidification of the tumor microenvironment
(TME) and its effects in cancer cell metabolism are not well defined. In
this study we analyzed metabolic adaptations of PC cells experiencing
physiological pH 7.4 versus cells cultured in 6.87.0 pH that is similar
to the pH range observed in the pancreatic TME. Using high performance
liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
analysis to determine the metabolite levels of PC cells cultured in these
TME conditions, we observed a marked reduction in glycolysis metabolites
in cells cultured at low pH. We observed reduced glucose uptake, as well
as, reduced lactate secretion in low pH culture conditions. Furthermore,
we observed that cells in low pH microenvironment were able to survive
upon glucose deprivation, but not upon glutamine deprivation. In
contrast, cells in normal physiologic pH culture could not survive upon
glucose deprivation. Based on the up regulation of metabolites in the
glutaminolysis pathway identified through LC/MS/MS analysis, and the
increase in metabolic enzyme mRNA levels, as well as the increased
sensitivity to inhibitors of this pathway, we conclude that glutamine
metabolism is essential for survival of pancreatic cancer cells under low
pH conditions. Furthermore, due to the increased levels of ATP and
sensitivity of low-pH cultured cells to oligomycin, we conclude that
oxidative phosphorylation is essential for the maintenance of cellular
homeostasis at low pH. Such changes result in reduced Warburg Effect,
denoted by reduced lactate release. This is the first study to establish
glutamine dependence of PC cells under low pH conditions. Our results may
provide novel therapeutic opportunities for targeting metabolic
adaptations in pancreatic cancer cells in response to changes in the
microenvironment.

