Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new frontier for molecular profiling of neoplastic bone tissue


Background: Tissue is alive and reacting to ex vivo stress during cold
ischemia time. Tumor cells react to the absence of vascular perfusion,
hypoxia, acidosis, and accumulation of cellular waste, which can
critically mask cancer related signaling network data. Standard formalin
fixation of calcified tissue requires decalcification with formic/nitric
acid solution, which greatly interferes with downstream molecular
analysis. We developed a non-formalin fixative (TheraLin) for preserving
biomarker molecules and tissue histomorphology in one step, which greatly
facilitates the analysis of phosphoprotein signaling pathways in
calcified tumor samples.Methods: Fifty specimens of neoplastic bone were
collected at the Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (Bologna, Italy). Matched
0.5 cm samples were fixed in TheraLin preservative; or fixed in 4%
buffered formalin and decalcified with formic/nitric acid solution.
Specimens were processed into paraffin blocks and 5 m tissue sections cut
onto glass slides. Enriched tumor cell populations were procured using
Laser Capture Microdissection. Reverse Phase Protein Microarrays were
constructed with the microdissected tumor cells and probed with >40
antibodies to unmodified or phosphorylated proteins. Immunohistochemistry
(>200 stains in total) was performed on routine clinical protein targets
and a subset of phosphorylated proteins.Results: TheraLin fixation
greatly facilitated molecular profiling of bony tissues by eliminating
the need for decalcification (18.5 hour average reduction in processing
time) while maintaining or improving histomorphology (>85% of cases) and
immunohistology (>75% of cases). In addition, we were able to demonstrate
full compatibility with laser capture microdissection, reverse phase
protein microarrays and downstream analysis of cell signal protein
activation. Protein extractability from microdissected material was
significantly increased (>2.5 fold, pBackground: Tissue is alive and
reacting to ex vivo stress during cold ischemia time. Tumor cells react
to the absence of vascular perfusion, hypoxia, acidosis, and accumulation
of cellular waste, which can critically mask cancer related signaling
network data. Standard formalin fixation of calcified tissue requires
decalcification with formic/nitric acid solution, which greatly
interferes with downstream molecular analysis. We developed a
non-formalin fixative (TheraLin) for preserving biomarker molecules and
tissue histomorphology in one step, which greatly facilitates the
analysis of phosphoprotein signaling pathways in calcified tumor
samples.Methods: Fifty specimens of neoplastic bone were collected at the
Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (Bologna, Italy). Matched 0.5 cm samples were
fixed in TheraLin preservative; or fixed in 4% buffered formalin and
decalcified with formic/nitric acid solution. Specimens were processed
into paraffin blocks and 5 m tissue sections cut onto glass slides.
Enriched tumor cell populations were procured using Laser Capture
Microdissection. Reverse Phase Protein Microarrays were constructed with
the microdissected tumor cells and probed with >40 antibodies to
unmodified or phosphorylated proteins. Immunohistochemistry (>200 stains
in total) was performed on routine clinical protein targets and a subset
of phosphorylated proteins.Results: TheraLin fixation greatly facilitated
molecular profiling of bony tissues by eliminating the need for
decalcification (18.5 hour average reduction in processing time) while
maintaining or improving histomorphology (>85% of cases) and
immunohistology (>75% of cases). In addition, we were able to demonstrate
full compatibility with laser capture microdissection, reverse phase
protein microarrays and downstream analysis of cell signal protein
activation. Protein extractability from microdissected material was
significantly increased (>2.5 fold, p<0.01) compared to formalin fixed,
decalcified bone tissue.Conclusion: TheraLin obviates the need for
decalcification of bone tissue while simultaneously preserving
histomophology and immunohistochemistry. TheraLin enables reliable
quantification of phosphorylated signal transduction proteins, the
substrates of kinase drug targets, and greatly facilitates tumor cell
enrichment compared to standard formalin fixation and decalcification.

