Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HnRNP Q1, a novel translational regulator for Aurora-A protein
synthesis in colorectal cancer


HnRNP Q1 is a multifunctional RNA-binding protein and has an abundant
expression level compared with hnRNP Q member. In colorectal cancer,
hnRNP Q has been reported to associate with cell proliferation, but the
underlying mechanism is still unclear. By RNA-immunoprecipitation assay
following next-generation sequencing (NGS), a group of cell cycle-related
genes was identified to be targeted by hnRNP Q1, including Aurora-A
kinase. Aurora-A is a cell cycle dependent kinase involved in regulating
centrosome duplication, maturation and spindle assembly during mitosis.
Abnormally elevated Aurora-A will cause mitotic defects and aneuploidy,
which might lead to genomic instability and tumorigenesis. Our previous
work has demonstrated that Aurora-A can be translational up-regulated in
colorectal cancer. In order to investigate the role of hnRNP Q1 in
Aurora-A expression, GFP-hnNRP Q1 was overexpressed in colorectal cancer
cells. We found that Aurora-A protein, but not the mRNA level, was
up-regulated in those GFP-hnRNP Q1-overexpressing cells. By biotin pull
down and Biacore analysis, we revealed that hnRNP Q1 binds to the 5-UTRs
of Aurora-A mRNA directly, and their interacting domain was mapped.
Importantly, we found that hnRNP Q1 can enhance Aurora-A protein
synthesis through IRES-mediated translational regulation in a cell
cycle-regulated manner by ribosomal protein S6 immunoprecipitation,
polysome fractionation and bicistronic reporter assay. CCK-8 assay,
colony formation and in vivo xenograft assay all suggested that
overexpression of hnRNP Q1 can promote cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer cells. In addition, the expression
level of hnRNP Q1 is positively correlated with Aurora-A in clinical
colorectal cancer tissues. Taken together, our data indicate that hnRNP
Q1 is a novel trans-acting factor that binds to Aurora-A 5-UTRs and
regulates its translation, which may increase cell proliferation and
contribute to the tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer.

