Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted suppression of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins amplifies
apoptosis and improves response to enzalutamide in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy and the 2nd leading cause
of cancer death in men worldwide. First-line treatment includes androgen
deprivation therapy in addition to androgen receptor (AR) antagonists
that work to block androgen signaling. Although most patients respond
initially to hormone deprivation therapy, responses are not durable and
the disease progresses to a lethal stage, termed castrate resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Interestingly, most CRPCs are still dependent on
AR signaling for growth and survival, therefore more potent
AR-antagonists such as enzalutamide have recently been FDA approved for
treatment of CRPC. However, response rates to enzalutamide can be limited
by emergence of acquired resistance or intrinsic resistance. A universal
mechanism of resistance to cytotoxic therapies is upregulation of
anti-apoptotic programs that function to override death signals and
permit survival of the tumor cell. In prostate cancer, overexpression of
the Inhibitor of Apoptosis (IAP) proteins cIAP1, cIAP2, and XIAP has been
demonstrated in progression to CRPC. Additionally, aberrant expression of
these proteins is reported to contribute to anti-androgen resistance.
Therefore, to achieve more robust responses to AR inhibition with
enzalutamide, we targeted IAP proteins in order to amplify the apoptotic
signal and increase cell death in prostate cancer cells. Using a
small-molecule IAP inhibitor, we evaluated response to enzalutamide upon
IAP inhibition in prostate cancer cell lines LNCAP and C4-2. Here we
demonstrate greater proliferation inhibition, reduced cell survival and
synergistic induction of apoptosis signaling in response to combined AR
antagonism and IAP inhibition. Furthermore, we demonstrate depletion of
cIAP1 protein expression upon enzalutamide treatment indicating a
possible role for AR in regulating anti-apoptotic pathways. Taken
together these results demonstrate that IAP proteins may be a critical
survival pathway in CRPC and antagonism of these proteins through
small-molecule inhibition can amplify apoptosis and increase cell death
in response to enzalutamide. Targeting a critical survival pathway can
lower the apoptotic threshold providing a possible therapeutic
opportunity to treat and prevent resistance to enzalutamide and increase
benefit to patients with this lethal form of prostate cancer.

