Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implications of Akt inhibition for neoadjuvant radiotherapy:
improving the rectal cancer treatment


Resistance to therapy is a major obstacle to a favorable outcome in
cancer treatment. For rectal cancer, neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (nCRT)
can lead to complete tumor regression in a significant proportion of
patients (up to 40%) but approximately 60% of patients have only partial
or no tumor remission after nCRT. A number of works searching for a
differential gene expression signature has failed. As those gene
signatures relies on the sample set, there is an increasing agreement
that biological understanding is necessary to produce a signature in
terms of pathways and biological processes. In this regard we applied
pathway enrichment analysis to RNA-Seq data in order to identify
biological pathways involved in tumor resistance and discriminate rectal
cancer patients that is refractory to neoadjuvant treatment.
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and phosphatidylinositol
signaling were identified as the main pathways involved in resistance to
nCRT in patients with rectal cancer. Both pathways have been reported as
involved in resistance to radiotherapy and chemotherapy in solid tumors
but according to the status of gene regulation observed and the
literature, there is evidence that Akt pathway could be central in
promoting resistance.Therefore, we evaluated the status of Akt activation
by immunohistochemistry of pre-treatment biopsies of rectal tumors as
well as by immunoblot of colorectal cancer cell lines utilizing
antibodies against phosphorylated Akt (pS473). As a result, we observed
an increased proportion of Akt phosphorylation in the resistant cell
line, SW480, and in patients with TRG 0-2 in comparison to those with TRG
3-4 and in the sensitive cell line, SW48. To evaluate the implication of
Akt in promoting nCRT resistance, we performed colony formation assays
using Akt inhibitors as radiosensitizers. We observed an additive effect
using MK2206 at sub-doses in combination to radiotherapy (2 Gy) in the
resistant cell line. In fact, Akt inhibition improved in approximately
40% the tumoricidal effects of radiotherapy. Moreover, at IC50 dose this
effect is even higher, reaching 60% the improvement of radiotherapy.
Furthermore, the treatment of MK2206 with radiotherapy alone or in
combination with 5-FU have similar effectiveness. In this setting, as Akt
is involved in a range of cellular functions that promote tumor
progression and metastasis, we propose that combination of Akt inhibitor
and radiotherapy as neoadjuvant treatment would maximize tumor remission
and improve the rectal cancer treatment.

