Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic approach to identify biomarkers for invasive cervix
cancer: a prospective pilot study


Objectives: Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer of women
worldwide. In this prospective study, we attempted to identify a set of
serum biomarkers, which could identify patients who have invasive
cervical cancer and possibly help monitor disease status (recurrence,
remission).Methods: Luminex bead array was used to measure serum protein
concentrations of 19 different, promising proteins in cervical cancer
patients (n = 23) compared to women with precancerous lesions (CIN2-3) (n
= 20), and patients with normal cervical cytology (n = 20) in this IRB
approved prospective study. Cervical cancer (adenocarcinoma and squamous
carcinoma) patients had blood samples drawn within 30 days of diagnosis
and repeat blood samples taken on follow up visits after completing
therapy. These results were correlated to clinical data and outcomes.
Protein expression was confirmed by immunohistochemistry in patient
samples.Results: CIN and controls have very similar levels of serum
proteins. Six proteins (CA153, OPG, CEA, IGFBP7, IGFBP4, and MMP-7) had
significantly different levels in cervical cancer patients compared to
controls and CIN (p Objectives: Cervical cancer is the second most common
cancer of women worldwide. In this prospective study, we attempted to
identify a set of serum biomarkers, which could identify patients who
have invasive cervical cancer and possibly help monitor disease status
(recurrence, remission).Methods: Luminex bead array was used to measure
serum protein concentrations of 19 different, promising proteins in
cervical cancer patients (n = 23) compared to women with precancerous
lesions (CIN2-3) (n = 20), and patients with normal cervical cytology (n
= 20) in this IRB approved prospective study. Cervical cancer
(adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma) patients had blood samples drawn
within 30 days of diagnosis and repeat blood samples taken on follow up
visits after completing therapy. These results were correlated to
clinical data and outcomes. Protein expression was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry in patient samples.Results: CIN and controls have
very similar levels of serum proteins. Six proteins (CA153, OPG, CEA,
IGFBP7, IGFBP4, and MMP-7) had significantly different levels in cervical
cancer patients compared to controls and CIN (p < 0.05) with Area Under
the Curve values of 0.74, 0.77, 0.79, 0.83, 0.84, and 0.98 respectively.
IGFBP4 had a sensitivity of 75% at 95% specificity for correctly
identifying invasive disease. MMP-7 had a sensitivity of 92% at 95%
specificity. MMP-7 was confirmed by IHC in patient specific cervical
cancer tissue.
Conclusions: Several serum proteins are significantly altered in cervical
cancer patients compared to controls and CIN, and are worth studying for
further clinical utility. MMP-7 may prove to be an important mediator of
cervical cancer.

