Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imputation of drug sensitivity levels in The Cancer Genome Atlas
using machine learning identifies novel predictors of chemotherapeutic
response


The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) represents a landmark undertaking that has
collected genomic data from tumors of almost 15,000 cancer patients. Most
tumors have been assayed using many high-throughput genomics techniques,
such as whole-genome DNA copy number, gene expression, mutation status
and DNA methylation. The project has also compiled a large set of
matching clinical data; however, the utility of TCGA for pharmacogenomic
discovery has been severely limited by the lack of cleanly measured drug
response data. The absence of such data owes to the difficulty in
obtaining this information from cancer patients, because individuals are
typically treated with complex multi-drug regimes, which renders the
precise measurement of a drug specific response phenotype intractable.
However, precisely measured drug response data can be readily obtained in
pre-clinical models, such as cell lines. Thus, in this study, we have
implemented a machine learning based approach, where gene expression
based predictive models of drug response are constructed on approximately
700 cancer cell lines; these models are then applied to nearly 15,000
TCGA tumor samples, for which gene expression data is also available,
yielding a predicted drug sensitivity value in each TCGA sample. We used
this approach to impute a drug sensitivity estimate for 138 drugs that
were treated against the cell lines.Our approach allowed us to transform
TCGA into a vast pharmacogenomics dataset, on an unprecedented scale (and
thus power), which could be mined for novel associations relevant to
chemotherapeutic response. As a proof-of-concept, we first investigated
whether the existing small number of known clinically relevant
associations could be recapitulated in these imputed data. As an example,
we identified the predicted difference in sensitivity to Lapatinib, which
interrupts ERBB2, as significantly greater in ERBB2 amplified tumors (P =
6 10-12), an association that is drug specific. In ERBB2 amplified
tumors, large chunks of chromosome 17, containing many genes, are
typically amplified; this recurring phenomenon often renders it
impossible to identify the causative genes in genome wide copy number
data using conventional approaches. Strikingly however, by interrogating
the observed effect size of genes in this amplicon, ERBB2 could be
identified as the precise causative drug target in our data,
demonstrating the impressive increase in power obtained from this
approach. Additionally, the second most significant association for
Lapatinib is for EGFR, which is the known secondary target of this drug
(P = 5 10-4).We also identified many novel associations; e.g. that a copy
number amplification in ERLIN2, a gene shown to play a role in
stabilizing microtubules, is associated with resistance to a class of
chemotherapeutics that interact with the microtubules. This was
subsequently validated with follow-up experiments.

