Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tobacco use among US cancer survivors


Background: Combustible tobacco use is a known risk factor for several
types of cancer including cancers of the head and neck, esophagus, lung,
stomach, bladder, pancreas and cervix. Smokeless tobacco use is a known
risk factor for cancers of the mouth, tongue, cheek, gum, and esophagus.
Continued use of cigarettes, non-cigarette combustible tobacco products,
or smokeless tobacco post diagnosis may interfere with treatment as well
as increase the chance of developing a second malignancy. In the past,
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has designed targeted
educational campaigns to prevent and reduce tobacco use among high-risk
populations. Information on the prevalence of use among cancer survivors
is vital to inform targeted smoking cessation programs.Methods: We
analyzed combined data from the 2012-2014 National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS) for tobacco use by cancer status among over 6,000 cancer
survivors aged 18 and older. Non-cigarette combustible tobacco products
include cigars, pipes, hookahs, bidis or cigarillos. Smokeless tobacco
refers to tobacco products which are placed in the mouth or nose and
include chewing tobacco, snuff, dip, snus (snoose), or dissolvable
tobacco. Current users had used at least 100 cigarettes in their lifetime
or used other non-cigarette combustible tobacco products at least once in
their lifetime and reported current use as rarely, some days or every
day. Survey data were weighted to produce national estimates that are
representative of the civilian noninstitutionalized US adult population.
Differences between percentages were evaluated using two-sided
significance tests at the 0.05 level.Results: More than 1 in 5 cancer
survivors were current cigarette smokers. This was significantly higher
than the population of persons without a cancer history. More than 1 in
every 15 survivors were current users of some form of non-cigarette
combustible tobacco product. However, this prevalence was not
significantly different from persons without a history of cancer. The
current use of smokeless tobacco products among cancer survivors (under
2%) was just over half the prevalence of that of their peers without a
history of cancer.Conclusion: Tobacco use is an important modifiable risk
factor for cancer- and non-cancer related morbidity and mortality of
cancer survivors, yet its use remains as prevalent among survivors as
among persons with no cancer history. Current cigarette use is higher
among US cancer survivors compared with persons without a cancer history,
and there is no significant difference in the current use of
non-cigarette combustible tobacco products between both groups. Findings
from this study may be used to discern differences in use of various
types of tobacco products among cancer survivors and their peers without
a cancer history.

