Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A blocks formation of IFN--induced metastatic cancer
stem cells through inhibition of the CXCR4/CXCL12 pathway in the UP-LN1
carcinoma cell model


As our understanding of cancer stem cell (CSC) biology improves, there is
an urgent need to search for inhibitory agents of CSCs and metastatic
CSCs (mCSCs) positive for CXCR4. Withaferin A (WA), a withanolide
extracted from the medicinal plant Withania somnifera, has been shown to
exhibit anti-cancer effects through multiple mechanisms. Whether WA could
selectively target CSCs, mCSCs, or non-CSCs of a gastrointestinal (GI)
carcinoma tumor remains unclear. Side population analysis, flow
cytometric phenotyping and sorting, non-invasive imaging in conjunction
with xenotransplantation, and immunohistology were used in this
investigation. Using the lymph node metastatic GI cancer cell line
UP-LN1, consisting of CD44high/CD24low grape-like floating (F) and
CD44low/CD24high adherent (A) cell subsets, this study demonstrated that,
as compared with parental UP-LN1 cells or A cells, WA preferentially
reduced F-cell proliferation, tumor sphere formation, and side population
cells in vitro in greater efficiencies by apoptosis. This action was
mechanistically mediated via the down-regulation of CXCR4/CXCL12 and
STAT3/IL-6 pathways, both of which are instrumental in the acquisition of
metastatic ability. Attenuation of IFN--induced CXCR4 expression in F
cells by knockdown with siRNA or blocking with anti-CXCR4 antibody,
followed by Western blot analysis, showed significantly reduced
metastatic potential in vitro. The extent of in vitro anti-invasive
effect of WA on the IFN--treated F cells was significantly greater than
on the F cells without WA treatment, or F cells treated with control
siRNA or with control IgG antibody. The observed in vitro effects of WA
on the CSC and mCSC targeting were validated by data obtained with
non-invasive imaging in NOD/SCID mouse xenotransplantation. We conclude
that WA could efficiently block the formation of both CSCs and mCSCs in
the UP-LN1 cell line, suggesting that WA may be considered an effective
therapeutic agent for GI malignancies exhibiting grape-like tumor sphere.

