Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concomitant administration of acid reducing agents can impact the
pharmacokinetics of the balanced pan-PI3K and mTOR inhibitor PQR309


IntroductionAcid reducing agents (ARAs) - such as proton pump inhibitors,
H2-antagonists or antacids - are commonly prescribed medications to
reduce stomach acidity in cancer patients. Increased gastric pH can
significantly impair the dissolution of agents that exhibit pH-dependent
solubility, thus possibly reducing their absorption and influence their
pharmacokinetics (PK).PQR309 is a novel oral balanced dual pan-PI3K and
mTOR inhibitor currently in clinical development for treatment of solid
tumors and hematological malignancies. PQR309 is a weak base and exhibits
pH-dependent solubility. Therefore, the assessment of the potential for
drug-drug interactions with ARAs is essential to avoid treatment failure
in cancer patients.MethodsGastroPlusTM v.9.0 (Simulations Plus, Inc.) was
used to build a physiologically-based absorption and pharmacokinetic
(PBPK) model of PQR309. A baseline model was built with the
physicochemical properties of the compound and pre-clinical PK data after
iv and po administration. The model was then extended using PK data from
cancer patients. Volume of distribution and renal clearance were
calculated using the Lukacova and fup*GFR methods, respectively. Hepatic
clearance was estimated from in vitro clearance obtained in hepatocytes
and the intestinal absorption was calculated by the Advanced
Compartmental Absorption and Transit (ACATTM) Model.ResultsThe parameter
sensitivity analysis showed that at fasted stomach pH of 1.5, PQR309 is
fully dissolved and rapidly absorbed in the upper part of
gastrointestinal tract leading to a distinct maximum plasma concentration
(Cmax) and a predicted bioavailability of almost 100%. At a stomach pH of
4.0 dissolution is delayed and the absorption shifted towards distal
parts of the gastrointestinal tract. The predicted bioavailability is
still estimated to be good (> 75%), but the observed plasma concentration
time profile is much shallower and the expected Cmax considerably
reduced.ConclusionsOur model predicts that concomitant administration of
ARAs can impact PQR309 absorption and change its pharmacokinetic profile.
The clinical relevance of this potential drug-drug interaction is
unknown. In currently ongoing clinical studies co-medication of PQR309
with ARAs should be avoided until further clinical investigations confirm
the model predictions and mitigation strategies are explored.

