Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the BCL-2 family in small cell lung caner


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) represents 13% of all lung cancer cases,
affecting approximately 30,000 people annually in the United States. The
prognosis for patients with SCLC is poor, and cancer-specific mortality
of this malignancy is 95% at five years. This dismal prognosis has been
further marred by the absence of major improvements in its treatment:
there have been no substantial changes in the standard of care for
advanced SCLC over the last three decades. Interestingly, small molecule
inhibitors of anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family members BCL-2 and BCL-XL,
ABT-737 and its orally bioavailable analog ABT-263, were shown to
effectively kill some SCLC cell lines in preclinical studies, suggesting
that targeting the BCL-2 family proteins may hold promise for the
treatment of this dreadful cancer. However, these inhibitors do not
inhibit MCL-1, another anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family member, which may
explain why multiple clinical trials have not led to meaningful results.
Because there are no effective MCL-1 inhibitors developed yet, we propose
to identify the best strategy that enhances the apoptotic effect of
ABT-737/263. To this end, we have performed a high-throughput screen in
ABT-737/263 resistant H196 cell lines using two libraries, a library of
FDA-approved anti-cancer agents and a pathway inhibitor library including
1000 compounds. As a result, doxorubicin and dinaciclib were identified
as synergizers of ABT-737/263 in triggering apoptosis. These two drugs
enhanced the death inducing activity of ABT-737/263 through
downregulation of MCL-1 mRNA. Interestingly, some of the ABT-737/263
resistant cell lines rely on MCL-1 for survival and thereby were killed
by dinaciclib or doxorubicin as a single agent, indicating that
predictive biomarkers of cellular addiction to anti-apoptotic BCL-2
family proteins (BCL-2s) can guide treatment decisions and reduce
unwanted toxicity. Importantly, we revealed that the expression ratio
between BCL-2, BCL-XL, and MCL-1 could predict cellular addiction to
BCL-2s. Surprisingly, we demonstrated that BCL-XL overexpression is an
another potential mechanism behind ABT-263 resistance. ABT-263 failed to
inhibit the interaction between BCL-XL and BAX/BAK in the absence of
activator BH3-only molecules and thereby failed to kill one
BCL-XL-addicted SCLC cell line with low expression of activator BH3-only
molecules. Finally, we showed that BCL-2 selective inhibitor ABT-199 can
also cooperate with doxorubicin or dinaciclib to kill ABT-263-resistant
cell lines. The in vivo efficacy of combination therapy including ABT-199
and doxorubicin was demonstrated in a SCLC xenograft model. These data
have direct translational implications for the treatment of SCLC.

