Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of genetic alternations in multiple tissue specimens from
each patient: Implications for field-effect colon cancerization


Colorectal cancer (CRC) develops through a polyp-to-cancer progression
sequence, in which normal colorectal epithelium transforms into an
adenoma, which then progresses to cancer via the accumulation of
progressive molecular changes, including both genetic and epigenetic
alterations. Given that Colon epithelial cells can acquire
pro-tumorigenic mutations that are insufficient to cause morphological
change, genetic alternations in adjacent tumor tissues are primed to
become neoplastic cells. It is known that individuals with a personal
history of colon adenomas or cancer are at increased risk for
metachronous colon neoplasms. To examine the genetic alternations
involving in a polyp-to-cancer progression sequence, whole-transcriptome
expression profiling of resected normal tissues (N1 and N3), adenoma (A1
and A2), and colorectal cancer (C1) obtained from individuals was
performed. Differentially expressed genes among groups were identified
using Subio platform. GATK and haplotypecaller was used to compare the
somatic mutations among three different tissues. Tophat, Cufflink, Mev, R
was used for determining the expression levels. Splicegrapher and
Genomon-fusion was used for identifying the fusion genes. Ordinal
regression analysis was performed to characterize site-dependent
expression profiles. Gene interaction was examined using String (Open
database). All statistical tests were two-sided, except where noted.
Expression profile showed that highly expressed genes associated with
inflammation were detected in adenoma. Our results indicated that highly
expressed genes associated with inflammation were initially found in
adenoma tissues and its levels were consistent in carcinoma tissues.
Number of somatic mutation was extremely increased in carcinoma tissues
when compared to adenoma tissues. The same mutations in KRAS, CDKN2A(p16)
and TP53 that were observed in carcinoma tissues. They were also present
in normal tissues and adenoma tissues. Disruption of TP53, CDKN2A, and
KRAS were all seen as possible initial events in tumorigenesis; the
sequence of mutations (the tumor development pathway) differed among
lesions. Also, unique somatic mutations were found 17 genes which were
not exist in normal tissues. Those somatic mutations were found in
carcinoma tissues. The results of fusion gene analysis showed that 9
fusion genes were detected. Four fusion genes (FIIR-RBM2292, ST7-AS1-ST7,
MMP11-IGLL5, EXOC4-LOC101928861) was detected in all of tissues. Five
fusion genes were found in normal tissues and adenoma tissues. Unique
fusion gene in carcinoma tissue was not detected. One explanation for
this increased risk could be field cancerization, which is a phenomenon
in which the histologically normal tissue in an organ is primed to
undergo transformation. Our analysis of genetic alterations in a single
patient appears to be promising markers for field cancerization.

