Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human serine protease therapeutics- potent constructs targeting
Fn14 in multiple tumor types


The cytokine TWEAK, a TNF superfamily member, and its cognate receptor,
Fn14, have emerged as potentially valuable targets for cancer therapy
since their expression has been frequently identified as independent
negative prognostic indicators in a variety of tumor types. The serine
protease Granzyme B (GrB) is a highly cytotoxic component of human immune
effector cells and induces multiple, intense pro-apoptotic signals when
delivered to the cytoplasm of target cells. This human protein has been
well-studied, operating through multimodal pathways which are both
caspase-dependent and caspase-independent. Our laboratory has designed
series of new Fn14 targeted fusion constructs containing an engineered
GrB payload. The GrB-Fc-IT4 containing either WTCYS or EACYS mutants of
GrB, and a human scFv targeting Fn14 were expressed in HEK293E and
suspension CHO cells, harvested under serum-free conditions and purified
to homogeneity. Both constructs display high-level protein production
(>50 mg/L), enhanced serum stability and impressive cytotoxic activity
(IC50 The cytokine TWEAK, a TNF superfamily member, and its cognate
receptor, Fn14, have emerged as potentially valuable targets for cancer
therapy since their expression has been frequently identified as
independent negative prognostic indicators in a variety of tumor types.
The serine protease Granzyme B (GrB) is a highly cytotoxic component of
human immune effector cells and induces multiple, intense pro-apoptotic
signals when delivered to the cytoplasm of target cells. This human
protein has been well-studied, operating through multimodal pathways
which are both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent. Our laboratory
has designed series of new Fn14 targeted fusion constructs containing an
engineered GrB payload. The GrB-Fc-IT4 containing either WTCYS or EACYS
mutants of GrB, and a human scFv targeting Fn14 were expressed in HEK293E
and suspension CHO cells, harvested under serum-free conditions and
purified to homogeneity. Both constructs display high-level protein
production (>50 mg/L), enhanced serum stability and impressive cytotoxic
activity (IC50 < 20 nM) against Fn14 positive cells. The specific
activity of the GrB moiety, as assessed by cleavage of a synthetic
chromogenic GrB substrate, was comparable to that of human GrB for the
WTCYS while the EACYS variant showed a 50% reduction in specific
activity. On the other hand, in vitro stability studies showed that EACYS
was more stable after 48h incubation in human serum, retaining over 60%
of its initial specific activity. Against a panel of 20 human cell lines
expressing Fn14, both constructs showed high affinity and selective
cytotoxicity within the nanomolar range (IC50 ranged from 4 to 284 nM)
and were two to over a hundred times more potent than free GrB.
Mechanistic studies demonstrated that GrB-Fc-IT4 constructs activated
caspase cascades and cytochrome C related pro-apoptotic mechanisms in
keeping with the known intracellular functions of GrB in target cells.
Pharmacokinetic studies in mice revealed that GrB-Fc-IT4 fusion proteins
exhibited a bi-exponential clearance from plasma with a rapid initial
clearance (t = 0.36 hours) followed by a prolonged terminal-phase plasma
half-life (t 1/2 = 35 hours). Toxicity studies in mice demonstrated that
the MTD is above 100 mg/kg total dose. Murine orthotropic tumor model
efficacy and bio-distribution studies are ongoing and will be presented.
Research conducted, in part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research.

