Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial targeting of PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways using
microRNAs to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis in breast cancer


PI3K/Akt and MAPK signaling pathways, regulating cancer cell
proliferation, apoptosis and metastasis, are among the top most
deregulated pathways in cancer. Current kinase inhibitors used in clinics
have limited success since one of these pathways gets activated when the
other is suppressed. Alternatively, simultaneous silencing of both
pathways results in high toxicity. Here, we aimed to establish a
microRNA-based, non-toxic approach to inhibit these pathways
simultaneously in breast cancer. By analyzing our previously published
Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) data showing differential expression
of 26 proteins upon overexpression of 733 different miRNAs, we selected
top miRNAs significantly deregulating PI3K and MAPK pathways as well as
cell cycle. We narrowed down the list by selecting miRNAs whose predicted
targets were among the PI3K and MAPK pathway elements. We came up with a
tumor suppressor miRNA affecting both in vitro viability and
migration/invasion of breast cancer cells. We identified the set of
differentially expressed genes in breast cancer patients under low and
high expression of the miRNA. A significant association was observed
between the expression of the miRNA or its identified gene signature and
clinico-pathological properties of breast cancer patients. Combinatorial
knockdown of targets of the miRNA that are in PI3K and MAPK pathways as a
cocktail phenocopied the tumor suppressive effects of the miRNA in breast
cancer cell lines. Notably, low expression of the target cocktail
predicts a better outcome in breast cancer patients. Overall, we
identified a tumor suppressor miRNA to be used an alternative to current
kinase inhibitor-based therapies for major subtypes of breast cancer by
suppressing both PI3K and MAPK pathways and as a result inhibiting
proliferation and migration/invasion in breast cancer.

