Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Outdoor air pollution and household coal combustion in a rural
high lung cancer incidence area of China


Outdoor air pollution inside populated areas is a growing environmental
health concern. Epidemiological data related to exposures to outdoor air
pollution are limited in rural areas. We previously assessed indoor and
personal exposures in two Chinese rural counties, Xuanwei and Fuyuan,
where the domestic combustion of locally sourced smoky (i.e., bituminous)
but not smokeless (i.e., anthracite) coal has been associated with the
highest lung cancer rates in China. In addition, we have previously
reported that improving home ventilation by installing stoves with
chimneys was associated with a reduction in lung cancer rates in this
region. However, outdoor air pollution from indoor burning of coal and
the impact of improving household ventilation on outdoor air pollution
have never been assessed in this area. Therefore, we measured outdoor
fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) including the known carcinogen benzo-a-pyrene (BaP) over two
consecutive 24-hour sampling periods in 29 villages. Half of the villages
were revisited several months after the initial sampling period to repeat
all measurements. The overall concentrations of outdoor pollutants in
Xuanwei and Fuyuan were 53.1 g/m3 (13.2-103.4 g/m3) for PM2.5, and 11.1
ng/m3 (5.9-19.8 ng/m3) for BaP. PM2.5 levels were almost twice as high as
the 24-hour mean World Health Organization guideline value of 25 g/m3.
Outdoor BaP concentrations in villages with homes using smoky coal were
significantly higher than those with homes that used smokeless coal (11.6
vs 5.9 ng/m3, p 50% of households had a chimney compared to villages
where 50% of homes had a chimney (12.3 vs 7.1 ng/m3, p = 0.024). Outdoor
PM2.5 was moderately correlated with the indoor concentration (Spearman
rs = 0.28, p = 0.011). These results show that outdoor air pollution in a
rural region of China with a high incidence of lung cancer was associated
with type of coal used for cooking and heating indoors and the presence
of stove ventilation. These findings suggest that further reducing
adverse health effects in rural villages from home burning of coal will
likely require use of stoves that reduce environmental exhaust and/or the
replacement of coal with cleaner fuel types.

