Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cooperative functional roles of RNA binding proteins LIN28B and
IMP1 in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer


Introduction: RNA binding proteins and miRNAs have emerged as crucial
regulators of intestinal homeostasis by controlling the stability and
translation of target mRNAs. LIN28B, an mRNA binding protein, plays a
critical role in regulating growth and proliferation in the intestinal
epithelium. Previous work in our lab revealed that LIN28B promotes growth
and tumorigenesis of the intestinal epithelium via suppression of mature
let-7 miRNAs.LIN28B suppression of let-7 promotes upregulation of let-7
targets, including IMP1 (Insulin-like growth factor II mRNA-binding
protein 1). Indeed, previous studies from our lab have shown that
transgenic mice expressing LIN28B from the mouse Vil1 promoter
(Vil-Lin28b mice) have an increase in IMP1 protein levels that is
increased further with conditional knockout of let-7. Mechanistically,
Let-7 isoforms have been known to physically and functionally interact
with IMP1; however, the specific role of IMP1 in Lin28b-let 7-mediated
tumorigenesis remains unknown. The current study tested the hypothesis
that IMP1 maybe required for LIN28B-mediated tumorigenesis and that
LIN28B and IMP1 may cooperatively promote a tumor-initiating
phenotype.Methods: We evaluated LIN28B and IMP1 expression and
localization in colorectal cancer patient samples using tissue
microarrays and clinical outcomes. We used intestinal epithelial cell
lines with LIN28B overexpression and CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockout of
IMP1 to study the functional consequences on migration, invasion and
proliferation.Results: LIN28B expression correlates with expression of
IMP1 in colorectal cancer patient samples. Individually, LIN28B and IMP1
expression intensity each was associated with worse prognosis in stage II
colon cancer. Knock-down of IMP1 in Lin28B overexpressing cells decreased
migration of colorectal cancer cell lines, suggesting a relationship of
IMP1 for the tumorigenic effects of LIN28B. Furthermore, our RNA target
analyses show that Lin28b and IMP1 both bind to target mRNAs in the WNT
and adherens junction pathways.Conclusions: These data implicate a novel
role for the Lin28b-let7-IMP1 axis in colorectal cancer and support an
emerging paradigm for a critical and cooperative role of RNA-binding
proteins in intestinal homeostasis and cancer.We are using the cell lines
generated for orthotopic xenograft studies to see the effects of IMP1
loss and Lin28b overexpression on tumor growth and dissemination.
Furthermore, we are generating mice with intestinal epithelium specific
Lin28b overexpression-IMP1 loss to study the effects in vivo.

