Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paclitaxel increases the assembly and function of the tumor
microenvironment of metastasis in breast cancer


Chemotherapy induces influx of bone marrow-derived progenitors such as
mesenchymal stem cells, endothelial progenitors and proangiogenic
monocytes into the primary tumor to promote angiogenesis. Thus it is
feared that chemotherapy may potentiate tumor cell invasion and
metastasis. Here, we show that paclitaxel delays tumor growth in several
mammary carcinoma mouse and human breast cancer models, yet it
significantly increases the density of microanatomical sites called tumor
microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM) that are responsible for tumor cell
intravasation and dissemination of breast cancer. The TMEM site consists
of a Mena-overexpressing cancer cell in direct contact with a
Tie2hi/VEGFhi macrophage and an underlying endothelial cell. Mice treated
with paclitaxel have significantly more circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
and metastatic foci when compared to vehicle-treated animals indicating
that the chemotherapy-induced TMEM are active in assisting tumor cell
intravasation. Moreover, syngeneic transplantation of Dendra2+/PyMT
tumors into FVB recipients showed significantly higher incidence of
Dendra2+ cells in the lung, following paclitaxel administration. In
parallel experiments, paclitaxel induced the influx of macrophages and
intravasation of cancer cells as observed using intravital imaging of
MMTV-PyMT-Dendra2/Cfms-CFP mice, in which blood vessels were visualized
with Quantum dots. Furthermore, paclitaxel treatment in experimental mice
caused a significant increase in the expression of Mena at the gene and
protein levels. PCR assays for total Mena (PanMena) or specific Mena
isoforms (MenaINV, Mena11a) revealed that this increase was particularly
attributed to the invasive Mena isoforms [i.e. MenaINV and MenaCalc
(Menacalc = PanMena - Mena11a)]. These pre-clinical data are supported by
the findings from a cohort of 10 breast cancer patients who received
neoadjuvant dose-dense paclitaxel followed by doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide. Of these tumors, 7/10 patients had more than 2-fold
increase in TMEM density following neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen.
Moreover, chemotherapy produced an acute increase of up to 150-fold in
MenaINV expression in 3/7 and up to 5.5-fold in MenaCalc in 3/4 patients
who underwent serial fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy before and after
1-2 doses of either neoadjuvant paclitaxel or
doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide. This is provocative because an increase in
either MenaCalc score or TMEM density are independently associated with
increased risk of distant recurrence in breast cancer patients. In
conclusion, our data indicate that paclitaxel treatment induces
intravasation-mediated dissemination of breast cancer cells in rodents
and in certain clinical scenarios in humans by promoting increases in
MenaCalc expression and TMEM intravasation sites.

