Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXA1, a novel regulator of neuroendocrine differentiation


Neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) is a subtype of prostate cancer
that is highly aggressive and exhibits a neuroendocrine phenotype, being
distinct from prostate adenocarcinoma. Cases of NEPC are predicted to
increase rapidly following broader use of new-generation hormonal
therapies including abiraterone and enzalutamide. Although androgen
deprivation and cytokine induction have been previously suggested to
induce neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer, little is known
regarding the underlying molecular mechanisms. FOXA1 is a forkhead box
family transcription factor that has been shown to act as a pioneer
factor for androgen receptor (AR), thereby defining the prostatic
transcriptional program. We have recently shown that FOXA1 plays an
important role in suppressing epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transdifferentiation, but is often downregulated in castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Along this line, in the present study, we showed
that FOXA1 loss, achieved by shRNA-mediated knockdown, led to cell
morphology changes typical of neuroendocrine differentiation, accompanied
by a strong increase of NEPC marker enolase2 (ENO2), while ectopic FOXA1
overexpression reverses these alterations. This was further linked to ERK
phosphorylation, which has been previously reported to be up-regulated
following neuroendocrine differentiation. Moreover, to understand the
mechanism underlying FOXA1 regulation of neuroendocrine differentiation,
we performed bioinformatics analysis and nominated interleukin 8 (IL8) as
a direct target of FOXA1 and its up-regulation is critical in mediating
neuroendocrine differentiation of FOXA1-depleted cells. Finally, we
validated a negative correlation between FOXA1 and neuroendocrine
differentiation in primary prostate cancer specimens through analysis of
publically available RNA-seq data as well as direct IHC staining of
various NEPC markers. In summary, we report a new role of FOXA1 as a
critical inhibitor of neuroendocrine differentiation and the importance
of balanced FOXA1 expressing in the maintenance of the epithelial
phenotype of prostate cancer.

