Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of NOXA and GSTpi effectively kills mantle cell
lymphoma cells


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is clinically characterized by an aggressive
course and only transient response to chemotherapy. Therefore, new
treatment strategies for this malignancy are warranted. The genetic
hallmark of MCL is the t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation leading to
deregulated expression of cyclin D1. It has been reported recently that
cyclin D1 overexpression in MCL is associated with constitutively high
levels of GSTP1 and PMAIP1 transcripts, coding for the glutathion
S-transferase pi (GSTpi) and for the proapoptotic protein NOXA,
respectively. Whereas GSTpi protein is stably expressed, NOXA half-life
turned out to be extremely short in this B cell lymphoma leading to
constitutively low levels of this BH3-only protein in these cells. We
asked if this MCL typical phenotype can be utilized for a selective
treatment by stabilizing NOXA protein and concurrent inhibition of GSTpi
activity. By screening different compounds known to stabilize NOXA
protein and GSTpi inhibitors we found that combination of the fatty acid
synthase (FASN) inhibitor Cerulenin together with Ezatiostat or
Ethacrynic Acid is not only effective but also selective for MCL cells.
Cell death induced by lethal doses of Cerulenin was dependent on Cyclin
D1 since siRNA-mediated knockdown of Cyclin D1 partially rescued cells
from apoptosis. Combinatory treatment of cells with sub-lethal doses of
Cerulenin together with Ezatiostat/Ethacrynic Acid had no effect on
viability of fibroblasts from normal donors but effectively killed both
MCL cell lines as well as primary cells from MCL patients. Importantly,
Cerulenin-mediated NOXA accumulation was significantly further elevated
upon combination with GSTpi inhibitors and associated with a concomitant
induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels. Cell death was
dependent on both NOXA and ROS since either inhibition of ROS by GSH or
Catalase or siRNA-mediated knockdown of NOXA was sufficient to almost
completely rescue cells from Cerulenin/GSTpi inhibitor induced
apoptosis.In conclusion we demonstrate that combined pharmacological
inhibition of GSTpi activity and stabilization of NOXA protein via
inhibition of fatty acid synthase might be an effective strategy to
selectively kill MCL cells and offer novel treatment options.

