Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of Rad6 inhibition to overcome platinum
resistance in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecological cancer in women in
the United States. Advances in surgery and chemotherapy have not
significantly changed the overall survival rate of OC for the last few
decades, which highlights the need for new therapeutic strategies.
Platinum drug resistance and refractory disease pose major challenges in
treating this disease and are major factors contributing to the poor
survival rate of OC patients. Although most patients initially respond to
platinum based chemotherapy, about 80% of cases present with recurrent
disease, develop platinum resistance, and die with the advanced disease.
Considering the heterogeneity, small fractions of the cells could be
inherently resistant to chemotherapy and/or dormant and exhibit stem-like
cell properties, contributing to the resistant phenotype and disease
recurrence. Although the Cancer stem cell (CSC) theory of therapeutic
resistance proposes that the proportion of CSCs correlate to enhanced
chemoresistance and early disease recurrence, the specific molecular
mechanisms that regulate tumor cell behavior (stemness) and integrate
signaling networks with aberrant oncogenic signaling in OC cells are not
known. Our analysis of clinical samples revealed upregulation of Rad6, an
E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, in more than 80% of ovarian tumors
compared to normal ovarian tissues. Upregulation of Rad6 also correlated
well with tumor progression. Further analysis of molecular pathways in OC
cells revealed a strong correlation between Rad6 upregulation and
increased -catenin and hedgehog signaling, stem cell like characteristics
and platinum resistance. Downregulation of Rad6 using siRNAs or
inhibition of its catalytic activity by a small molecule inhibitor,
attenuated carboplatin induced monoubiquitination of its target proteins
such as histone 2B, PCNA and proteins of the Fanconi anemia pathway
thereby sensitizing OC cells to carboplatin. Interestingly, inhibition of
Rad6 alone in OC cells induced replication stress and reduced cell
survival and proliferation by arresting cells in the G2/M phase.
Moreover, inhibition of Rad6 in various OC cell lines reduced expression
of -catenin, Gli1 and several OC stem cell markers. Moreover, Rad6 plays
an important role in the activation of the trans-lesion synthesis (TLS)
pathway by monoubiquitinating PCNA and in the activation of the Fanconi
Anemia (FA) DNA repair pathway. These are critical mechanisms for cells
to repair DNA crosslinks induced by platinum drugs. Together with these
observations, our data suggest that inhibition of Rad6 could be a viable
therapeutic target for overcoming platinum resistance and disease
recurrence in ovarian cancer.

