Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the immune microenvironment to improve colorectal cancer
anti-angiogenic therapy


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Anti-angiogenic therapy with bevacizumab has been proven
efficacious in metastatic CRC. However, the improvement in overall
survival has been modest and rather disappointing. Thus, there is an
urgent need to identify the underlying mechanisms responsible for the
resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy and develop strategies to overcome
it. Clinical and preclinical interest in tumor immunotherapy has been
renewed in a significant manner recently. However, the role of the immune
microenvironment in colorectal cancer resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy is not well understood.We have developed miniaturized confocal
endomicroscopy technique for spontaneous CRC models in mice. We also
established a novel cecum window recently. These unique systems enable us
to monitor the CRC and its immune microenvironment longitudinally with a
video-rate intravital multi-photon microscope. Using these CRC models and
in vivo imaging methods, we found that anti-vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) antibody increases infiltration of Gr1+
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and they alter the tumor
microenvironment toward an immune-suppressive condition to avoid attack
of the host immune system. We also found that the Gr1+ MDSCs express
CXCR4, which has important roles in cell-autonomous survival and
chemotaxis, through its downstream signaling pathways. When we treat the
VEGF signaling blocker together with a CXCR4-specific inhibitor, the
level of the Gr1+ MDSC infiltration is dramatically decreased nearly to
that of control group, and subsequently, tumor growth is significantly
delayed compared to separate treatment of each inhibitor.Taken together,
we identified Gr1+ MDSCs as key players in tumor resistance to
anti-angiogenic therapy in CRCs, and the blockade of CXCR4 signaling has
a synergistic effect with anti-VEGF therapy, proven by state-of-the-art
in vivo imaging modalities.

