Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma using
the novel SMAC-mimetic birinapant


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the most prevalent
cancer affecting the upper aerodigestive tract, with an annual incidence
of 600,000 patients and a five year survival of approximately 60%
worldwide. Molecular mechanisms driving the development of HNSCC have
recently begun to be discovered, with The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
uncovering the genomic landscape of 279 cases of HNSCC. Alterations in
cell death pathways were commonly found in the TCGA analysis, with 30% of
samples harboring 11q13/22 amplifications and overexpression of genes
encoding for Fas-associated death domain (FADD) and/or cellular Inhibitor
of Apoptosis Proteins 1/2 (cIAP1/2). While overexpression of cIAP1 has
been implicated in resistance to cytotoxic therapies, the role of FADD
amplification as a target for therapy and in mechanisms of cell death is
not well understood. Birinapant is a novel second mitochondria-derived
activator of caspases (SMAC)-mimetic that targets and promotes
degradation of cIAPs. Its clinical efficacy is currently being
investigated in phase II trials of patients with ovarian cancer and
leukemia. However, its preclinical and clinical efficacies have not been
tested in HNSCC and genomic markers of sensitivity remain to be defined.
Here we hypothesized that overexpression of FADD and cIAP1/2 could
modulate birinapant sensitivity in HNSCC. To test this hypothesis, we
have treated a panel of 11 HPV(-) and 8 HPV(+) HNSCC cell lines with
birinapant alone and in combination with death agonists TNF or TRAIL.
UMSCC-46, an HPV(-) cell line which possesses high FADD expression, was
the only cell line to reach half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50)
72 hours post treatment with birinapant alone (IC50 = 10.7 nM); however,
8 of 11 HPV(-) cell lines and all 8 HPV(+) cell lines attained an IC50
(range: 0.1 - 794 nM) when treated with birinapant in combination with
either TNF or TRAIL. We further demonstrated that forced FADD
overexpression in a previously resistant cell line (UMSCC-38) led to
sensitization when treated with birinapant and TNF. In vivo, two
FADD/cIAP1 overexpressing murine xenograft models of HNSCC, UMSCC-46 and
UMSCC-11B, were treated with birinapant at 15 mg/kg or 30 mg/kg every 3
days for a total of 10 treatments. The single modality regimen led to
tumor growth inhibition and prolonged host survival. Additionally,
combination treatment with birinapant 15 mg/kg and radiation 2Gy/day M-F
for 2 weeks synergistically induced TNF and led to a cure of animals
bearing UMSCC-46 xenografts. Mechanistically, birinapant enhanced
degradation of cIAP1 and modulated caspase apoptotic or MLKL necroptotic
cell death markers in vitro and in vivo. These results suggest that
patients harboring genomic alterations in FADD and/or cIAP overexpression
may be candidates for treatment with birinapant and radiation.Supported
by NIDCD intramural projects ZIA-DC-000073, and 74.

