Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Moderate-intensity exercise to reduce radiation therapy-related
fatigue in black breast cancer patients: A feasibility trial


Background: Fatigue is an important side-effect of radiation therapy (RT)
for treatment of early stage breast cancer. Evidence on the efficacy of
physical activity (PA) interventions in reducing fatigue among Black
cancer patients undergoing RT is lacking. In a randomized controlled
trial we tested the efficacy of a structured PA intervention, coinciding
with the start of RT, in reducing cancer-related fatigue among Black
patients undergoing RT for breast cancer.Methods: We randomly assigned 30
Black, sedentary, RT-nave, non-pregnant patients diagnosed with stage
0-IIIA breast cancer who had completed adjuvant or neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy and were scheduled for RT to the PA intervention (n = 15)
and control groups (n = 15). PA intervention was an 8-week structured,
moderate-intensity aerobic exercise regimen (75 minutes/week) using
PEDLARS (portable stationary cycle ergometers) concurrent with RT.
Fatigue was measured by using the Functional Assessment of Chronic
Illness Therapy-Fatigue (FACIT-Fatigue) survey, a 13-item scale whose
score ranges from 0 to 52 with a higher score denoting lower fatigue. We
used ANCOVA to compare fatigue levels between the groups at T8 weeks
after adjusting for baseline (T0) fatigue levels. We also compared change
in fatigue scores (T8 weeks - T0) using 2-sample t-tests. All tests were
double-sided with alpha = 0.05.Results: 27 women completed baseline and
follow-up assessments. After adjusting for baseline fatigue scores,
intervention group participants reported lower fatigue at T8 weeks than
the control group (42.53 vs. 37.12; P = 0.17). Intervention group
participants improved their fatigue scores at T8 weeks compared to T0
(mean change +1.3) but the control group did not (mean change -1.91; P =
0.42).Conclusion: Although statistically not significant,
moderate-intensity exercise regimen among Black breast cancer patients
undergoing RT was associated with lower RT-associated fatigue. This trial
demonstrated the feasibility and acceptability of conducting a randomized
clinical trial of a moderate-intensity exercise program among women
initiating RT for breast cancer.

