Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression measurement of immuno-oncology targets in a single
FFPE section using a novel targeted sequencing assay


Background and Purpose: The field of immuno-oncology (IO) covers a broad
set of research disciplines and presents a highly diverse set of
experimental requirements. The challenges include sample types of varying
quality and quantity of material (including both small fixed samples and
blood products) as well as an expanding multiplicity of targets to assay
for immunological response. The HTG EdgeSeq system combines HTG's
proprietary quantitative nuclease protection assay chemistry with a Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) platform to enable semiquantitative analysis
of hundreds of targeted genes in a single assay. The novel HTG EdgeSeq
Immuno-Oncology Assay measures 549 IO-related genes and can be used with
most clinically relevant samples.Methods: An internal verification study
was performed to evaluate a five-point, two-fold titration series (6
concentrations) in a variety of sample types with as few as a 250 cells,
32 l of PAXgene, or 1.56 mm2 of a 5 m FFPE section. FFPE sample types
included: melanoma; DLBCL; and tissue from lung, breast, colon and renal
carcinomas. Additionally, examples of the biological relevance of this
data are provided by examination of expression from several pairs of
samples, each profiled using a single 5 m FFPE section.Results:
Equivalent expression across the dynamic range was obtained within each
of the sample types (Pearson correlations ranging between 0.84 to 0.98).
For DLBCL, while most canonical markers of immune cells showed similar
patterns of expression, different patterns of expression of T cell and NK
cell genes were obtained, likely indicating a different composition of
the immune cell infiltrates within these tumors. Specific to the two
different melanoma tumors the lymphocyte infiltrates appear to be similar
in these tumors. Interestingly, a markedly different immune response
appears to be occurring in the melanoma tumors. One tumor appears to be
mounting a significant type I interferon response, which is not as
apparent in the second tumor. Differential expression of other well-known
metastasis-associated genes are also observed between the two tumors.
These observations suggest that patterns of differential expression could
be used to assist in directing patients to targeted therapies.Conclusion:
The HTG EdgeSeq Immuno-Oncology Assay provides a valuable tool for
researchers exploring the immune response to tumors across a wide variety
of tissues. Combining highly reproducible results with very small sample
input amounts allows the assay to be utilized for the very small and
precious samples available to researchers in this field.

