Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemo-preventive efficacy of a natural product anti-cancer agent
which surpasses Taxol


Breast cancer (BC), a major public health problem, is one of the leading
causes of cancer-related deaths among women. In particular,
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), the most aggressive form of BC
poses significant therapeutic challenges. TNBCs are most common in women
with BRCA1 gene mutations, younger women, and in pre-menopausal African
American (AA) women compared to White women, significantly contributing
to health disparities. Consisting of many heterogeneous, undifferentiated
cell types including very high mammary cancer stem cell (MCSCs) content,
TNBCs are diseases with high recurrence rates. Combining therapeutics to
target a variety of growth pathways has inhibited growth and shrunk
aggressive TN tumors. Yet, a major drawback of such therapy is the severe
side effects commonly used chemotherapeutic agents have on normal cells.
Therefore there is a critical need to develop new combinations of
therapeutics that target MCSCs and improve the anticancer effects, while
reducing harmful side effects. We present compelling preliminary findings
comparing the anticancer effects of aqueous extracts of a plant, Vernonia
amygdalina (VA), alone or in combination with Paclitaxel (TAX) in vitro
and against TNBC cells injected into athymic mice intra-peritoneally. The
effects of TAX alone or VA extracts alone or with TAX, were evaluated in
Hsd:Athymic Nude-Foxn1nu, age 5-6 weeks, female mice inoculated
subcutaneously with Hras MCSCs. Animals were grouped as follows:
1-Control, inoculated with Hras cells only; 2-VA treatment (10 mg/kg)
simultaneously with injection of Hras cells, followed by 16-day VA
treatment; 3-replicate of 2; 4-pretreatment with VA 10 days before
injection of Hras cells, followed by 16-day VA treatment; 5-IP
inoculation of TAX (10 mg/kg) simultaneously with injection of Hras
cells; and 6-subcutaneous inoculation of VA (5 mg/kg) plus IP injection
of TAX (5 mg/kg) simultaneously with injection of Hras cells. Studies
revealed that though there was a lag in tumor growth for all treatment
groups, the most significant reduction in tumor size was observed in
group 4 animals, those which had been pretreated with VA each day for 10
days prior to inoculation with Hras cells. In the second round of
experiments, we evaluated the efficacy of VA extracts (10-day
pretreatment, high dose, 20 mg/kg) administered simultaneously with
injections of both Hras cells and AA woman-derived MDA-MB-468 cells, at
opposing sites, versus combined treatment with very low doses of VA and
TAX (5 mg/kg of each agent, subcutaneously) toward inhibition of growth
of tumors in our nude mice model. Based upon our findings, VA extract
exhibits chemopreventative efficacy, addressing a major health problem
which is the dominant biological cause of population-based disparities in
BC mortality in the U.S. Our expectation is that this work could direct
further in vivo studies and eventually translate to human clinical trials.

