Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of highly selective inhibitors of cyclin-dependent
kinase 12


CDK12 and CDK13 belong to the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) family, which
includes at least 20 different human CDKs and CDK-like enzymes. One
subclass of CDKs (e.g. CDK7, CDK8, CDK9, CDK12 and CDK13) preferentially
regulates transcription by phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of
RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), whereas another subgroup of CDKs plays a
pivotal role in controlling cell cycle progression (e.g. CDK1, CDK2,
CDK4, CDK6 and CDK7). Both groups - cell cycle as well as transcriptional
CDKs - have been reported to be involved in cancer development and
progression. Recent reports indicated CDK12 to be involved in DNA damage
repair mechanisms and linked its mutation to high-grade serous ovarian
carcinoma rendering CDK12 a promising target for drug development.
However, the pivotal role of individual CDKs and their complex regulation
requests for highly selective inhibitors to avoid unwanted adverse
effects. Non-specific first-generation CDK-inhibitors cause toxicity in
vivo issues. They showed little to no therapeutic window in clinical
trials and thus shifted the focus to the optimization of selective small
molecule CDK inhibitors.To identify selective small molecular weight
inhibitors of CDK12 and CDK13 we employed a rationale drug discovery
approach based on a focused kinase library screen. Screening of slightly
over 16.000 compounds identified several hit compound classes. Medicinal
chemistry based optimization yielded nanomolar CDK12 inhibitors. The
selectivity of these improved CDK12 inhibitors is excellent, when tested
against 12 CDK family members. Such selective CDK12 inhibitors have also
shown promising physicochemical properties, indicating lead- and
drug-likeness. Although, potency on the target still needs to be
improved, the frontrunners from our selective CDK12 inhibitor family have
shown cellular inhibition of CDK12 substrate phosphorylation such as
those of RNA polymerase II. Currently, potency of these CDK12 inhibitors
is being improved by using structure-guided medicinal chemistry-based
optimization. The resulting lead candidates will then be tested in in
vivo cancer models.

