Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel targeted and immunotherapy combinations by
a high throughput assay of T cell-mediated cytotoxicity


Melanoma is the major cause of skin cancer-related deaths. However, the
recent emergence of immune checkpoint inhibitors such as Ipilimumab
(anti-CTLA-4) and Nivolumab (anti-PD-1), and adoptive cell therapy, using
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), has improved clinical outcomes and
produced response rates of approximately 50%. Despite the progress made
in melanoma immunotherapy, there is a large cohort of patients for which
these treatments are currently not applicable. They are either inherently
resistant to or acquire resistance to immunotherapy. As such,
understanding mechanisms of resistance to immune response and
ascertaining efficacious therapy combinations is important in overcoming
immunoresistance and developing novel treatment regimens.As proof of
principle, preliminary work using a unique protocol for an in vitro
T-cell mediated cytotoxicity screen was established. In this assay,
intracellular staining of active caspase-3 in tumor cells, a marker of
apoptosis, is measured by flow cytometry in a 96-well format. Using
patient-derived tumor and TIL pairs, a screen of 850 compounds was
performed to find candidate drugs that could modulate the sensitivity of
tumor cells to T- cell mediated killing. Initial screens identified
classes of compounds that inhibit Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), Aurora
Kinase and Topoisomerase I, and studies to understand their mechanisms of
action are currently underway.However, as this screening process is very
time-intensive, we are currently increasing the efficiency and
feasibility of this screen by miniaturizing this workflow. This work
presents the development of a screening method that is performed in a
384-well format, with a greater drug concentration range, and utilizing
robotics to streamline and increase output. With this, we can
specifically identify novel targeted and immunotherapy combinations that
may be used in the clinic to treat melanoma. Additionally, by
understanding the signaling pathways and molecular factors that regulate
tumor response to T cell mediated killing, we can translate these
findings into making immune-based cancer therapies applicable to other
tumor types. This project aims to discover novel compounds that work
synergistically with T-cell mediated tumor cell cytotoxicity, understand
their mechanism of action and how they contribute to resistance and as a
result identify innovative immune-based therapies that can be translated
into clinical use.

