Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel small molecule inhibitor targets the DNA double strand
break repair protein Ku70/80


Purpose: Non-Homologous End-Joining (NHEJ) is the primary pathway for the
repair of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) in human and mammalian cells.
NHEJ is frequently upregulated in diverse solid malignancies and is a
determining factor in the process of carcinogenesis. In addition,
upregulation of the NHEJ pathway can reduce the efficiency of anti-cancer
therapies including radiation or chemotherapy. Inhibition of NHEJ by
siRNA reduces the growth of NHEJ-upregulated tumors and alleviates
radiation-refractory disease. The Ku70/80 heterodimer is the central
scaffolding protein of the NHEJ pathway, which recruits and activates all
other key NHEJ factors. Therefore, Ku70/80 protein is a logical target
for disruption of the NHEJ process.Experimental Procedures: We report the
identification of a prospective binding pocket in the Ku70/80 crystal
structure, located in close proximity to the DNA-binding domain and the
Ku70/80 heterodimer interface. Based on this pocket, an idealized virtual
ligand (protomol) was created and utilized to screen in silico an
extensive database of small molecule compounds for potential ligands.
Nine of the highest ranking hits were chosen for biological
evaluation.Results: We identified one compound (designated Compound L),
which proved capable of disrupting the in vitro binding of Ku70/80 to a
DNA substrate in a dose-dependent manner with an IC50 of 3.5 M. In
addition, Compound L showed dose-dependent inhibition of DNA-Dependent
Protein Kinase Catalytic Subunit (DNA-PKCS) activity, which requires
Ku70/80 as a co-factor with an IC50 of 2.5 M. Finally, we showed that
Compound L synergistically sensitizes a glioblastoma cell line to
ionizing radiation, with a marked sensitization at 20-25 M. This latter
observation clearly demonstrates the ability of Compound L to disrupt
NHEJ-mediated repair of radiation-induced DSBs.Conclusions: Compound L is
an active inhibitor of the Ku70/80 heterodimer. To the best of our
knowledge, no such compound has been reported in the peer-reviewed
literature. The structure of Compound L will be utilized as a scaffold
for a structure-activity relationship (SAR) based hit-to-lead drug
development aimed at designing a novel class of anti-cancer agents
targeting the Ku70/80 heterodimer. We predict Ku70/80 inhibitors would
have applicability as single-modality drugs, following a synthetic
lethality approach, or as sensitizing agents for concurrent radiation or
chemotherapy in a variety of solid malignancies.Support: P30 CA023074.

