Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational control of MYC protein stability as a target of
small molecules


It is well established that MYC family proteins drive tumor growth and
sustain the malignant phenotype. However, MYC family proteins have gained
the reputation of being un-druggable by small molecule inhibitors. This
is because MYC proteins lack intrinsic enzymatic activities or
appropriate molecular grooves to which small molecules may bind and
inhibit their function. Nonetheless, previous studies suggest that MYC
family proteins (MYC, MYCN, MYCL) can be targetable indirectly by
accelerating their turnover rate at different biochemical pathways that
regulate the steady state level of the proteins. These include
transcriptional-inhibition of the corresponding genes and acceleration of
their proteasome-dependent degradation. The goal of this study is to gain
a better understanding of how the MYC family protein turnover is
regulated, which in turn might help develop future new drugs against MYC
family-driven cancers. We have used neuroblastoma, a childhood cancer, as
a disease model and identified several small molecules that rapidly
destabilize MYC and MYCN proteins in MYC-driven neuroblastoma cells. The
small molecules include FCCP, OSU-03012 and Salinomycin. Preliminary data
suggest that the common target of these compounds is mitochondria.
Recently, we have also found Halofuginone, an FDA approved orphan drug
for Scleroderma treatment exhibits a similar MYC-destabilizing activity.
At submicromolar concentrations and less than one hour of drug-treatment,
Halofuginone rapidly causes significant down-regulation of MYC proteins
in neuroblastoma cells. Halofuginone is known to activate the eIF2
pathway, which controls translation. Activation of the eIF2 pathway is
initiated by the activation of eIF2a kinases (GCN2, HRI, PERK, PKR) via
autophosphorylation by various stress-related stimuli such as reactive
oxygen species and misfolded proteins. The activated eIF2 kinases then
inactivates eIF2 by phosphorylation, which subsequently halts translation
globally. Interestingly, FCCP, OSU-03012 and Salinomycin treatments also
caused eIF2 phosphorylation. These observations suggest that activation
of the eIF2 pathway results in translational block of the MYC family
protein expression in tumor cells. Because half-lives of MYC family
proteins are very short, a sudden attenuation in protein translation can
cause rapid down-regulation of the proteins. Hence, activation of the
eIF2 pathway by small molecules may prove effective for rapid
down-regulation of MYC family proteins in MYC-driven cancer cells.

