Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly potent monoclonal and bispecific anti-angiogenic antibodies
to VEGF and angiopoietin-2


The angiogenic factor Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) is a
well-established target for cancer therapy. The humanized monoclonal
antibody (mAb) bevacizumab (Avastin), which binds and neutralizes VEGF,
is widely prescribed for the treatment of colon, lung and certain other
tumors, but typically provides a relatively modest survival benefit of
several months. It is unknown whether the limited benefit is due to
redundancy in angiogenic pathways or to the inability of bevacizumab at
the doses used to fully neutralize VEGF in the tumor microenvironment.
However, the exploration of higher doses of bevacizumab in the clinical
setting has been very limited due to lack of incentive to perform
dose-ranging studies for an already approved drug, the expense of the
drug, and concern about toxicity. To determine whether more effective
neutralization of VEGF would be possible and useful, we have therefore
used an intensive immunization protocol to generate a new murine mAb
designated VE1 that binds VEGF with very high affinity. A humanized form
of this mAb, HuVE1, retains the full affinity of VE1 and binds VEGF about
5-fold better than bevacizumab. In side-by-side comparisons, HuVE1 also
blocked the binding of VEGF to its receptor with an IC50 that is 5 to
10-fold lower than for bevacizumab, and it correspondingly inhibited
VEGF-induced proliferation of HUVEC about 5-fold better than bevacizumab.
HuVE1 almost completely blocked growth of primary human hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) xenografts in one model, and showed a trend toward better
efficacy than bevacizumab in a second HCC xenograft model. For
potentially even greater anti-angiogenic efficacy, we developed a
humanized mAb HuA2T that potently neutralizes angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2), a
cytokine that acts through the Tie-2 receptor to promote angiogenesis,
especially in combination with VEGF. The synergy between VEGF and Ang-2
provides a strong rationale to develop a bispecific mAb that neutralizes
both these factors. We therefore developed such a mAb using the IgG-like
bispecific antibody format Bs(scFv)4-IgG consisting of a homodimer of two
monomers, each monomer having a single chain Fv from HuVE1 linked to a
light chain constant region, and a single chain Fv from HuA2T linked to a
heavy chain constant region. While, as is common in construction of
bispecific antibodies, this bispecific HuA2T/HuVE1 mAb did lose some
binding affinity for VEGF and Ang-2 relative to the original mAbs, its
VEGF binding activity was still greater than that of bevacizumab,
illustrating the importance of starting with an extremely high activity
mAb. Based on its potency in vitro and in animal models, we believe that
HuVE1, in either natural or bispecific form, has the potential for
greater clinical efficacy than bevacizumab and thus merits further
investigation.

