Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of taxane resistance in prostate cancer through
RNA-Seq analysis of circulating tumor cells


Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed male cancer in the United
States. Taxanes are the only established chemotherapy drugs proven to be
effective in improving survival of men with advanced prostate cancer
through disruption of the AR-signaling axis downstream of microtubule
stabilization. However, there is significant heterogeneity in how
patients respond to taxanes and most patients ultimately become
refractory due to the development of drug resistance. Currently, the
molecular basis of clinical taxane resistance in PC is poorly understood.
Prostate cancer circulating tumor cells (P-CTCs) are often found in the
peripheral blood of patients suffering from metastatic prostate cancer
and have been clinically used as prognostic biomarker for metastatic
progression and treatment outcome. The objective of this study is to
identify clinically relevant mechanisms of taxane resistance through
conducting RNA-Seq analysis in P-CTCs isolated from patients before,
during and after they become refractory to taxane chemotherapy.To show
feasibility of RNA-Seq experiments with limiting samples such as CTCs and
given the presence of contaminating leucocytes, a pilot experiment was
performed in which limiting numbers of prostate cancer cells (LNCaP)
either pure or enriched following spiking into healthy donor blood, were
analyzed by RNA-Seq. Matching healthy donor blood processed with the same
enrichment protocol was used as germline control as well as control for
the presence of contaminating leucocytes following CTC enrichment.
Trimmed reads were aligned to human reference genome (hg38) using STAR.
Determination of Fragments Per Kilobase of exon per Million mapped
fragments (FPKM) was performed using Cufflinks and heat map was built
based on the value of log10(FPKM+1). Gene expression analysis showed that
markers of prostate (such as AR, PSMA, KLK3, KLK2, and AMACR) or
epithelial lineage (such as EpCAM, CDH1, KRT8 and KRT18) were detected in
both pure LNCaP cells-regardless of amount- as well as limited number of
captured LNCaP cells in the presence of contaminating leucocytes. In
contrast, healthy donor blood was negative for the prostate and
epithelial lineage markers and positive for the leucocyte specific
markers (such as CD45 and CD16). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
indicated significant enrichment for Andorgen response, MYC, MTOR and RB
related pathways in pure and captured LNCap cells compared with healthy
donor blood. These data clearly show that by using RNA-Seq we can detect
the prostate and epithelial specific gene signatures of limited number of
spiked prostate cancer cells using the microfluidic device. Ongoing work
includes RNA-Seq analysis of P-CTCs isolated from patients before and
after taxane treatment, in order to detect differentially expressed
genes, pathways, and potentially driver somatic mutations associated with
clinical taxane resistance.

