Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-treatment of metastasis-derived colon cancer cells with
bromoethyl indole (BEI) enhances camptothecin or TNF alpha-induced cell
death


Colorectal cancer is still the third most deadly cancer in the United
States. Currently, there are limited choices of targeted anticancer
agents that are durably effective against colorectal cancer. Therefore,
chemotherapeutic regimens containing the drugs Camptothecin (CPT), 5-FU
and Oxaliplatin remain the mainstays for the treatment of advanced
colorectal cancer. We recently found that the indole-derivative small
compound Bromoethyl Indole (BEI) potently inhibits the proliferation of
colon cancer cells and also suppresses NF-kB activation. In this study,
we investigated if the combination of BEI with either CPT or TNF would
enhance cell death in vitro. Metastasis-derived parental or engineered
NF-kB-reporter colon cancer cells were used to examine 1) the activation
of NF-kB signaling by clinically used drugs, 2) the potential for BEI to
inhibit drug-induced NF-kB activation, and 3) the potential for
combination treatment to enhance cell death in vitro. Cells were treated
with either the drugs alone or in combination with BEI at varying
concentrations. NF-kB-inducing concentration of CPT (0.6 to 2.5 M), TNF
(25 to 50 ng/ml), and BEI concentrations of 1 to 50 M range were tested.
Cell cycle profiles and cell death markers were assessed to determine the
effects of single or co-treatments. The expressions of Bcl-xL and cIAP2
(BIRC3) proteins were examined to monitor the targets of NF-kB
activation.Our results show that 1) both TNF and CPT induce NF-kB
signaling in metastasis-derived colon cancer cells, 2) combination of BEI
and TNF or CPT inhibits such a drug-induced NF-kB activation and reduces
the expression of NF-kB responsive genes, 3) sequential treatment of the
cells with CPT and BEI delivers the best outcome, increasing cell death
by up to 3-fold compared to either CPT or BEI alone, and 4) co-treatment
of the cells with TNF and BEI increases cell death by up to 2-fold
compared to either TNF or BEI alone, 5) BEI is most effective in inducing
cell death at concentrations between 2 and 10 M.We anticipate that BEI
will improve the therapeutic index of some chemotherapeutic drugs.
Therefore, the potential benefit for combination of BEI with NF-kB
activating drugs needs to be evaluated in vivo.

