Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between MUC1 and STAT1 drives IFITM1 overexpression in
aromatase inhibitor-resistant breast cancer cells


Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) successfully treat many estrogen receptor
expressing breast cancers by depleting circulating estrogen levels.
Unfortunately, many patients eventually develop resistance to this
treatment. In order to elucidate the mechanism(s) of AI-resistance, our
lab has developed an AI-resistant breast cancer cell line MCF-7:5C which
was clonally derived from parental MCF-7 cells following long-term
estrogen deprivation. Unlike MCF-7 cells, the AI-resistant MCF-7:5C cell
line grows robustly in the absence of estrogen and is highly aggressive.
We have previously reported that interferon induced transmembrane protein
1 (IFITM1) is overexpressed in MCF-7:5C cells and in AI-resistant breast
tumors. Additionally, we have shown that loss of IFITM1 leads to cell
death. What remains to be addressed is how IFITM1 expression is regulated
in AI-resistant breast cancer cells. IFITM1 is a type 1 interferon (IFN)
stimulated gene which is not expressed in normal tissue and is only
induced by the type1 IFNs (IFN/). In previous studies we have found that
MCF-7:5C cells produce elevated levels of IFN, which binds to the type 1
IFN receptor, IFNAR, and induces JAK/STAT signaling, resulting in the
overexpression of IFITM1. In this study, we further characterized the
mechanisms of IFITM1 overexpression in AI-resistant MCF-7:5C cells. We
have found that mucin 1 (MUC1) associates with STAT1 and stabilizes its
phosphorylated form, thereby enhancing IFITM1 expression. This
interaction is disrupted by treatment with the JAK inhibitor,
Ruxolitinib. MUC1 is a transmembrane O-glycosylated protein that is
overexpressed in 90% of breast cancers and known to promote the survival
of the epithelium through formation of mucous, interaction with
transcription factors and inhibition of apoptosis. A luciferase reporter
determined that MUC1 contributes directly to IFITIM1 transcription. MUC1
expression is hormonally controlled and is normally enhanced by estrogen
stimulation. In this study we found that MUC1 expression is dysregulated
in AI-resistant MCF-7:5C cells and is instead reduced by estrogen
stimulation. In contrast with the AI-sensitive MCF-7 cells, western blot
and immunofluorescent staining showed that MUC1 expression was enhanced
by treatment with the pure anti-estrogen, fulvestrant. Additionally,
Annexin V/PI staining and PARP cleavage indicated that loss of MUC1
expression induced cell death in MCF-7:5C cells. We found that treatment
with fulvestrant protects MCF-7:5C cells from this phenomenon, indicating
that loss of MUC1 induces apoptosis in an ER dependent manner. MCF-7:5C
cells are sensitive to apoptosis following exposure to estrogen, which
can be enhanced by loss of IFITM1 expression. We report that loss of MUC1
expression similarly enhances estrogen-induced apoptosis, suggesting that
the communication between MUC1 and STAT1 also influences estrogen
signaling in AI-resistant breast cancer.

