Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MR prediction of tumor burden in Patient-Derived Mouse Xenografts
model of glioblastoma using an adaptive model


Introduction: In human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), infiltrating cells
are found in remote locations, even in the hemisphere contralateral to
the primary lesion. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) allows approximation
of the extent of tumor cell infiltration. However, the actual extent of
infiltration may be greater or less than the edema, and there is no
standard MRI practice that allow exploring the infiltrating tumor burden.
This pilot study investigates the feasibility of using a set of MR
modalities for the development of an MRI estimate of infiltrating tumor
burden in Patient-Derived Mouse Xenografts model of GBM using an adaptive
model.Material and Methods: 8 mice implanted with GBM CSC HF2927 were
studied. MRI studies were performed in a Direct Drive Varian 7 Tesla. The
following image sets were acquired: high-res. T1-weighted; T2-weighted
(TE/TR = (20, 40, 60, 80)/3000 ms); MT-weighted fast spin-echo. Magnevist
(0.25 mmol/kg i.p) was injected about 5 minutes before the post-contrast
T1-weighted image set was acquired. The animal was sacrificed immediately
after MRI and stained for the presence of human GBM cells. We used the
following MRI sequences to establish a basis set for training the AM:
pre- and post-contrast (Magnevist, I.P.) T1-weighted, 4-echo T2, MT,
3-direction, 3 b-value diffusion-weighted. Maps of T2 and proton density
(T2-PD) were produced by fitting the T2 data. The histology image was
warped and co-registered to the T2-PD image using mouse brain anatomical
landmarks. MR image sets were normalized to the white matter area of the
brain, and each voxel profile extracted from the 9 image set was
normalized to the summation of two normalized T2 images (echo 2 and 3),
following which the normalized profile along with the co-registered
histology was used for training and testing of an artificial neural
network (ANN) with Multi-Layer perceptron architecture to predict the
presence of local tumor burden in form of tumorous cell density.Results
and Conclusions: The ANN was successfully trained and validated using
K-Fold Cross Validation technique (KFCV) and the 9 MR modalities as its
input set. Results imply that the chosen MRI feature set contains
adequate information content for training the ANN. The predictive power
of the ANN was 0.81. The correlation coefficient for the association
between the predicted map and histology was 0.85. Given the success of
training an ANN to predict infiltrating tumor burden, it may be possible
to identify similar or different basis set of MRI images that can
robustly predict both infiltrating and solid tumor burden in human GBM.

