Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic and microenvironment changes in the mammary of calorie
restricted, normal weight, and obese mice throughout the lifespan


Background: Breast tissue remodeling occurs with age and is marked by a
progressive increase in stromal tissue. Advancing age is also associated
with increased senescence among stromal cells that promote a
protumorigenic microenvironment by adopting a senescence-associated
secretory phenotype (SASP). In previous studies, calorie restriction has
been effective in cancer prevention through inhibiting cellular
senescence and SASP. However, obesity has shown to be cancer promoting
with inconsistent findings on its role in cellular senescence.Purpose: We
tested the hypothesis that calorie restriction is protective to the
protumorigenic, age-related changes that occur within the mammary
microenvironment while diet-induced obesity accelerates these
changes.Methods: Six week old female mice were randomized to receive
either a low-fat control regimen (10 kcal% fat), a 30% calorie restricted
(CR) regimen relative to control, or a high-fat diet induced obesity
(DIO, 60 kcal% fat) regimen, resulting in control, CR, and DIO mice
respectively. A subset of mice was sacrificed at 1, 3, 5, 12 and 20
months following diet initiation with mammary fat pads (MFP) harvested
and serum stored for further analysis. H&E staining was analyzed using a
digital algorithm to quantify the composition of adipose, epithelia and
stoma in the MFP tissue. RNA was extracted from MFP sections and rt-PCR
was preformed to analyze gene expression of CDKN2a, the gene encoding
p16(INK4a) a well known marker for senescence.Results: CR significantly
decreased body weight and decreased serum IGF-1, insulin, leptin and
estradiol and significantly increased adiponectin relative to control and
DIO mice at all time points. MFP composition remained relatively stable
from 1 and 12-month time points. However, there was an apparent
non-significant trend from 12 and 20-month time points, with increasing
stromal tissue and a decrease in adipose tissue, which was most drastic
in CR mice. Gene expression analysis showed an increase in CDKN2a
expression in control mice relative to CR mice at 5 and 20-month time
points. Additionally, control and CR mice demonstrated an increase in
CDKN2a expression with age from 5 months to 20-months.Conclusions:
Stromal composition of murine MFP displayed an age-related increase that
is consistent with findings in human breast tissue. Despite this uniform
increase, we see a decrease in the age-related acquisition of a
senescence phenotype in CR mice relative to control supporting the notion
that CR is protective to this protumorigenic change that occurs with
advancing age. Ongoing analysis of gene expression in DIO mice will
determine the role of obesity in MFP cellular senescence and confirmation
of senescent phenotypes via -galactosidase staining and analysis of SASP
associated gene expression.

