Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Factors associated with false positive results on screening
mammography in a population of predominantly Hispanic women


Objective - High rates of screening mammography have been reported among
Hispanic women in the U.S. However, a potential harm of screening is a
false positive result with recall breast imaging or biopsy. Our objective
was to identify factors associated with false positive results on
screening mammography among a predominantly Hispanic population in New
York City.Methods - We enrolled women receiving mammography at Columbia
University Medical Center in New York, NY. They completed a questionnaire
on breast cancer risk factors and gave consent to access their medical
records for breast imaging and biopsy reports for the past 15 years.
Breast cancer risk was assessed using the Gail model and eligibility for
BRCA genetic testing was determined using a family history screener. High
breast density was defined qualitatively as heterogeneously or extremely
dense. Recall breast imaging was based upon a BIRADS score of 0, 3, 4, 5,
or 6 on the screening mammogram. False positive breast biopsies were any
biopsies that did not yield breast cancer.Results - From November 2014 to
May 2015, 1325 women were enrolled: median age 58 years (range, 29-89);
white/black/Hispanic/other (%): 10/10/76/4; 25% met high-risk criteria
for breast cancer; 31% had high breast density; 71% were undergoing
annual mammography; 53% had at least one recall breast imaging and 6% had
at least one false positive breast biopsy. In multivariable analysis,
high breast cancer risk, high breast density, and more frequent screening
mammograms were associated with recall breast imaging and
biopsy.Conclusions - Based upon our results, a potential strategy to
reduce the false positive rates on screening mammography is to target
women at high risk for breast cancer or with high breast density for
screening with breast tomosynthesis, which has less false positives than
digital mammography. Additionally, we may adopt less frequent breast
cancer screening in average risk women to further reduce the harms of
screening.
Factors associated with Recall Breast Imaging and False Positive Biopsy

