Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methionine restriction alters functional polarization of
macrophages in a murine model of prostate cancer


Background: Epidemiological studies link prostate cancer (CaP) to dietary
intake. Recent research has shown that individuals consuming a Western
diet, high in protein, have higher circulating IGF-1 (insulin-like growth
factor 1) which feeds into the nutrient sensing mTOR pathway. This
evolutionarily conserved pathway is central to the development of
advanced stage and castration resistant CaP. Our previous published
studies have shown that dietary protein restriction inhibits tumor growth
via mTOR pathway alteration and reduces circulating IGF-1 levels in vivo.
The current study hypothesizes that dietary methionine restriction will
alter the functionality of immune cells enhancing the ability of the
immune system to respond to cancerous insults.Methods: Mice were fed low
(7% protein) or control protein (21% protein) diets. In a prevention
study mice consumed modified diets for four weeks prior to being
inoculated with CaP tumors. In a simultaneous intervention study mice
were inoculated with CaP tumors first then four weeks later were placed
on the modified diets.Results: In the low protein diet group, we observed
that pro-tumor M2 polarized macrophages were significantly reduced in the
tumor microenvironment (TME) for both prevention (p = 0.012) and
intervention diet (p = 0.0003) studies as compared to the control diet,
in addition to observation of mTOR inhibition and IGF-1 reduction.
Besides protein content in diet, we also analyzed the amino acid
composition. Multiple groups have shown that methionine restriction (MR)
inhibits mTOR activation, alters the immune system, and prolongs the
survival of rodents. The mechanism by which MR impacts the innate immune
system is still poorly understood. In our preliminary in vitro studies,
we observed that modification of a single amino acid (AA), such as
methionine, is sufficient to inhibit activation of both the mTOR pathway
and M2 polarization (Arginase1 qRT-PCR of two samples in quadruplicate (p
= 0.0732)), while increasing the presence of M1 macrophage marker iNOS (p
= 0.2689) in bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs). Thus, we
hypothesize that modulating specific amino acids in the diet is
sufficient to alter macrophage expression of M1/M2 characteristics, and
their functions in the TME.Conclusions: Preliminarily data shows that
altering one specific AA intricately linked to the mTOR pathway is
sufficient to change macrophage polarization status both at the protein
and gene expression levels, suggesting that dietary alteration of a
single AA is capable of altering macrophage function. The results of the
study provide the basis for translational use of dietary means to alter
the immune system and improve the therapeutic effects of immunotherapies.

