Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comorbidity factors associated with human papillomavirus
infectivity: Implications in cervical cancer health disparity


Objective: High-risk strains of human papillomavirus (HPV), HPV E6/E7
cause cervical cancer (CxCa). Certain underserved populations in the
United States, such as American Indian and African American women
disproportionately suffer from CxCa compared to their Caucasian counter
parts. However, precise etiology and comorbidity factors associated with
CxCa health disparity are not fully uncovered. Understanding of these
factors at molecular level will entail developing novel strategies to
reduce this health disparity. In this study, we have investigated the
molecular interplay existing between various comorbidity factors, namely,
smoking, alcohol and HIV co-infection on the HPV infectivity which are
primarily known for the progression of CxCa.Method: In order to define a
molecular association of smoking, alcohol and HIV co-infection with CxCa,
Caski and SiHa (HPV infected cervical cancer cells) cells were treated
with a smoking carcinogens Benzo[a]Pyrene (BaP) or alcohol (EthOH) or
both for different time periods. Effects of these treatment was analyzed
on cell proliferation, clonogenicity, cell migration, cell cycle and the
expression of HPV E6/E7 was determined by qRT-PCR, immunoblotting and
confocal microscopy. The effect of HIV co-infection on the expression of
HPV E6/E7 was also investigated by incubating CxCa cells with conditioned
medium derived from HIV infected U937 monocytic cells (U1). Additionally,
we examined effect of these cofactors on the expression enzymes
associated with cellular oxidative stress using immunoblotting and
confocal microscopy analyses.Result: Our results show that the exposure
of BaP or EthOH or their combination enhances the expression of HPV E6/E7
oncogenes. Additionally, cells treated with BaP and EthOH alone or in
combination show higher oncogenic phenotypes as evident by increased cell
proliferation, clonogenicity and cell migration andinvasion. These
cofactors in presence of HIV co-infection also augment the expression of
HPVE6/E7 oncogenes. Exposure of these cofactors alter cellular oxidative
stress via modulation of the expression of PRDX6 enzyme. Interestingly,
curcumin and its nanoparticle formulation (Nano-Cur) effectively inhibits
BaP/EthOH induced expression of E6/E7 oncogenes, growth, migration of
CxCa cells and induces apoptosis.Conclusions: The study suggests a
molecular link between smoking, alcohol and HIV infection with HPV
infectivity and their potential association with CxCa health disparity.
These events however, can be effectively attenuated by
curcumin/nano-curcumin treatment, implying its role in CxCa
prevention/treatment. This provides hope for developing a feasible
approach to effectively reduce CxCa health disparity among underserved
populations.

