Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential regulation of human T-cells by TGR-1202, a novel PI3K
inhibitor


INTRODUCTION: TGR-1202 is a novel, next-generation PI3K inhibitor
presenting significant structural and pharmacological differences from
prior small-molecule PI3K inhibitors. TGR-1202 has high clinical efficacy
in treatment of B cell malignancies with a substantially differentiated
adverse event profile compared to previous PI3K inhibitors, specifically
concerning hepatotoxicity or colitis which have been minimal or
non-existent. It has been postulated that these effects may be due to T
cell immune-mediated mechanisms. We hypothesized that TGR-1202 preserves
the function of the regulatory T cell (Treg) population, translating to
decreased immune-mediated side effects after treatment. Here, we aimed to
compare effects of clinically available PI3K inhibitors on T cells with
an emphasis on Tregs.METHODS: We compared activity of idelalisib,
duvelisib, and TGR-1202 as single agents in vitro in isolated human T
cells. Viability, apoptosis, and proliferation were determined using
CellTiter Blue, annexin V/PI and CFSE staining. CBA and qRT PCR were used
to measure cytokines and transcription factors. Flow cytometry was used
to detect subset ratios and surface marker expression.RESULTS: First, we
observed comparable dose-dependent increases in cytotoxicity beginning at
25uM following treatment of isolated T cell populations with idelalisib,
duvelisib, or TGR-1202. At this dose, apoptosis was induced between 48
and 72h. Second, all inhibitors reduced cytokine production in CD3+ T
cells upon stimulation. Particularly, IFN-, IL-10 and IL-17a reduction
was less pronounced after TGR-1202 treatment, indicating relative
conservation of T cell response. All inhibitors lowered mRNA expression
of T-bet (Th1), GATA-3 (Th2) and FoxP3 (Treg), however FoxP3 levels were
consistently higher in TGR-1202 treated T cells. Third, we detected
normal CD4:CD8 ratio and unaffected proliferative capacity of CD4+ and
CD8+ subsets after drug treatment. Finally, all inhibitors decreased
total percent of Tregs following stimulation (CD4+ CD25HI FoxP3+)
accompanied by decreased expression of co-inhibitory molecules CTLA-4 and
PD-1 on the Tregs. Interestingly, TGR-1202 significantly preserved the
percent of Tregs closer to normal as well as surface expression of CTLA-4
and PD-1 on Tregs, indicating greater retention of immune checkpoint
blockade and suppressive phenotype.CONCLUSIONS: We report herein that
TGR-1202 affects human T cells differently than idelalisib and duvelisib.
TGR-1202 sustains IL-10 production, FoxP3 mRNA expression, and maintains
Treg percentage and expression of immune checkpoint molecules, suggesting
relative preservation of numbers and function of Tregs. Data presented
begin to provide novel insight into immune mediated cellular mechanisms
responsible for lack of side effects in clinical trials of TGR-1202. In
vivo models to further characterize effects on the T cell compartment are
ongoing.

