Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of the cardiotoxicity of the
proteasomal-targeted anticancer drugs bortezomib and carfilzomib


Bortezomib and carfilzomib are anticancer drugs that target the
proteasomal system. Case reports indicate that the use of these drugs can
result in cardiotoxicity. These drugs may also be used in combination
with doxorubicin, which is itself cardiotoxic. Thus, in order to
determine the mechanism of this cardiotoxicity studies were undertaken
using a neonatal rat myocyte primary cell model. Using LDH release as a
measure of damage in the myocyte model we showed that even brief exposure
(6 h) to submicromolar concentrations of bortezomib resulted in
significant myocyte damage. Carfilzomib was slightly less toxic and
displayed myocyte damage in the low micromolar concentration range.
Utilizing a fluorogenic substrate both bortezomib and carfilzomib
inhibited the chymotrypsin-like proteasomal activity of myocyte lysate in
the submicromolar concentration range. The inhibition kinetics were
consistent with formation of an essentially irreversible covalent complex
at the active site. Bortezomib irreversibly inhibited proteasomal
activity about four-fold faster than carfilzomib. Thus, the reduced
toxicity of carfilzomib may be due to its slower inhibition kinetics. A
brief pre-exposure (6 h) of myocytes to low non-toxic nanomolar
concentrations of bortezomib greatly increased doxorubicin-mediated
damage. The doxorubicin cardioprotective agent dexrazoxane partially
protected the myocytes from doxorubicin treatment and from bortezomib
plus doxorubicin treatment under these conditions. However, at slightly
toxic bortezomib concentrations dexrazoxane offered little protection
against bortezomib plus doxorubicin treatment. Bortezomib, at least over
short times, did not induce oxidative damage in myocytes as measured with
a fluorogenic DCF assay. Likewise, a 6 h bortezomib treatment did not
affect the mitochondrial membrane potential of myocytes as measured in a
JC-1 ratiometric assay. In conclusion both bortezomib and carfilzomib are
potently toxic to myocytes at submicromolar concentrations, likely
through their ability to irreversibly inhibit myocyte proteasomal
activity. Support: CIHR; a Canada Research Chair in Drug Development.

