Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNAs in exosomes from prostate cancer cells modify normal
fibroblasts and osteoblasts favoring tumor spread and metastasis


Introduction: Exosomes from bulk and cancer stem cells (CSCs) from
prostate cancer primary cultures present a differential pattern of
miRNAs. The most abundant miRNA in all exosomes is miR-100, while miR-21
and miR-139 were the most abundant differentially expressed miRNAs in
bulk and CSCs exosomes, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis suggested
that these miRNAs were related with tumor progression. The functional
effect of these miRNAs on targets related with changes at primary and
pre-metastatic microenvironment was evaluated in prostatic stromal cells
and osteoblasts.Methods: Normal human undifferentiated osteoblasts
(hFOB1.19) and prostate fibroblasts (WPMY-1) cell lines were transfected,
by separated, with 25 nM of the following miRNas: miR-100-5p, miR-21-5p,
miR-139-5p. let7c was included as transfection control. After 48 hours,
changes in the expression of metalloproteinases (MMP)-2, -9 and-13,
RANKL, OPG and IL-8 at mRNAs and protein levels were evaluated by qPCR
and western blot, respectively. As transfection control, expression of
specific targets previously described for each miRNA was evaluated.
Besides, the effect of miRNAs in fibroblast migration was evaluated by
transwell assay.Results: In fibroblasts, transfection with miR-21, -100
and -139 increased significantly expression of RANKL, IL8 and all MMPs,
with a higher effect in MMP-9. Besides, miR-21 increased fibroblast
migration. In osteoblasts, transfection with miRNAs changed the balance
that triggers vicious circle at the bone, increasing RANKL and
diminishing OPG expression. miRNAs also increased MMPs expression. The
greater effect was observed with miR-21 transfection.Conclusions: Through
exosomes, prostate cancer cells recruit normal cells to favor their
growth and spread. miRNAs in exosomes increase expression of proteins (in
particular, MMPs and RANKL) and cell migration of fibroblasts that create
a favorable microenvironment for tumor progression at the primary niche.
Besides, through bloodstream, tumoral exosomes can reach the bone,
preparing the premetastatic niche. miRNAs from these exosomes change the
balance RANKL/OPG that triggers osteoclast recruitment facilitating
metastases by activation of the bone vicious circle. miR-21,
overexpressed in bulk cells, the main cellular component of tumor, has
the higher effect in modify microenvironment, being a potential
therapeutic target. (FONDECYT 11121525 and 1140417).

