Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The modifying effects of the extract from Okinawan sweet potato
leaves in mouse colon carcinogenesis


A) IntroductionOkinawa is the southernmost islands in Japan. The climate
is subtropical and largely different from mainland of Japan. There are
various kinds of Okinawan specific plants and they have been eaten as
food. Okinawa is also known as the region where has large number of
centenarians. Okinawan specific plants could be the reason of longevity.
Okinawan sweet potato is one of these specific plants. Since old times,
Okinawan people have eaten the sweet potato leaves but this custom has
not be seen in mainland of Japan. In fact, Okinawan sweet potato contains
much higher polyphenols such as caffeoylquinic acid (CQA) derivatives
than other vegetables. It is reported that CQA derivatives have
anti-oxidative activity and anti-mutagenic activity. We examined the
modifying effect of Okinawan sweet potato leave extract in two-step mouse
colon carcinogenesis.B) Experimental procedures71 male ICR mice, 5
week-old, were divided into 5 groups. Mice in groups 1-3 were given
azoxymethane (AOM; 10 mg/kg body weight) by intraperitoneal injection
once at experimental first week, and one week after AOM injection they
were administrated 1.5% dextran sulfate sodium in drinking water for 7
days. Mice in group 1 were fed control diet (CE-2, CLEA Japan, Inc),and
mice in groups 2 and 3 were fed diet contained Okinawan sweet potato
leaves extract (200 ppm and 1000 ppm respectively). Mice in groups 4 and
5, which were not injected AOM, were fed diet contained Okinawan sweet
potato leaves extract (1000 ppm), and control diet respectively. At 12
experimental week, all mice were sacrificed and the colon tissues were
removed to count the number of preneoplastic lesion, aberrant crypt foci
(ACF), and were histologically analyzed the nodules larger than 3mm on
colonic mucosa.C) ResultsThe mean number of ACF was 1.640.95 (/colon
length cm) in group 1, 1.180.79 in group 2, 1.140.60 in group 3,
respectively. In high dose treated rats (group 3), the appearance of ACF
was slightly lower than that in group 1, although not significant (P =
0.09). Histopathologically, the most nodules were lymphoid follicles but
some showed neoplastic lesions. The neoplastic lesions were revealed as
adenoma or adenocarcinoma. The number of the neoplasm was 9, 8 and 2 in
groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The tumor incidence in group 3 was
inhibited those in groups 1 and 2 (PA) IntroductionOkinawa is the
southernmost islands in Japan. The climate is subtropical and largely
different from mainland of Japan. There are various kinds of Okinawan
specific plants and they have been eaten as food. Okinawa is also known
as the region where has large number of centenarians. Okinawan specific
plants could be the reason of longevity. Okinawan sweet potato is one of
these specific plants. Since old times, Okinawan people have eaten the
sweet potato leaves but this custom has not be seen in mainland of Japan.
In fact, Okinawan sweet potato contains much higher polyphenols such as
caffeoylquinic acid (CQA) derivatives than other vegetables. It is
reported that CQA derivatives have anti-oxidative activity and
anti-mutagenic activity. We examined the modifying effect of Okinawan
sweet potato leave extract in two-step mouse colon carcinogenesis.B)
Experimental procedures71 male ICR mice, 5 week-old, were divided into 5
groups. Mice in groups 1-3 were given azoxymethane (AOM; 10 mg/kg body
weight) by intraperitoneal injection once at experimental first week, and
one week after AOM injection they were administrated 1.5% dextran sulfate
sodium in drinking water for 7 days. Mice in group 1 were fed control
diet (CE-2, CLEA Japan, Inc),and mice in groups 2 and 3 were fed diet
contained Okinawan sweet potato leaves extract (200 ppm and 1000 ppm
respectively). Mice in groups 4 and 5, which were not injected AOM, were
fed diet contained Okinawan sweet potato leaves extract (1000 ppm), and
control diet respectively. At 12 experimental week, all mice were
sacrificed and the colon tissues were removed to count the number of
preneoplastic lesion, aberrant crypt foci (ACF), and were histologically
analyzed the nodules larger than 3mm on colonic mucosa.C) ResultsThe mean
number of ACF was 1.640.95 (/colon length cm) in group 1, 1.180.79 in
group 2, 1.140.60 in group 3, respectively. In high dose treated rats
(group 3), the appearance of ACF was slightly lower than that in group 1,
although not significant (P = 0.09). Histopathologically, the most
nodules were lymphoid follicles but some showed neoplastic lesions. The
neoplastic lesions were revealed as adenoma or adenocarcinoma. The number
of the neoplasm was 9, 8 and 2 in groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The
tumor incidence in group 3 was inhibited those in groups 1 and 2 (P<0.05
by Fisher exact test). No ACF and neoplastic lesions were observed in
groups 4 and 5.D) ConclusionIt was shown that Okinawan sweet potato leave
extract has a possibility to prevent the development and progression of
neoplasms in mouse colon carcinogenesis model.

