Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of early antimitotic treatment response in ovarian
cancer using temporal diffusion spectroscopy


A quantitative MRI method, namely, temporal diffusion spectroscopy (TDS),
has been used to measure tumor microstructural changes in response to a
well-established antimitotic drug treatment (protein-bound paclitaxel)
and evaluated as an early indicator of tumor responsiveness. Current
radiological methods of monitoring treatment response in solid tumors
rely on measuring changes in tumor size as measured by CT or MRI, and it
is well recognized this approach suffers from major limitations. In
recent years, tumor size measurements have been supplemented by a number
of imaging techniques that aim for in vivo characterization and
measurement of biologic processes at the cellular and molecular level,
but to date none has proven robustly successful in practice. For example,
diffusion MRI has shown a high sensitivity to tumor response, but a
relatively lower specificity e.g. sometimes unable to distinguish real
response of responder tumors from the progression of some
non-responders.Temporal diffusion spectroscopy measures a series of
apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC) over a wide range of effective
diffusion times, corresponding to diffusion distances ranging from
subcellular to cellular levels ( 3-20 m). By fitting the measured ADC
spectra to a simplified tissue model, parameters reflecting structural
properties (such as cell size) in tissues can be extracted. Abraxane, one
of the most successful microtubule-targeted chemotherapeutic drugs, has
been reported to induce aberrant mitosis in tumor cells leads to mitotic
arrest, the consequence of which is a cell size increase. In the current
study, we implemented TDS in Abraxane/PBS-treated two types of human
ovarian xenografts and cultured cells (OVCAR-8 as a responder to
Abraxane, and NCI/ADR-RES as a resistant type). Abraxane-induced cell
size increases were confirmed by flow cytometry and light microscopy in
cell culture. The efficacy of Abraxane in treating tumors in vivo was
examined histologically by calculating percentages of Caspase-3-activated
area within Caspase-3 stained slides. Most excitingly, the fitted
restricted size, one of the spectral parameters obtained from TDS, was
able to quantify cell size increases which were not detected by
conventional diffusion-MRI. All the MR results had a high degree of
consistency with other flow, microscopy, and histological data. Moreover,
with an appropriate analysis, the Abraxane-responsive tumors in vivo
could be easily distinguished from all the other drug-vehicle-treated
tumors and Abraxane-resistant tumors. In conclusion, temporal diffusion
spectroscopy detects antimitotic-therapy-induced microstructural
variations (notably, increases in cell sizes) in tumors in vivo which
occur before changes in tumor volume or conventional diffusion MRI
metrics. A combination of restricted size and zero-frequency diffusion
coefficient can potentially be used as an early indicator of tumor
responsiveness.

