Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes from mutant TP53 cancer cells polarize tumor associated
macrophages


Introduction: TP53 mutants are involved in the pathogenesis of most solid
tumors and are known to gain oncogenic functions distinct from their
original wild-type form. The existence of such gain-of-function (GOF)
activities is supported by ample evidence, however only in a
cell-autonomous fashion. Since tumor-associated-macrophages (TAM) are
also a hallmark of solid tumors typically correlated with poor prognosis,
we investigated the link between mutations in the TP53 gene (mutp53)
occurring in epithelial tumor cells and the formation of a surrounding
TAM population in-situ.Methods: By designing a co-culture system we
incubated human primary monocytes together with colorectal cancer (CRC)
cells differing in their p53 status. Relevant macrophages markers were
evaluated on RNA level and protein level. In addition, co-cultured
macrophages were subjected to various functional assays (phagocytosis,
migration, and invasion). In attempt to confirm clinical relevance,
samples from a cohort of human CRC patients were analyzed using genomic
and immunohistochemical methods. To identify the interaction between the
tumor cells and the macrophages, we isolated exosomes from the CRC cells
and subjected them to a Nanostring analysis to learn about their
microRNAs composition.Results: In this study, we discovered that mutp53
exerts a non-cell-autonomous effect over neighboring macrophages by using
specific microRNAs (miRs) which are shuttled through an exosomal transfer
resulting with a phenotype change of the affected macrophages.
Mutp53-specific exosomes containing cargoes such as miR-1246 were shown
to be used by macrophages at the receiving end, thus promoting the
formation of TAM subset also observed in surgical specimens resected from
cancer patients.Conclusions: Altogether, these findings are consistent
with a microenvironmental role for specific hot-spot p53 mutants
tightening the interaction between the tumor cell and the immune
compartment. Additionally, this study is the first to show a
non-cell-autonomous role played by mutant p53 - the most common form of
mutation found in human cancers. Deciphering the intricate regulation
shared by the tumor cell and its surrounding macrophages may give rise to
novel prognostic and diagnostic tools as well as to therapeutic
approaches targeting TAM, specific tumor-promoting miRs and
mutp53-specific subsets of exosomes.

