Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential CXCL13 and CXCR5 expression mediated by
down-regulation of select miRNAs in prostate cancer


Chemokines and their receptors are involved in the inflammatory response
by attracting immune cells to sites of infection and wound healing.
Chemokines have also been implicated in the progression of prostate
cancer (PCa). We have previously shown a positive correlation between the
expression of CXCL13 and CXCR5 proteins with PCa progression; in
particular, the CXCR5 protein is expressed to a greater extent by
prostate tumors isolated from African Americans than compared to those
from European Americans. In the present study, we sought: (i) to
determine whether CXCL13 and CXCR5 mRNA expression patterns correlated
with overall and/or disease-free survival in PCa cases and (ii) to
identify the possible molecular mechanisms that govern this association.
CXCL13 and CXCR5 mRNA levels and PCa survival rates were evaluated using
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data sets and the CbioPortal,
respectively. CXCR5 and CXCL13 mRNA expression did not correlate with
prostate tumor stage or grade and was not associated with overall PCa
survival. However, CXCR5 mRNA expression was significantly associated
with poor disease-free survival. Gene map analysis using the UCSC Genome
Browser revealed consensus sequence binding sites for four miRNA's
(miR-192/215, miR-486, and miR-494) that could bind the 3 UTR of the
cxcr5 transcript. Our results showed that miR-494 was frequently deleted
or down-regulated, confirming other reports that miR-494 is
down-regulated in high-grade PCa cases. Of note, miR-494 also targets
cxcr4 mRNA and suppresses migration of PCa cells. Others have shown that
miR-486 is associated with p53 and PI3K-Akt pathways and miR-186 has a
putative binding site in the 3 UTR region of the cxcl13 transcript. This
miRNA was down-regulated in PCa patients with initial metastasis. These
results confirm our previous studies demonstrating a correlation between
tumor expression and PCa progression and reveal new mechanisms of
post-translational regulation of this chemokine receptor.

