Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A network approach to study the effect of chemical exposures on
gene regulatory system in rats


Exposure to environmental chemicals during early development may increase
the risk of developing breast cancer later in life. In this context, we
are interested in characterizing which microRNA (miRNA) and mRNA
expressions change in a coherent manner across the lifespan, and whether
the co-expression pattern is affected by environmental exposures. miRNAs
contribute to tumor progression via the regulation of
post-transcriptional gene expressions. Thus, information on different
interaction patterns among miRNAs and mRNAs measured in mammary tissues
from chemical exposed vs. non-exposed rats can cast light on how chemical
exposures may alter mammary gland development. Specifically, we consider
three common environmental chemicals: diethyl phthalate (DEP), methyl
paraben (MPB) and triclosan (TCS). Female Sprague-Dawley rats were
treated with these chemicals at four windows of susceptibility (prenatal,
neonatal, prepubertal and pubertal) respectively with oral doses shown to
produce urinary metabolite levels similar to those measured in US
population. We implemented a new algorithm, Joint Random Forest (JRF),
for simultaneous estimation of multiple related networks to characterize
co-expression patterns among mRNAs and miRNAs. JRF is designed to borrow
information across different treatment conditions, so that regulatory
relationships shared across conditions can be detected with increased
power, while those specific to each condition can be detected with fewer
false positives. We focused on 1403 mRNAs and 283 miRNAs with larger
variability across rats, and derived four co-expression networks of these
mRNAs/miRNAs for each environmental chemical treatment plus a control
group. Overall we observed a substantial loss of connectivity in networks
of chemical exposed groups (DEP: 1813 edges, MPB: 1539 edges and TCS:
1013 edges) compared to that of the control group (2641 edges).
Interestingly, despite the overall loss of connectivity in networks of
chemical exposed groups, some microRNAs such as rno-miR-126b
(MIMAT0017843) and rno-miR-3596b (MIMAT0017871) showed many connecting
edges in networks of chemical exposed groups but zero in that of the
control group. In particular, rno-miR-3596b is a member of the Let-7
family which is well known to regulate self-renewal and tumorigenicity in
breast cancer cells. Findings like this can lead to better understanding
of how chemical exposures could alter gene regulatory activities. Our
study also demonstrates the great potential of using JRF to investigate
changes in gene regulatory system across different conditions.

