Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of lung cancer patient derived xenograft model from
circulating tumor cells: Identification of somatic mutations associated
with metastatic potentials


Carcinoma metastasis is initiated by a subpopulation of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) found in the blood of patients. However, the existence and
genetic alternations of metastasis-initiating cells (MICs) among CTCs has
not been experimentally demonstrated. The establishment of xenograft
model using CTCs should help us to understand the biologic behaviors and
genetic alternations of MICs associated the promotion of metastasis.
Here, we demonstrate that xenograft model can be established by CTCs
obtained from lung cancer patients and somatic mutations analyzed from
xenograft model in which MICs develop metastatic tumor. After injecting
mononuclear cells of lung cancer patients via tail vein, mouse was
sacrificed at four weeks. After primary cultured cells were isolated from
mouse lung tissues, the MICs were selected by using FASC sorting (EpCam+)
and then re-injected via tail vein. And tumor formations in mouse were
examined at 8 weeks. For identifying somatic mutations, target sequencing
with NGS was performed in tumor DNA and cell free DNA (CF DNA) of lung
cancer patients bloods. Our results indicated that nonsynonymous IDH,
EGFR, KIT, ABL1, PTEN, ATM, P53, and SMAD4 were found in both tumor
tissues and CF DNA of lung cancer patients bloods. IDH and EGFR was
alternative homo. Others newly found in CF DNA. For further examination
of the biologic behaviors of tumor cells which harvested from xenograft
model using CTCs, we cultured primary cells from lung tissues and
analyzed the anti-cancer drug resistance. Our results showed that primary
cultured cells (BH-007) were resistant against cisplatin and erlotinib.
In assay of migration and invasion, BH-007 cells possessed high
metastatic potential when compared with A549 and H23 cell lines. These
data suggested that several somatic mutations affect the anti-cancer drug
resistance in lung cancer patients. Our future researches will include
development of patient-derived xenograft models for preclinical testing
of novel therapeutics. And we develop the possible integration of CF DNA
analysis and PDX model from CTCs in the design of co-clinical studies for
testing in individual lung cancer patients.

