Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of Hsp90 inhibitors on triple-negative breast cancer:
BRCA1 as a therapeutic target for TNBC


Background: Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death for woman.
Within breast cancer, those classified as Triple Negative Breast Cancer
(TNBC) exhibit dismal survival rates due to their propensity to develop
distant metastases. Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a molecular
chaperone that aids in the folding and maturation of various proteins
involved in breast cancer progression and resistance to therapy. The aim
of this study was to elucidate whether the two natural inhibitors of
Hsp90, celastrol and triptolide inhibit triple negative breast cancer
growth. Both these compounds are terpenoids and were obtained from the
Chinese herb Thunder God of Vine (Tripterygium wilfordii).Methods: BT20,
BT549, MDA-MB-157 and MDA-MB-231 cells (all TNBC cells), and immortalized
human mammary epithelial cells (HMLE) were grown in DMEM containing 10%
FBS as per ATCC recommendations. Cell proliferation was assessed by
hexoseaminidase activity, and IC50 values calculated using GraphPad
Prism5. For clonogenicity, 500 cells were incubated with IC50
concentrations of each compound for 24 h, after which they were allowed
to grow and form colonies. For in vivo, BT20 cells were injected into
flanks of athymic nude mice and treated with celastrol and triptolide at
3 mg/Kg bw and 0.25 mg/Kg bw, respectively.Results: Celastrol and
triptolide treatment suppressed proliferation and colony forming ability
of all four TNBC cell lines, but not that of the immortalized HMLE cells.
The compounds increased apoptotic cell death, based on increased Annexin
V staining. Moreover, there was increased expression of the pro-apoptotic
protein Bax but decreased expression of the anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl2
and BclXL. Immunoprecipitation-coupled western blots also showed that the
compounds inhibit HSP90/CDC37 complex formation. Interestingly, the
coupled immunoprecipitation-western blot analyses showed increased
HSP90-BRCA1 interaction after treatment with the compounds. Coupled to
this, western blot and immunostaining assays showed increased cytosolic
levels and reduced nuclear levels of BRCA1 protein. Similar results were
obtained in vivo with BT20 xenografts. In addition to decreased tumor
size in response to treatment with celastrol or triptolide, the xenograft
tissues showed an increase in cytoplasmic BRCA1 levels following
treatment. In addition, there was increased in HSP90-BRCA1 complex
formation in the treated xenograft tissues. Finally, knockdown of BRCA1
using specific silencer RNA resulted in partial inhibition in cell growth
reduction after celastrol and triptolide treatment in both BT20 and
MDA-MB-231 cells.Conclusion: Taken together, these data suggest that both
celastrol and triptolide suppress TNBC cell growth, in part through
increasing cytosolic HSP90/BRCA1 complex formation.

