Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary omega-3 suppress mammary tumor growth, metastasis and
enhances survival in an iso-caloric pair-fed mice model


Omega-6 (6) and omega-3 (3) poly unsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) are pro-
and anti-inflammatory respectively. Regulating their dietary ratio
provides an approach for cancer prevention and potentially therapy;
however, most studies have not separated the inflammatory effects of
dietary fatty acids (FA) from that of obesity. Herein we studied the
effects of the 6:3 ratio in iso-caloric diets containing 35.5% of
calories from fat on mammary tumor growth and metastasis. The 6:3 ratio
in 6 and 3 based diets were 42:1 and 1:1 respectively (confirmed by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry) using the liquid, Lieber DeCarli diet
with fish oil substituting for 70% of olive oil. The 3 diet contained 3:1
ratio of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) as major 3
FA with small amount of linolenic acids. The 6 diet contained linoleic
acid as predominant 6 FA and small level of linolenic acid as 3 FA. The
diets were pair-fed to avoid the tumor promoting effects of obesity. Two
weeks after establishing female BALB/c mice on the diets, they were
orthotopically injected with 4T1 mammary tumors. Outcomes included body
weight, diet consumption, tumor growth, metastasis and survival. In
association with pair feeding there were no significant differences in
the diet consumed (3 diet used as baseline) and weight gain between
animals; however, the time to tumor growth was significantly more rapid
in mice fed the 6 diet versus the 3 diet cohorts. The 6 diet fed cohort
had significantly higher numbers of pulmonary and hepatic metastases and
significantly shortened survival. Further, 6 diet fed mice had an unusual
metastasis profile including an increase in ovarian and renal metastases
and an increase in posterior paralysis that in prior studies was
associated with demineralization, osteolysis, marrow metastases and
spontaneous long bone fractures in mice fed 6-enriched diet. Histological
analysis of tissues supported the observation of more frequent unusual
metastasis sites (ovaries, kidneys, heart) along with systemic changes to
myeloid cells infiltration in the tissues of mice fed 6 diet. Further, 6
and 3 diets had identical total and fat calories and were pair fed;
however, the tumors and livers of 6 diet fed cohorts had more lipid
content in adipocytes. Our results were replicative and also found to be
consistent when the tumor growth and survival experiments were compared
between young (22 weeks) versus old (58 weeks) mice in independent
studies. In summary, our studies demonstrate that the dietary ratio of
6:3 regulates tumor growth and metastasis.

