Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of FOXO3 by cofactors
upon PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibition


The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is frequently deregulated in breast cancer.
Specific inhibition of its key signaling nodes results in cell death and
tumor growth arrest, but also in activation of feedback loops that
ultimately limit therapeutic activity.The subcellular localization and
activity of Forkhead box O3 (FOXO3) transcription factor is heavily
regulated by the PI3K pathway. Phosphorylation of FOXO3 by AKT inhibits
its transcriptional functions leading to cell survival and
growth.Although our understanding of the transcription function of FOXO3
downstream of the PI3K pathway has increased significantly in recent
years, it is still unclear how FOXO3 acts in concert with other cofactors
of the transcription machinery.We conjectured that inhibition of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling by specific agents targeting the pathway at
different nodes leads to unique FOXO3-mediated transcriptional programs
unveiling a complex network of regulation. We therefore sought to
identify proteins that differentially co-immunoprecipitate with FOXO3
upon PI3K, AKT or mTOR blockade.To target the pathway at different
levels, we used BYL719, a PI3K inhibitor; MK2206, an allosteric AKT
inhibitor; and RAD001, an allosteric mTORC1 inhibitor. Upon treatment, we
immunopreciptated endogenous FOXO3 and searched for FOXO3 interactors by
mass spectrometry analysis. In parallel RNA samples from each treatment
were analyzed using gene expression microarrays.Gene expression analyses
revealed that each specific compound originated distinct transcriptional
signatures. Accordingly, mass spectrometry analysis revealed novel FOXO3
co-interactors engaging in different transcriptional complexes at each
treatment conditions. We identified some of these proteins as CUL1, the
core component of the SCF (SKP1-CUL1-F-BOX protein) E3 ubiquitin-protein
ligase complex, the cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), the upstream
binding transcription factor (UBTF), and the core component of RNA
polymerase I POLR1C (polymerase RNA I polypeptide C). We performed
coimmunoprecipitation analyses to confirm that these cofactors are bona
fide FOXO3-interacting proteins. We then analyzed the effects of
overexpressing these proteins on FOXO3 transcriptional activity.
Luciferase assays demonstrated an increase in FOXO3 transcriptional
activity when CUL1, UBTF, CDK5 or POLR1C were overexpressed. The
overexpression of cofactors also induced the expression of FOXO3 target
genes such as TRAIL or IRS2. Furthermore, overexpression of these
co-interactors enhanced the binding of FOXO3 to its target gene
promoters. We are now engaged in both elucidating how these cofactors can
modulate the transcriptional activity of FOXO3 upon PI3K/AKT/mTOR
inhibition and understanding the therapeutic implications of these
FOXO3-containing complexes.

