Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Model evolution technique as a novel concept for characterization
of tumor heterogeneity in dynamic contrast enhanced MRI studies


Introduction: Many studies have shown that tumor vascular network and the
assortment of tumorous cells inside and on the periphery of solid tumors
are spatially heterogeneous. Variation in cell packing density (VCPD),
hypoxia, acidosis, and elevated interstitial fluid pressure (IFP) are
main characteristic features of solid tumors. Elevated IFP and VCPD in
solid tumors can be generally relevant to the pathological structures at
the cellular level that is fundamental to understanding the chance of
response to treatment and recurrence. Therefore, non-invasive
quantification of tumor heterogeneity for the same types of tumors can
play an important role in diagnosis and treatment planning.Hypothesis: In
this pilot study, using Nested Model (NM) selection technique, Model
Evolution (ME) concept is framed and introduced to quantify the
evolutions of 3 different physiologically NM that are derived from
standard Tofts model, throughout the course of Dynamic Contrast Enhanced
(DCE) Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) experiment. Using ME technique for
pharmacokinetic (PK) modeling and DCE-MRI data analysis, a heterogeneity
measure is formulated and introduced based on the evolutionary profile of
the estimated extra-cellular extra-vascular (ve) volume. We hypothesized
that the ME profiles in the course of DCE-MRI experiment, highly depend
on the inward diffusion and outward convection of contrast agent
concentration and contain abundant information for describing the
compartmentalization and heterogeneity levels of solid tumors.Material
and Methods: 24 athymic Nude rats with U251n rat tumor model of cerebral
tumor were studied. Look-Locker T1 mapping and DCE-MRI experiments (Dual
Gradient Echo, 150 image sets at 4.0 sec intervals over 10 min: matrix =
12864, five 2.0 mm slices, NE = 2, NA = 1, TE/TE/TR = 2.0/4.0/40ms with
bolus intravenous injection of the Magnevist at 0.25 mmol/kg) acquired at
7T field strengths. In each animal, in-vivo measurement of tumor IFP was
done right after the DCE-MRI experiment using a wick-in-needle technique.
The ME technique was applied on DCE-MR data of 24 U251n rat tumors to
characterize the heterogeneity of each tumor and then the results were
compared to their known in vivo measure of IFPs.Results and Conclusions:
Results of this pilot study clearly attest that the evolutionary profile
of ve can be used to characterize the heterogeneity level of solid
tumors. The ME results imply that as the slop of the evolutionary profile
increases, the IFP of tumor increases. Also, the latency of the profile
during the course of MR experiment can reliably explain the tumor
compartmentalization and their elevated IFP. This pilot study confirms
that the ME concept can make a paradigm shift in non-invasive
quantification of tumor heterogeneity from DCE-MRI studies

