Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of EMT-selective cytotoxic compounds


Background: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a cellular
phenotype which may contribute to metastasis and therapeutic resistance
in cancer. Therapeutic targeting of EMT-like phenotypes in cancer cells,
thus may afford an approach to treating metastatic disease and/or
thwarting therapeutic resistance.Methods: We have developed a cell-based
high-throughput screening protocol using the high content Operetta
imaging platform to identify EMT cytotoxic compounds. This screen was
performed on PC3E and TEM 4-18 cell lines which were originally isolated
form a parental PC3 prostate cancer cell line based on their differential
ability to invade an endothelial monolayer. A library of 2,640 compounds
(Microsource) was screened on a co-culture of epithelial cells (PC3E GFP
cells) and EMT-like cells (TEM 4-18 mCherry cells). After 72h exposure to
compounds, relative numbers of GFP- and mCherry-positive cells were
quantitated using the Operetta system. Dose-response curves were
established for each compound exhibiting a greater toxicity against
EMT-like cells. The results were validated on PC3E and TEM 4-18 cell
lines cultured separately with the CellTiter Blue viability
assay.Results: Among the 2,640 compounds tested, monensin and
salinomycin, both monovalent cation ionophores, exhibited a relatively
greater toxicity against EMT-like cells. Nigericin, compound closely
related to monensin but absent from the Microsource library, was also
evaluated. The highest potency and selectivity for the EMT-like cells was
obtained with nigericin (IC50 357nM for PC3E vs 7nM for TEM 4-18),
followed by monensin (IC50 457nM for PC3E vs 11nM for TEM 4-18) and
salinomycin (IC50 1687nM for PC3E vs 278nM for TEM 4-18). Monensin and
nigericin induced apoptosis, a cell cycle arrest, and an increase in ROS
production in TEM 4-18 without apparent mitochondrial disruption. In
addition, monensin rapidly induced swelling of golgi apparatus likely
resulting in a blockage of intracellular protein trafficking and
consequently cell death. To extend our findings, we evaluated the
toxicity of these three ionophores in 15 cancer cell lines from different
origins and classified them as resistant or sensitive. We analyzed
publically available gene expression data for these cell lines and
performed a Gene Set Enrichment Analysis to identify the gene sets
differentially represented in the 2 groups. Supporting our hypothesis,
the gene set involving EMT was the top gene sets enriched in the
sensitive group.Conclusion: In this study we identified three
chemically-related compounds (monensin, salinomycin and nigericin)
exhibiting relatively greater toxicity against EMT-like cells. These
compounds may serve as chemical probes for exploring the biology of
EMT-like cells and point to strategies for selectively targeting these
cells to disrupt metastasis and/or therapeutic resistance.

