Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing high affinity, soluble T cell receptors for the
treatment of cancer


Immunotherapeutic strategies that drive activation of cytotoxic T cells
possess significant potential to eradicate tumours. Whereas monoclonal
antibodies are restricted to targeting secreted or cell surface proteins,
T cell receptors (TCRs) are able to recognise a wider range of targets.
This is achieved through binding to short peptide fragments derived from
proteins that are degraded intracellularly and presented at the cell
surface by human leukocyte antigens (HLAs). Natural cancer specific TCRs
however, have weak affinities and cancer cells often develop escape
mechanisms to avoid destruction by T cells.To overcome this, we have
developed Immune mobilising monoclonal TCRs Against Cancer (ImmTACs); a
new class of soluble bi-specific molecules comprising affinity-enhanced,
monoclonal T cell receptors (mTCRs) fused to an anti-CD3 scFv. ImmTACs
target peptides presented by HLA, and through the anti-CD3 effector,
re-direct cytotoxic T cells to achieve highly specific and potent tumour
cell killing.At Immunocore, we have developed an integrated in-house
process for the generation of ImmTACs and here describe the critical
engineering steps involved. T-cell clones that specifically recognise
validated cancer antigens are isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes
and the TCR-encoding sequences are identified by RACE. To confirm antigen
binding, TCR and chains are expressed as inclusion bodies in bacteria,
co-refolded in vitro, and their binding to the target peptide:HLA tested
by Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR). The affinity of the TCR is then
enhanced up to a million-fold through directed evolution, utilising phage
display. Individual mutants are screened by SPR and combined to generate
ImmTACs with pM affinities (KD) and binding half-lives of many hours. A
range of biochemical and cellular assays are then performed to assess the
potency and specificity of each ImmTAC generated.This process has been
successfully applied to produce ImmTACs for a wide range of targets,
demonstrating the robustness of the platform. Our lead candidate,
IMCgp100, is undergoing Phase IIa clinical trials in patients with
advanced malignant melanoma. This reagent, which specifically targets the
gp100 (280-288) peptide presented by HLA-A2 on melanoma cells, is well
tolerated and shows very promising therapeutic potential.

