Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating microtubule growth dynamics in patient-derived
metastatic prostate cancer cells


Advanced prostate cancer (PC) is treated primarily by means of
chemotherapy with one of the clinically approved microtubule
(MT)-targeting agents (MTAs): paclitaxel, docetaxel and cabazitaxel. The
mechanism of action of the MTAs on the cellular level is to bind to MTs
and inhibit MT-dependent intracellular pathways, ultimately leading to
cell death. In PC, MTAs are the only chemotherapy class shown to improve
survival, however, there is high variability of response to MTA
chemotherapy among patients as well as emergence of resistance to drug
action which hampers the clinical efficacy. Clinicians need additional
information to match individual patient tumors to the most effective
drugs or refrain from treating patients that will not respond. However,
the precise mechanism of action or resistance development to MTAs is not
understood, which represents a critical gap in our knowledge to select
the best treatment. Our hypothesis is that there are inherent differences
in tumor MT dynamics among individual patients which dictates their
response to treatment with specific MTAs. To this end, we envision that a
systematic characterization of PC MT dynamics and their response to MTAs
will allow chemotherapy customization and prolong survival. Specifically,
our approach consists of the analysis of metastatic castrate resistant PC
(mCRPC) organoids (Gao D. et al, 2014) derived from bone (acetabulum,
vertebrae), soft tissue (salvage prostatectomy, lymph nodes), pleural
effusion and circulating tumor cells biopsy samples obtained from
metastatic patients who have received hormonal therapy and the MTA
docetaxel or hormonal therapy alone or no treatment. We apply a
quantitative single-cell image analysis algorithm (ClusterTrack) to
measure a panel of twelve distinct MT dynamics parameters (a MT dynamics
signature). Preliminary analysis suggests differences between different
mCRPC organoids. MT tracking results indicate a correlation of decreased
MT growth rate with increased Op18/stathmin expression. In this context,
we hypothesize that differential expression of MT regulating genes
affects specific parameters of MT dynamics, thus determining the
sensitivity to MTA treatment.

