Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapeutic approach for triple negative breast cancer
using paramagnetic nanoparticle


Breast cancer (BC) is a spectrum of diseases with distinct molecular
alterations accounting for differences in treatment response and outcome.
Gene expression profiling defines much of this molecular heterogeneity
and has been used to stratify the disease into different molecular
subtypes. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) refers to a subtype of
breast cancer that is negative for estrogen receptors (ER) and/or
progesterone receptors (PR), and lacks HER2 overexpression. Therefore,
this subtype of breast cancer lacks the benefits of specific therapies
which target these receptors. TNBC has been characterized by an acidic
extracellular environment. In human aggressive breast tumors,
extracellular pH (pHe) has been measured by microelectrode and the values
are in good agreement with the values observed in animal systems i.e.
that the pHe is significantly acidic in the range from 6.2 to 7.0.
However, tumor intracellular pH is either neutral or alkaline.
Interestingly, a similar pH gradient is not observed in normal tissues.
Therefore, this acidic extracellular pH (pHe) within tumor tissues can be
exploited for targeted delivery of drugs and imaging agents.Recently, A
pH low insertion peptide (pHLIP) derived from the protein
bacteriorhodopsin has been found to target tumor acidic pHe. The peptide
inserts across cell membranes as an alpha-helix when extracellular pH
(pHe) is acidic, but does not form the helix at normal or alkaline pH.
Since aggressive TNBC has an acidic environment, the pHLIP will insert
into the cancer cell membrane, but the pHLIP will not insert into the
cell membranes of normal tissues, providing excellent specificity for
targeting TNBC. Our initial study demonstrated the detection of breast
tumor in rodent by dendrimer-based paramagnetic nanoparticles
nonspecifically. To develop this nanoparticle as a platform, it should
easily accommodate targeting ligands for selective localization at the
acidic tumor microenvironment and for therapeutic drugs that can be
released selectively into TNBC tumor cells. Here, we demonstrate that
pHLIP-tagged nanoparticles bind to and are internalized by TNBC cells in
in-vitro. Systemic delivery of paramagnetic nanoparticle, Gd-G5-pHLIP
(NP-pHLIP) leads to accumulation of the NPs in a flank mouse model of
TNBC tumor that are detected by both optical and MR imaging.Finally, we
have conjugated doxorubicin (dox) with pHLIP3-NP via hydrazone bond
formation. We have successfully incorporated 20 dox molecules with
pHLIP3-NP via a pH-sensitive hydrazone bond as evidenced by maldi-tof
analyses. A cohort of 6 mice was treated with pHLIP-NP-dox and a second
cohort of 6 mice was treated with vehicle. A solution of 0.04 mmol/kg
pHLIP-NP-dox (12mg/kg equivalent dose of dox) was injected through the
tail vein catheter at day 8 and 14. We generated T2 maps on day 21to
calculate tumor volume by following our previous reports. We observed a
short-term tumor regression by pHLIP-NP-dox infusion.

