Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of mitochondrially targeted oncology agents on
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) integrity


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are natural byproducts of mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation. Dysfunction in electron shuttling leads to
enhanced ROS production that is notorious for inflicting damage to
macromolecules. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is particularly sensitive to
ROS as it is located in close proximity to the respiratory chain.
Additionally, mtDNA lack histones which are known to provide protection
from ROS. Mitochondria also have limited DNA repair mechanisms making
damage to mtDNA more detrimental to mitochondrial physiology. Recent
evidence suggests that oxidative insult, leads to mtDNA degradation to
prevent the accumulation of mutagenic base lesions, which is enabled by
the high redundancy of mtDNA. The primary objectives of this study were
to determine the impact of redox-active mitochondrial-targeted
chemotherapeutic agents on mitochondrial physiology and mtDNA integrity.
All experiments were performed in two cancer cell lines [MDA-MB-231
(breast) and H23 (lung)] that were treated with 2 uM of the
mitochondrial-targeted redox-active compounds: MitoTempol [C4 (MT4)],
MitoQuinone (MQ) and MitoChromanol-Acetate (MCA) for 1 or 24 hrs.
Mitochondrial status was determined by measuring mitochondrial membrane
potential, superoxide production, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and
protein levels of the respiratory chain complexes using the JC-1 and
MitoSOX assays, Seahorse XF analysis, and immunoblotting, respectively.
Next, mtDNA integrity was analyzed by quantifying the degree of mtDNA
fragmentation using PCR amplification of a 10kb fragment compared to a
short 100bp fragment. Moreover, changes in the mtDNA replication
machinery were assessed using immunoblotting. MQ and MCA induced a loss
in mitochondrial function and mtDNA replication machinery as indicated by
a reduction in membrane potential, OCR and protein levels. Furthermore,
increases in superoxide levels and mtDNA fragmentation were observed with
MQ and MCA treatment. Finally, we assessed mitochondrial content using
two methods. The first method being the ratio of mitochondrial to nuclear
DNA, determined by qPCR of short (100bp) nuclear and mitochondrial
sequences. The second method was the ratio of mitochondrial outer
membrane proteins to cytoplasmic housekeeping proteins, determined by
immunoblotting. Both mitochondria DNA and outer membrane proteins
decreased with MQ and MCA treatment suggesting that redox-active
mitochondrial-targeted agents may reduce the mitochondrial content in
cancer cells.

