Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGFreceptor antagonist, Sugen 5416, sensitizes pulmonary
endothelial stem-like cells to estrogens: A microvascular model for the
progression of lung cancer


Proliferative vascular lesions are an aggressive angiogenic phenotype
associated with a poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Recent studies suggest that CD133+ endothelial stem-like cells are
recruited to the angiogenic vascular system of NSCLC; and are associated
with tumor stage and progression. Epidemiological studies have reported
that women who received hormone replacement therapy (HRT) show an overall
lower survival to lung cancer especially NSCLC when compared to women
with no HRT. Proliferative vascular lesions have been studied extensively
using the VEGFreceptor antagonist, Sugen 5416 (SU5416), plus chronic
hypoxia (SuHx) rodent model. Therefore, the aim of this study was to
determine whether SU5416 exposure of human pulmonary vascular endothelial
cells (ECs) become more sensitive to estrogen-induced cell growth. We
exposed human pulmonary endothelial cell line HPMEC-ST1.6R to SU5416 to
select for a sub-population of cells which were then treated with
17-estradiol and/or estrogenic polychlorinated biphenyl 153 (PCB153). We
observed a significant increase of 2-3 fold change in cell growth and
proliferation as determined by MTT, SRB, BrdU, and FACS analysis when
SU5416 treated cells were exposed to estrogenic chemicals. Sugen 5416
treatment of ECs showed an increase in the inhibitor of DNA binding and
differentiation protein 3 (ID3) along with stem cell markers CD133,
Oct-4, and Sox-2. Immunohistochemistry of lung tissue samples from SuHx
rodent model showed increased expression of ID3 in pulmonary vascular
lesions that correlated with an increase in stem cell markers Oct-4 and
Nanog; and increased VEGFR3+ cells surrounding vessel obliterating
lesions from SuHx lung tissue. Our findings demonstrate that SU5416
sensitized cells to estrogens resulting in higher cell growth compared to
control. Since VEGFR3 expression levels are reported to correlate with
metastasis in NSCLC patients, our findings may be used as a model to
study how VEGFR3 signaling can promote the aggressive growth and spread
of lung cancer when exposed to estrogenic chemicals. Furthermore, we
showed that stem cell markers Oct-4, Sox-2, and Nanog are inducible
molecular targets of Sugen 5416 treatment. This finding is significant in
that it points toward a potential mechanism of chemical-induced
pluripotent stem-like cells. A better understanding of how vascular
lesions depend on SU5416 may open new avenues for the prevention and
treatment of lung cancer. The presence of stem cell markers does not
imply that these cells actually function as stem cells. Instead, we
propose that the combination of stem cell marker expression and chemical
exposure to Sugen 5416 re-program terminally differentiated ECs to a
pluripotent cell that gives rise to a clonal pulmonary vascular lesion
that supports the aggressive growth of NSCLC.

