Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPX-351 cytotoxicity against fresh AML blasts is increased for
FLT3-ITD+ cells and correlates with drug uptake and clinical outcomes


Background: CPX-351, a synergistic ratio of cytarabine (Cyt) and
daunorubicin (Daun) co-encapsulated in a nano-scale carrier, has
demonstrated improved complete remission and overall survival rates
compared to conventional Cyt + anthracycline treatments in two randomized
clinical trials and is currently being evaluated in a Phase 3 trial vs
7+3 Cyt:Daun. To determine whether these effects are attributable to
liposome-mediated altered drug PK or specific AML blast
genotypes/phenotypes, we investigated the ex vivo cytotoxic potency of
CPX-351 against fresh AML blast samples. Cytotoxicity results were
correlated with patient characteristics as well as CPX-351 cellular
uptake and molecular phenotype status including FLT3-ITD, NPM1 and CEBP.
Methods: Peripheral blood was obtained at diagnosis from patients with
AML. White blood cells were isolated on Ficoll gradients. Cells were
incubated over graded concentrations of CPX-351 for 72 hr at which time
cell viability was assessed by MTS assay. Cell viability values were
normalized to patient-matched untreated cells. Patient-specific IC50
values were calculated and correlated with clinically-relevant disease
features. Uptake of intact CPX-351 liposomes by AML cells was determined
by monitoring cells for daunorubicin fluorescence by flow cytometry.
Results: CPX-351 cytotoxicity was evaluated in 53 AML patient specimens.
CPX-351 IC50 values ranged from 0.03:0.006 uM to 10:2 uM (Cyt:Daun), and
all values were significantly lower than the 72 hour plasma drug
concentration of 60:12 uM Cyt:Daun observed in patients receiving
CPX-351. Sensitivity to CPX-351 was similar regardless of cytogentic
risk, NPM1 and CEBP status as well as whether the patients went on to
achieve a CR or PD upon receiving standard 7+3 Cyt:Daun after blast
samples were taken. Surprisingly, AML blasts exhibiting the FLT3-ITD
phenotype exhibited some of the lowest IC50 values and as a group were
5-fold more sensitive to CPX-351 than those with wild type FLT3. Flow
cytometric analysis revealed a correlation between uptake of CPX-351 into
AML blasts and its cytotoxic potency. Taken together, the data are
consistent with clinical observations where CPX-351 retains significant
anti-leukemic activity in AML patients exhibiting high-risk
characteristics that are typically associated with poor outcomes when
treated with conventional regimens. Conclusions: The profile of ex vivo
AML blast sensitivity to CPX-351 mirrors the efficacy profile observed
clinically and may provide a means to identify specific AML patient
genotypes/phenotypes that could benefit most from CPX-351 treatment. The
increased sensitivity of FLT3-ITD+ blasts to CPX-351 is an example of how
such analyses may identify additional AML patient populations warranting
further clinical investigation.

