Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined treatment with anti-LAG-3 and anti-PD-1 fully human
monoclonal antibodies inhibits tumor growth in immunocompetent
double-humanized LAG-3/PD-1 mice


Lymphocyte-activation gene 3 (LAG-3) receptor is expressed on activated
CD4 and CD8 T cells, T cells, Treg, NK, NKT, B and plasmacytoid dendritic
cells. LAG-3 binds to major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC II)
and delivers inhibitory signals that regulate T cell proliferation and
cytokine production. LAG-3 blockade augments T cell proliferation and
activation. Programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) receptor upon binding to its
ligands PD-L1 (B7-H1; CD274) and PD-L2 (B7-DC; CD273) also delivers an
inhibitory checkpoint signal that is critical for the establishment and
maintenance of peripheral T cell tolerance. PD-1 signaling plays a
critical role in the tumor microenvironment by allowing tumors to escape
immune surveillance.We tested in vivo activity of anti-mouse PD-1 and
anti-mouse LAG-3 antibodies in several preclinical syngeneic tumor models
and showed that combination treatment with both antibodies resulted in an
additive anti-tumor effect compared to either single antibody treatment.
TaqMan analysis in the MC38 tumor model demonstrated CD8+ T cell
expansion in both the draining lymph nodes and spleens of mice in the
combination treatment group.Anti-human LAG-3 antibody is a fully human
monoclonal antibody developed for cancer immunotherapy. It binds with
high affinity to human LAG-3 and blocks LAG-3/MHC II interaction. Fully
human monoclonal antibody REGN2810 binds with high affinity to human PD-1
and blocks PD-1 interaction with PD-L1 and PD-L2.Double humanized
LAG-3/PD-1 mice were engineered using VelociGene technology to replace
the extracellular domains of mouse Pdcd1 and Lag3 genes with the
corresponding regions of human PD-1 and human LAG-3 genes. To validate
humanized protein expression, we examined PD-1 and LAG-3 protein
expression on T cells after anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibody stimulation. We
confirmed binding of human LAG-3 and PD-1 to the corresponding mouse
ligands by cell adhesion assay for human LAG-3 and mouse MHC II
interactions and by SPR-Biacore for human PD-1 and mouse PD-L1
interactions, respectively.Combination of REGN2810 and anti-hLAG-3
antibodies in MC38.ova tumor model in double humanized LAG-3/PD-1 mice,
which allows testing of clinical antibodies that do not cross to mouse
receptors, demonstrated improved efficacy, including reduced tumor growth
and improved survival, compared to REGN2810 and anti-hLAG-3
monotherapies.Robust anti-tumor efficacy of REGN2810 and anti-hLAG-3
combination in preclinical setting supports their clinical development as
a combination cancer immunotherapy.

