Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving cytotoxicity against cancer cells by chemo-photodynamics
combined modalities using silver/graphene quantum dots/doxorubicin
nanoconjugates


Tumor microenvironment complexity render chemotherapy and radiotherapy
ineffective to eradicate highly aggressive tumors. For this reason, we
are interested to find new avenues that can improve clinical outcomes.
Recently, different nanomaterials such as Graphene Quantum Dots (GQDs)
have been explored in treatments for a broad range of diseases, including
cancer therapeutics. GQDs are nanometer-sized fragments (2-20 nm) of
graphene, which have shown unique electrical, optical and mechanical
properties. We hypothesize that the unique physical and chemical
properties of the Graphene Quantum Dots (GQDs) along with the anticancer
properties of silver (Ag) can provide an alternative to the challenges
presently encountered in traditional cancer therapy regimens. In this
study functionalized silver decorated graphene quantum dots (Ag-GQDs)
nanocomposites were synthesized by a bottom-up approach by the pulsed
laser irradiation of a liquid hydrocarbon precursor containing silver
ions. The Ag-GQDs were characterized by UV-Vis spectroscopy, transmission
electron microscopy, and Fourier transform IR spectroscopy. The Ag-GQD
nanocomposites were tested in the treatment of cervical cancer HeLa cells
and prostate cancer cells DU-145. The Ag-GQD nanocomposites demonstrated
high potential in the delivery of Doxorubicin to cancer cells and an
anticancer activity boost due to their intrinsic properties.
Interestingly, we observed an increase in the activity of caspase-3/7 in
DU145 and HeLa when treated with such nanoparticles. The photo-activation
of Ag-GQDs with 425 nm radiation increased the levels of Reactive Oxygen
Species (ROS) in both cell lines, inducing cell death by DNA damage. The
combination of the chemo-photodynamic therapies using Ag-GQDs conjugated
with DOX remarkably enhanced the treatment efficacy of HeLa and DU145, as
compared to treatment by using each modality alone. HeLa. Fluorescence
imaging results showed that Ag-GQDs deliver DOX to the nucleus of cancer
cells, which suggests they may deliver other cargos. Also, to confirm
whether the decrease in the cells viability upon treatment with Ag-GQDs
was caused by toxicity, we tested a non-transformed cell line. The data
suggest that the effect is due to the intrinsic effect of Ag-GQDs and not
by toxicity. The Ag-GQDs thus offer a general platform for incorporating
multiple therapeutic modalities for treating different types of cancer
and they represent a significant breakthrough in nanomedicine for
potential translation to the clinic. Further studies are necessary to
elucidate the exact mechanism(s) of Ag-GQDs in releasing their cargo, and
to test them in vivo. In summary, we developed a novel, multi-functional,
and biocompatible PEGylated Ag-GQDs nanocomposites that combines two
therapeutic modalities, chemotherapy and photodynamic therapy, into one
platform for treatment of different type of cancers.

