Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting extrinsic and intrinsic cancer risk


Cancers were once thought to originate from mature tissue cells that
underwent dedifferentiation in response to cancer progression. Today,
cancers are proposed to originate from the malignant transformation of
normal tissue progenitor and stem cells, although this is not uniformly
accepted. Nevertheless, recent research has highlighted a strong
correlation between tissue-specific cancer risk and the lifetime
population size and cumulative number of cell divisions of
tissue-specific stem cells. However, there has been extensive controversy
regarding the conclusion that this correlation implies that there is a
very high unavoidable risk for many specific cancers that are due solely
to the intrinsic baseline population size of tissue-specific stem cells.
This issue has become a key public health debate with dissemination of
the bad luck hypothesis. Here we provide strong evidence that unavoidable
intrinsic risk factors contribute only modestly (Cancers were once
thought to originate from mature tissue cells that underwent
dedifferentiation in response to cancer progression. Today, cancers are
proposed to originate from the malignant transformation of normal tissue
progenitor and stem cells, although this is not uniformly accepted.
Nevertheless, recent research has highlighted a strong correlation
between tissue-specific cancer risk and the lifetime population size and
cumulative number of cell divisions of tissue-specific stem cells.
However, there has been extensive controversy regarding the conclusion
that this correlation implies that there is a very high unavoidable risk
for many specific cancers that are due solely to the intrinsic baseline
population size of tissue-specific stem cells. This issue has become a
key public health debate with dissemination of the bad luck hypothesis.
Here we provide strong evidence that unavoidable intrinsic risk factors
contribute only modestly (<10-30%) to the development of many common
cancer types. In an initial approach, we demonstrate that the correlation
between stem-cell division and cancer risk does not distinguish between
the effects of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. We then develop a novel
data-driven approach to estimate intrinsic risk by considering the lower
bound risk value for most cancers as a limiting condition for
contribution of intrinsic processes. Furthermore, we present an
independent mathematical model that capitalizes on the accumulation of
endogenous mutations in stem cells. Using mutation rates as a starting
point, we found that rates of intrinsic mutations are not sufficient to
account for the observed lifetime cancer risk, even in the conservative
estimate that all these mutations are due to intrinsic processes alone.
Our results are consistent with vast epidemiological data at population
level and also mutational signature data at molecular level. The
consensus suggests that cancer risk is likely to be heavily influenced by
extrinsic factors, and therefore is possibly modifiable and preventable.
These results carry immense consequences for strategizing cancer
prevention, research, and public health. [Note: this work is in press in
Nature.]

