Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS mutation in cell-free DNA was correlated with treatment
response to gemcitabine/cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with
pancreatic cancer


Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of cancer patients has been known to be a useful
marker for minimal residual disease detection and treatment monitoring.
However, there are a few studies which showed correlation of cfDNA with
pancreatic cancer treatment. Here we investigated applicability of cfDNA
as a response and prognosis biomarker through comparing the qualitative
and quantitative changes of the KRAS mutant in the patients with
pancreatic cancer before and after treatment.Total of 44 pancreatic
cancer patients who treated by gemcitabine and cisplatin included in the
study. Serum from the blood samples was separated by centrifugation
through the method established. cfDNA was extracted through the QIAamp
Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (Qiagen, Germany) from 0.8 ml of serum.
Extracted cfDNA was quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, USA). QX200 Droplet Digital PCR System (Biorad, USA)
was applied to measure frequency of KRAS mutation. We performed digital
PCR with KRAS screening multiplex droplet digital PCR kit which covers
G12A, G12C, G12D, G12R, G12S, G12V and G13D sites (Biorad, USA). Mutant
concentration and fractional abundance were analyzed by QuantaSoft
software (Biorad, USA).The positive rate of KRAS mutation was 61% (27/44)
and 47% (16/34) in before and after treatment. When we analyzed the
treatment response according to the positive presence of KRAS mutation
before treatment, 50% and 61% of KRAS mutations were observed in patients
who showed either partial response (PR) or stable disease (SD) after
chemotherapy, respectively. However, all the 5 patients (100%) with
progressive disease (PD) showed KRAS mutation implicating significant
correlation (p = 0.046) with treatment response.The fraction change of
KRAS mutation was showed decrease in 18 (58.1%) patients and increase in
13 (41.9%) patients comparing before and after treatment status. When we
observed the association the fraction change direction (decrease vs.
increase) with the survival, there was no significant difference.These
results implicate that KRAS mutation in cell-free DNA might be associated
with treatment response to gemcitabine/cisplatin chemotherapy. In further
studies, we will conduct in prospective study for pancreatic cancer
patients. (This study was supported by National cancer center, Korea,
Grant no. 1510203-1)

