Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic exposure and mosaic loss of the Y chromosome among
Bangladeshi men


Background: Exposure to drinking water contaminated with arsenic, a known
carcinogen, is a serious global health issue, increasing risk for several
types of cancer, as well as overall mortality. Somatic mosaic loss of the
Y chromosome (LoY) is the most frequent known somatic chromosomal
aberration in men, and LoY in peripheral blood cells has been associated
with exposure to cigarette smoke, as well as cancer risk and overall
mortality. In this work, we examine the correlates of LoY among 2,588
male members of an arsenic-exposed Bangladeshi cohort (mean age: 42
years).Methods: DNA was extracted from peripheral blood at baseline
interview, and genome-wide SNP data was generated using Illumina arrays.
We assessed LoY using the median Log R Ratio (mLRR) for 2,882 SNPs
located in the male-specific region of chromosome Y. Within each of five
different genotyping batches, we classified individuals have having LoY
if their mLRR-Y value fell below the 2nd percentile of an mLRR
distribution simulated assuming no LoY. Arsenic exposure was measured as
the arsenic concentration in participants primary drinking wells
(reported at baseline). All association estimates were adjusted for age,
BMI, and smoking status.Results: We detected LoY for a total of 305 men
across 5 different genotyping batches, with rates of LoY ranging from 7%
to 18% across batches. Age showed a consistent positive association with
LoY across all batches, consistent with prior studies. Among the two
genotyping batches representing random samples of the cohort (n = 391 and
n = 344), quartiles of increasing arsenic concentration in drinking water
were associated with increased LoY (P-trend = 0.05 in both batches). In a
comparison of 297 individuals with incident arsenical skin lesions (the
most common sign of arsenic toxicity) and 673 control individuals
(randomly selected from the cohort), LoY was significantly more common in
cases than controls (P = 0.001); however, this association was attenuated
after adjusting for arsenic exposure (P = 0.22). In an analysis of all
2,588 individuals (including non-randomly-sampled case groups), current
smoking showed a suggestive association with increased LoY (P = 0.06),
consistent with a prior studies of older populations.Conclusion: In this
population-based study of arsenic-exposed Bangladeshi men of a wide range
of ages, increasing exposure to arsenic, a known carcinogen, was
associated with increased risk of LoY, and LoY was more common among men
with subsequent arsenic toxicity (i.e., arsenical skin lesions). This
study provides evidence that a carcinogenic environmental exposure causes
the most common form of genetic mutation in men. Additional research is
needed to determine if LoY is causally involved in arsenic-induced
carcinogenesis or if LoY is simply a marker of exposure.

