Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: On- and off target toxicity profiling for adoptive cell therapy by
mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidome analysis of primary human normal
tissues


A major constraint for the broad and safe application of Adoptive
Cellular Therapy (ACT) is the limited number of validated tumor targets,
especially for solid tumors. For T-cell receptor (TCR)-based approaches,
presentation of targeted HLA-peptides on normal tissues can lead to
on-target toxicity, such as severe inflammatory colitis reported upon
re-directing T cells to an HLA-A*02 restricted carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) epitope. Independently, off-target cross-reactivity of TCRs
occurred in previous ACT trials, e.g. when a MAGEA3-directed TCR
cross-recognized an HLA-A*01 restricted epitope from titin expressed on
heart, which led to fatal cardiac toxicities. Here we present a novel
approach allowing the prediction of severe on- and off-target side
effects before entering into clinical trials.We used a target discovery
engine (XPRESIDENT) combining highly sensitive, quantitative mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), RNA-Seq-based differential transcriptomics,
immunology and bioinformatics to characterize the human immunopeptidome
directly on shock frozen primary human tissues. Over the last years we
have built an according database for > 600 tumor samples from > 20
different tumor types and, importantly, > 300 samples from > 40 different
normal tissue types, resulting in hundreds of thousands of unique
HLA-peptide sequences. These data allow conclusions on which HLA peptides
are actually presented on primary normal tissues in a quantitative
manner, taking into account relative differences between normal tissues
and tumors as well as absolute peptide copy numbers per cell. In order to
assess the off-target risk for a TCR, we predict all theoretical HLA- and
TCR-binding peptides in the proteome, ideally based on the binding motif
of the TCR, and specifically search for actual peptide presentation by
normal tissues.When analyzing the above described CEA case, we were able
to detect the CEA-derived peptide IMIGVLVGV on HLA-A*02 positive
colorectal cancer samples, but importantly also on normal colorectal
samples. In the original study describing the titin case tremendous
experimental efforts and sophisticated cell culture models were required
to retrospectively identify cross-recognition of the peptide on
cardiomyocytes as the cause of toxicity. In contrast, with our approach
we easily and directly identified the critical peptide ESDPIVAQY as one
of the most abundantly presented peptides on an HLA-A*01 positive primary
human heart sample. We show that this approach can lead to noteworthy
results also for other pre-clinical and clinical stage TCR candidates.In
conclusion our data demonstrate that ultrasensitive LC-MS/MS of primary
tissue may represent a fast, straightforward and meaningful complementary
method to common in vitro or animal models for the prediction of on- and
off-target toxicities in TCR-based immunotherapy approaches.

