Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of SNORA21, an H/ACA box snoRNA, as a
metastasis predicting and prognostic biomarker in colorectal cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains a prevalent malignancy
worldwide with a high mortality rate. Over the last decade, the roles of
several types of noncoding RNAs in oncogenesis have been clarified.
Emerging evidence indicates that not only microRNAs, but small nucleolar
RNAs (snoRNAs) appear to be dysregulated in various malignancies and they
play a critical role in modulating cell transformation, tumor progression
and metastasis. Functionally, cancer associated snoRNAs are subdivided
into four major categories based on their oncogenic functions: 1) an
independent function from imprinting gene in cancer initiation and
progression 2) Activation of human telomerase 3) Inhibition of ribosomal
maturation 4) Act directly as oncogene or tumor suppressor. Despite these
exciting evidences, the role of snoRNAs in CRC remains limited and their
clinical significance remains largely unexplored in this malignancy.Aims:
We aimed to clarify the clinical relevance of snoRNAs in tumors and
evaluate their prognostic potential in CRC. Furthermore, we investigated
the functional role of snoRNAs in CRC tumorigenesis.Methods: Initially,
we screened for the most commonly differentially expressed snoRNAs from
publicly available microarray and RNA-sequence databases for other
malignancies. Three clinical cohorts (a total 345 CRC tissues) were then
used to select/validate the candidate snoRNAs. The prognostic potential
of the candidate snoRNAs were evaluated and the association with
clinicopathological features were assessed. CRISPR/Cas9 system was used
to knockdown the target snoRNA in multiple CRC cell lines to determine
the functional role of the target snoRNA in a series of in vitro
assays.Results: In the discovery phase, we identified four differentially
overexpressed snoRNAs in human cancers. We then confirmed overexpression
of three snoRNAs (SNORA21, SNORA34 and SNORD66) in CRC compared to
adjacent normal tissues. Of these three snoRNAs, high SNORA21 expression
in tumors resulted in poor prognosis (p = 0.0086, Log-rank test). In an
independent validation cohort, we confirmed high SNORA21 expression
results in poor overall survival (p = 0.0060), especially in stage IV CRC
(p = 0.0272). Clinicopathological analysis showed positive association
between SNORA21 and vascular invasion and metastasis (p = 0.030 and
0.011, by Kruskal-Wallis test and Mann-Whitney U test, respectively)
indicating that SNORA21 could be involved in metastasis. Moreover,
multivariate analysis revealed that increased SNORA21 expression was an
independent prognostic factor for overall survival. Using CRISPR/Cas9
stable SNORA21 knocked-down cell lines, we demonstrated that SNORA21
suppression resulted in reduced cell proliferation and colony forming
capacity.Conclusion: We firstly identified SNORA21 as a novel oncogene
which could also be a potential prognostic marker in patients with CRC.

