Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of p62/SQSTM1 as a component of non-canonical WNT
VANGL2-JNK signaling in breast cancer


Planar cell polarity (PCP), an evolutionarily conserved developmental
process originally described in Drosophila melanogaster, is essential to
the control of tissue morphogenesis and development of polarized
structures in metazoans. Its importance in human diseases is best
demonstrated in polycystic kidney disease, hearing loss, Bardet Biedl
syndrome, neural tube closure defects and cancer. PCP involves a set of
evolutionarily conserved PCP genes encoding WNT ligands, transmembrane
(vangl2, frizzled, fat, dachsous) and cytoplasmic (scribble, prickle,
dishevelled, diego) molecules triggering a genetically well-defined
non-canonical WNT-JNK pathway. Recent work has linked defects of this
pathway to breast cancer aggressiveness and proposed non-canonical
WNT/PCP signaling as a therapeutic target. Here we show that the
archetypal non-canonical WNT/PCP protein VANGL2 is overexpressed in basal
breast cancers, associated with poor prognosis and implicated in tumor
growth. We identify the scaffold p62/SQSTM1 protein as a novel
VANGL2-binding partner and show its key role in an evolutionarily
conserved VANGL2-p62/SQSTM1-JNK pathway in breast cancer cells and in
Xenopus. This proliferative signaling cascade is upregulated in breast
cancer patients with shorter survival, and can be inactivated in
patient-derived xenograft cells by inhibition of the JNK pathway or by
disruption of the VANGL2-p62/SQSTM1 interaction. VANGL2-JNK signaling is
thus a potential target for breast cancer therapy.Puvirajesinghe T.M., et
al. Identification of p62/SQSTM1 as a component of non-canonical Wnt
VANGL2-JNK signaling in breast cancer. Nature Communications, in press.
Sebbagh M. and Borg J.-P. Insight into Planar Cell Polarity. (2014)
Invited review in Experimental Cell Research, 328:284-295. Belotti E., et
al. The human PDZome: a gateway to PDZ mediated functions. (2013) Mol
Cell Proteomics, 12: 2587-603.

