Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STRAP mediates the stemness of human colorectal cancer cells by
epigenetic regulation of Notch pathway


Human colon cancer-initiating cells (CCICs) are responsible for the
unrestrained cell proliferation and chemoresistance of colorectal tumors.
Notch signaling is critical for the maintenance and self-renewal of
cancer-initiating cells in colon cancer. We have shown that the
serine-threonine kinase receptor-associated protein (STRAP), a ubiquitous
WD40 protein, is involved in promoting tumorigenesis through activated
MAPK/ERK pathway and pRb phosphorylation. In addition, our previous
studies uncovered that STRAP is up-regulated in 60% colon carcinomas and
behaves as an oncogene in a TGF--dependent or -independent manner. Based
on our new finding that STRAP stabilizes intracellular fragment of Notch3
(ICN3) via post-translational modification, we sought to explore the
cross-talk between STRAP and Notch pathway in regulating stemness of
CCICs. Here, we have generated STRAP knock down (KD) colorectal cancer
cell lines (RKO, DLD1, HCT116, HT29, WiDr, SW480, SW620, and LOVO) to
show how STRAP abrogates apoptosis by up-regulating CD44+/CD133+
subpopulations of CCICs. Heterozygous Strap KO inhibits tumorigenesis
accompanied by the reduction of stemness phenotype (CD44+, Lgr5+) in a
colitis-associated mouse model. Western blot assays and immunofluorescene
staining demonstrated that the expression of stemness biomarkers (Nanog,
Oct4 and Sox2) is decreased in STRAP KD cells. Furthermore, the
transcriptional activation of Notch pathway related genes is
downregulated in the STRAP KD cells. EpiTect Chip qPCR Arrays profiled
that 17 out of 84 genes key to Notch signal transduction had higher
activating (H3K4me3) and lower repressive (H3K27me3) histone
modifications in WT cells compared to STRAP KD cells. Among these genes,
we identified two transcription factors, Hes1 and Hes5, that are
transcriptionally regulated by STRAP as demonstrated by luciferase assays
and qPCR. We further demonstrated that Hes1 and Hes5 were
transcriptionally activated by STRAP through Polycomb Repressive Complex
2 (PRC2)-dependent mechanism. Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that
STRAP interacts with the key components, EZH2 and SUZ12 of PRC2 complex
in vivo, which antagonizes the histone methyltransferase activity in
H3K27 on the promoters of Hes1 and Hes5, resulting in activating these
two genes. Of interest, ectopic expression of either Hes1 or Hes5 can
rescue the stemness phenotype in STRAP KD cells. Together, our findings
provide a novel mechanistic insight into the regulation of CCICs via
STRAP-PRC2-Hes1/5 regulatory axis, which represents a potential target
for CCICs, thus overcoming cancer chemoresistance and relapse.

