Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of histone deacetylase 1 reverse the immune evasion
phenotype to enhance T-cell-mediated lysis of prostate and breast
carcinoma cells


The clinical promise of cancer immunotherapy relies on the premise that
the immune system can effectively recognize and eliminate tumor cells
identified as non-self. However, tumors can evade host immune
surveillance through multiple mechanisms, including epigenetic silencing
of genes involved in antigen processing and immune recognition. Hence,
there is an unmet clinical need to develop effective therapeutic
strategies that can restore tumor immune recognition and thus promote
long-lasting tumor control when combined with immunotherapy, such as
immune checkpoint blockade and therapeutic cancer vaccines. Although
epigenetic therapies have shown limited clinical benefit for patients
harboring solid tumors, recent clinical reports suggest a strong
potential for clinical synergy when combined with immunotherapy. We
sought to examine the potential of clinically relevant exposure of
prostate and breast human carcinoma cells to histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors to reverse tumor immune escape to T-cell mediated lysis. Here
we demonstrate that prostate and breast carcinoma cells are more
sensitive to T-cell mediated lysis in vitro after clinically relevant
exposure to epigenetic therapy with either the pan-HDAC inhibitor
vorinostat or the class I HDAC inhibitor entinostat. This pattern of
immunogenic modulation was observed against a broad range of
tumor-associated antigens, such as CEA, MUC-1, PSA, and brachyury, and
associated with augmented expression of multiple proteins involved in
antigen processing and tumor immune recognition. Genetic and
pharmacological inhibition studies identified HDAC1 as a key determinant
in the reversal of carcinoma immune escape. Further, our findings suggest
that the observed reversal of tumor immune evasion is driven by a
response to cellular stress through activation of the unfolded protein
response. This offers the rationale for combining HDAC inhibitors with
immunotherapy, including therapeutic cancer vaccines.

