Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico design and biological evaluation of benzofused
polyamides targeting G-quadruplex DNA structures


Guanine-rich nucleic acids can fold into distinctive four-stranded
G-quadruplex structures which are found in telomeric DNA repeats as well
as in sequences in the promoter and other regulatory regions of genes,
especially those involved in cellular proliferation. Small molecules that
can selectively bind and stabilize the G-quadruplex structure have become
of significant interest to researchers, and are gaining momentum as a
possible new class of anticancer agents.We recently reported a series of
novel biaryl polyamides with significant selectively toward G-quadruplex
compared to duplex DNA. Using a distamycin scaffold as a starting point,
we introduced biaryl building blocks in place of pyrroles to switch
preference from duplex to G-quadruplex DNA. This alteration in shape
ensured that the molecules had low affinity for duplex DNA while
increasing their interaction with a G-quadruplex structure. We have now
used a molecular modeling approach to modify the structure of the
previously reported biaryl polyamides by incorporating benzofused
building blocks to improve affinity for G-quadruplexes while further
reducing affinity for duplex DNA to enhance selectivity for G-quadruplex
versus duplex DNA.A small, focused benzofused-polyamide library (17
molecules) was initially synthesized and evaluated for the ability of
members to stabilize G-quadruplex structures using a FRET-based DNA
thermal denaturation assay and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
However, these compounds failed to stabilize the human telomeric
G-quadruplex and c-Kit quadruplexes, and MD simulations suggested that
the shape of the molecules required further modification to facilitate
G-quadruplex interaction. A second library of molecules (50 in total) was
then designed and synthesized using a molecular modeling based approach.
In this series, the shape of the polyamide fragment was changed, while
retaining the original scaffold, by introducing benzofused moieties with
3,5-substitutions. Evaluation of these molecules in the same FRET assay
showed a notable increase in stabilization of the F21T quadruplex for
many library members. For example, compounds AR-130 and AR-168 stabilized
the G-quadruplex by 15C and 17C, respectively (at 1 M concentration),
while showing insignificant affinity for duplex DNA. Cytotoxicity in the
micromolar region is anticipated based on recent studies on related
compounds, and a full growth inhibition evaluation is presently underway
in MiaPaCa2, MDA-MB 231, HeLa and NCIH1975 cell lines.Given their low
molecular weight (e.g., between 422-646 Daltons), reasonable water
solubility and good cellular penetration properties compared to other
known G-quadruplex inhibitors which are mostly non-drug-like, molecules
of this type have the potential to be developed into reagents that can
probe DNA structure, and novel therapeutic agents based on G-quadruplex
targeting.

