Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergy between PARP and Wee1 inhibitors suggests homologous
recombination repair defect in NSCLC as a mechanistic target for
combination therapy


Advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of
cancer mortality. Despite progress in targeted molecular therapeutics and
precision medicine, outcomes in this disease remain poor. Recent evidence
suggests that impaired homologous recombination (HR) occurs in a
significant subset of NSCLCs and may serve as a predictive biomarker for
sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. Poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) and
Wee1 inhibition represent two mechanistically distinct approaches to
augment the effects of DNA damage. Specifically, the PARP inhibitor
olaparib impairs repair of DNA single strand breaks, which during
replication lead to the formation of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs),
resulting in synthetic lethality in HR deficient tumors. AZD1775 is a
Wee1 inhibitor that abrogates the G2 checkpoint and thus removes a
safeguard against cell cycle progression with unrepaired DNA damage.
Moreover, AZD1775 has been recently reported to exhibit single-agent
activity in patients harboring BRCA1/2 mutations. Therefore, we
hypothesize that olaparib and AZD1775 would have synergistic effects in a
subset of NSCLCs and that HR deficiency could be predictive of tumor
response to combination therapy.Utilizing Rad51 focus formation as a
marker of HR deficiency, we prospectively selected representative NSCLC
cell lines that either did (e.g. Calu6) or did not (e.g. A549) harbor
putative defects in HR repair. We treated Calu6 and A549 and other NSCLC
cells with AZD1775 and olaparib with varying drug dosing and sequencing
to determine the optimal regimen for synergistic effect. Cytotoxicity was
determined by CellTiter-Glo cell viability assays and synergy was
quantified by calculating the combination index. Additionally, we
investigated mechanistic protein markers by Western blot.In response to
combined olaparib and AZD1775 treatment, Calu6 cancer cells demonstrated
markedly more pronounced synergistic sensitivity (median CI = 0.19)
compared to A549 cancer cells (median CI = 0.90). Moreover, a similar
trend toward a selective synergistic effect was demonstrated in a panel
of 10 additional NSCLC lines. On biochemical analysis, we observed
inhibition of p-Cdk1, upregulation of p-Chk1, and upregulation of p-KAP1,
suggesting abrogation of the G2/M checkpoint and activation of ATM/ATR
repair pathways, all consistent with the mechanistic underpinnings of our
hypothesis.Taken together, these results provide early pre-clinical
evidence for the rational combination of Wee1 and PARP inhibition in the
treatment of advanced NSCLC, and suggest HR deficiency as a predictive
marker applicable to NSCLC. Continued mechanistic investigation and
further confirmatory studies are warranted to inform the selection of
patients who may maximally benefit from such combination treatment.

