Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FRA1 contributes to ERK-mediated increased PD-L1 expression in
KRAS mutated premalignant human bronchial epithelial cells


BACKGROUND: Activating KRAS mutations are common driver mutations in
non-small cell lung carcinoma. Patients with mutated KRAS demonstrate
less benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy and resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. KRAS mutations are known to activate the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway.
Fos-related antigen-1 (FRA1) is a MEK/ERK-dependent transcription factor
and member of the AP-1 transcription factor superfamily. Immune
checkpoint pathways including the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway are involved in
immune-mediated tumor evasion. We hypothesize that KRAS mutation directly
regulates the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway through ERK activation and FRA1 may be
an important transcriptional mediator.METHODS: In order to assess the
role of KRAS mutation independent of other somatic mutations and to begin
to understand potential immune suppressive pathways operative in
pulmonary premalignancy, premalignant human bronchial epithelial cell
lines (HBEC) were used instead of human lung cancer cell lines. Four
immortalized HBEC (2, 3, 7, and 11 cell lines) with KRAS v12-mutation
(HBEC-KRAS) compared to control (HBEC-vector) were used to assess mRNA
and protein expression levels of PD-L1 by RT-qPCR, flow cytometry, and
western blot. Cell-lines were treated with MEK (ERK kinase) inhibitor
(PD0325901) for 24 hours (h) up to 1M. FRA1 was silenced by transfection
with siRNA at 100nM.RESULTS: In comparing HBEC-KRAS to HBEC-vector
(wild-type) cells, PD-L1 mRNA (1.33.4 fold) and surface protein
expressions (1.22.3 fold by flow cytometry) were increased in all 4 cell
lines and confirmed by western blot analyses. PD-L1 mRNA and protein
levels were highest in HBEC3-KRAS. MEK inhibition resulted in decreased
PD-L1 expression by 10 fold (HBEC3-vector) and 11 fold (HBEC3-KRAS) in
mRNA levels and 3 fold (HBEC3-vector and HBEC3-KRAS) in surface protein
levels. In comparing HBEC3-KRAS to HBEC3-vector, FRA1 increased mRNA (2.7
fold) and protein level expression (2.8 fold). In comparing HBEC3-KRAS to
HBEC3-vector cells, FRA1 silencing (FRA1 siRNA) resulted in reduced PD-L1
(53% at 48 h; 73% at 72 h) and FRA1 (94% at 48 h; 99% at 72 h) by western
blot. In comparing HBEC3-KRAS to HBEC3-vector cells, ERK phosphorylation
increased 7.9 fold and FRA1 silencing led to inhibition of ERK
phosphorylation by 2.8 fold at 72 h by western blot.CONCLUSIONS: Here, we
demonstrate that PD-L1 expression is elevated in premalignant KRAS
mutated human bronchial epithelial cells, and ERK activation mediates
KRAS mutation driven up regulation of PD-L1 and at least in part through
FRA1 dependence. Our data suggest that KRAS mutation may directly
regulate the PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint pathway through FRA1 and
MEK/ERK-dependent transcriptional regulation. Further understanding of
KRAS driven molecular pathways that modulate immune checkpoints may
elucidate therapeutic targets for potential new combination immune
therapies.

