Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of heat shock factors for cancer stem cell regulation


Introduction: Heat shock factor family is a group of transcription
factors that can bind specifically to heat shock elements (HSE) within
the promoter region of heat shock protein (HSP). The HSF pathway
activation helps cells survive under stress by preventing protein
misfolding and aggregation. Three heat shock factors (HSF1, HSF2 and
HSF4) have been identified in humans, among them, HSF1, which is believed
to be the master regulator of cellular response to stress, is by far the
best-characterized member of the HSF family.We first identified that high
HSF1 is associated with high tumor grade and poor survival in multiple
cancer models including breast, ovarian, lung and colon cancers. In
addition, our recent data indicate that HSF1 drives a distinct
transcription program that is unrelated to heat shock response in
malignant tumors, and this HSF1 non-heat shock related transcription
program correlates with poor outcome in breast cancer patients. Moreover,
we confirmed that HSF1 drives the Cancer Stem Cell (CSC) phenotype in
multiple breast cancer cell lines and facilitate chemo-treatment
resistance by increasing CSC frequency in breast cancer cells.Previous
studies have shown that HSF2 and HSF4 may play a role in cancer
progression either on their own or through interaction with HSF1. HSF2
forms hetero-trimers with HSF1 and facilitate its function in response to
heat shock. Inactivation of HSF4 in p53 null mouse models causes cell
senescence and suppression of tumorigenesis, with great similarities to
HSF1-/- p53 null mice.Results: In an attempt to investigate how HSF1 is
activated to regulate CSC phenotype, we constructed phospho HSF1 at three
different sites. We observed that there is no correlation of phospho
activation of HSF1 with CSC phenotype. In follow-up work to the studies
above, we found that both HSF2 and HSF4 are also significantly
up-regulated in CSCs, suggesting that they may cooperate with HSF1 in
regulating CSCs. Moreover, we discovered that HSF4 is over-expressed in
breast cancers compared to normal mammary gland, and over-expression of
HSF4 induces tumorsphere formation in breast cancer cells.Conclusion:
These observations indicated that in order to gain a complete
understanding of the role of the HSFs in cancer it is now necessary to
study all three HSFs together.

