Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive approach to delineate FGFR2 targeted therapy
response in diffuse gastric cancer


Dysregulation of fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) signaling has
been associated with tumorigenesis and progression in various cancers.
Preclinical models have shown that FGFR2 signaling activation due to
FGFR2 amplification is essential driver for specific gastric cancers.
Cancer cell lines or patient-derived gastric cancer xenograft models with
FGFR2 amplification are highly sensitive to AZD4547, which is a
small-molecule tyrosine kinase (TRK) inhibitor that selectively targets
FGFR1-3. However, recent clinical trial studies failed to demonstrate the
therapeutic potential of AZD4547 in patients with FGFR2 amplification.
For this study, we identified critical genetic and molecular features
that determine the response to FGFR2 inhibitors in gastric cancer.To
systematically delineate the pathways that modulate response to FGFR2
inhibitors, we identified CRISPR-library-based gene knockouts that result
in resistance to AZD4547 in Kato III cells, a gastric cancer cell line
with high sensitivity to this drug. Although majority of transduced Kato
III cells undergo cell senescence upon AZD4547 treatment, a small
population of resistant cells rendered by CRISPR knockout is enriched.
Subsequent sequencing and pathway analysis reveal the alternative
activated pathways that contribute to the cell growth in lieu of FGFR2
inhibition.Furthermore, we applied the elastic-net regression analysis to
identify genetic features associated with the drug sensitivity to FGFR2
inhibition in cancer cell lines. The cell line drug response data are
derived from the Cancer Therapeutic Response Portal (CTRP v2) and the
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). Notably, few cancer cell lines have
high FGFR2 copy numbers (CN>4). The elastic-net algorithm simultaneously
integrates mutation, copy number, gene expression data, and forms
multiple linear regression to learn the coefficient weights associated
with FGFR2 inhibitor sensitivity. Using the method, we identify the whole
spectrum of genetic and molecular features that are potential drug
response markers.In summary, our study provides new insight into genetic
and molecular features that implicate in the cellular response to FGFR2
inhibitors, which can facilitate the development of more effective
strategies to treat patients with FGFR2 amplification.

