Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic correlation of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
and cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in patients with human
esophageal carcinoma


Backgrounds: Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are thought to play an
essential role in cancer invasion, migration, metastasis, and tumor
immunosuppression. However, there has been still a little evidence of the
correlation of tumor immunosuppression and CAFs in human esophageal
carcinoma. The other hand, as like rising of PD-1 antibody targeting
therapy to tumor immunosuppression have been shown dramatic cure
responses in melanoma and now ongoing to other malignancies.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are considered typically to
represent a host immune response against carcinoma. In many types of
tumors TILs have been shown their strong correlation to patient's
clinicopathological features. In this study, we evaluated the prognostic
correlation of CAFs and TILs, which are classified respectively in
tumor-associated CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) and FoxP3+ regulatory
T cells (Treg) in surgically resected esophageal carcinoma.Materials and
methods: Total 58 cases with esophageal carcinoma in our institution were
evaluated for the presence of CAFs and TILs by immunohistochemistry. TILs
of CTL and Treg were calculated each in the intratumoral and the
peripheral tissues, and the cutoff for subgroups was defined at the
median value. CAFs were defined as fibroblasts expressing alpha smooth
muscle actin (-SMA), and evaluated with the -SMA scoring by using Area
Index, which is calculated by imageJ. TILs and CAFs were assessed for the
associations with pathological invasion depth (pT), lymph node metastases
(pN), histological types, and disease-free survival (DFS) or overall
survival (OS).Result: In intratumoral tissues, Treg was significantly
associated with advanced T stages, and Treg and a CTL/Treg ratio were
associated with lymph node metastasis. Higher CTL, higher CTL/Treg ratio
and lower Treg were significantly associated with improved DFS and OS in
univariate analysis. Furthermore, multivariate analysis demonstrated
selected higher CTL as an independent prognostic factor (P = 0.010). On
the other hand, in peripheral tissues, CTL, Treg, and CTL/Treg ratio were
not correlated with clinicopathological factors or the any prognosis.
Additionally the overexpression of CAFs was strongly associated with poor
prognosis (P = 0.002) and the Area Index of -SMA was inversely correlated
with the CTL and CTL/Treg ratio in intratumoral tissues (P = 0.029,
0.017). It suggests that CAFs accumulation in tumor tissue is correlated
to status of intratumoral immunesuppression.Conclusion: The CTL in
intratumoral tissues are independent prognostic factors, and are
considered to play an essential role in tumor immunity. Our results
demonstrate that CAFs are significant correlation of immunosuppression in
esophageal carcinoma. In the future, targeting CAFs therapy itself might
improve tumor immunosuppression, and there is possibility to prolong a
prognosis.

