Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Entrectinib is effective against the gatekeeper and other emerging
resistance mutations in NTRK-, ROS1- and ALK- rearranged cancers


Gene rearrangements involving NTRK1, NTRK2, NTRK3, ROS1 and ALK result in
oncogenic fusion proteins that have been identified in many types of
cancer, including lung, colorectal, salivary gland, sarcoma, papillary
thyroid, glioblastoma, melanoma and other histologies. Entrectinib
(RXDX-101) is an orally available, highly potent and selective
ATP-competitive pan-Trk, ROS1 and ALK inhibitor. In preclinical studies,
entrectinib effectively inhibits target kinase activity and cancer cell
proliferation and in vivo tumor growth across various fusion partners and
cancer types. More importantly, entrectinib's activity has been validated
clinically in patients across multiple fusion partners and tissue
histologies.Trk inhibitors, including entrectinib, have shown promising
clinical activity in molecularly selected patients. Predictably,
potential resistance mechanisms have also begun to emerge. For example,
mutations in the Trk kinase domain were identified as one of the in vitro
induced resistance mechanisms to the Trk inhibitor, Loxo-101. The three
reported resistance mutations in the Ba/F3-MPRIP-NTRK1 cell line model
treated with Loxo-101 were F589, G667 and V573. The F589 location on TrkA
is equivalent to the gatekeeper mutations, L1196 location on ALK and
L2026 location on ROS1. These gatekeeper mutations often arise as
resistance mechanisms in patients treated with ALK and ROS1 inhibitors.
To test the activity of entrectinib against these three reported NTRK1
mutations, we introduced mutated Trk proteins into Ba/F3 and cancer cell
lines and performed dose-dependent proliferation studies. Entrectinib was
able to inhibit proliferation of cells harboring each of these three
mutations that confer resistance to other Trk inhibitors. Particularly,
the IC50 values of entrectinib against kinase domain wildtype and
gatekeeper mutated (F589) are essentially unchanged (low single-digit
nM), which is consistent with the observation that entrectinib is also
able to inhibit the gatekeeper mutation in ALK (L1196) in both cell based
assays and in vivo tumor growth inhibition studies.In conclusion, our
preclinical data suggest that entrectinib is an effective treatment for
patients with NTRK-rearranged tumors, including cancers that harbor
certain resistance mutations to other Trk inhibitors.

