Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammary fibroblasts exert divergent effects on the survival of
invasive breast cancer cells


Cancer development and progression are inherently inefficient processes
riddled with anti-tumorigenic obstacles. Anoikis, or apoptosis induced by
detachment from the extracellular matrix (ECM), represents one prominent
hindrance to cancer progression that transformed cells must overcome in
order to survive, particularly during the ECM-bereft metastatic cascade.
Far from acting in isolation, we report that one mechanisms of anoikis
evasion by invasive breast cancer cells involves the exploitation of
carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) from the surrounding tumor
microenvironment. CAFs secrete insulin-like growth factor-binding
proteins (IGFBPs) that facilitate non-canonical activation of
integrin-linked kinase (ILK), activation of ERK/MAPK, and ultimately
stabilization of the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 to promote cancer cell
survival during ECM detachment. Further investigation into the influence
of the tumor microenvironment on cancer cell survival revealed that,
contrary to the role of CAFs, normal mammary fibroblasts (NMFs) appear to
exert anti-tumorigenic effects on ECM attached cancer cells. Utilizing
conditioned media from NMFs, we have found that NMFs secrete factors that
increase caspase activation in multiple cancer cell lines, suggestive of
NMF-mediated cancer cell death. Because cancer progression necessitates
the intermingling of cancer cells with normal stromal cells, particularly
at early time points in primary tumor and metastases formation, we
hypothesize that this NMFs pose yet another obstacle to disease
progression that may compliment the process of anoikis by capping the
metastatic cascade with environments that are inhospitable to cancer cell
survival. Similar to anoikis evasion, our data suggests that cancer cells
must evade NMF-induced death stimuli in order to survive, possibly
through the accrual of CAFs in the tumor microenvironment to combat or
replace the pro-apoptotic NMFs. Using traditional and 3D mammalian cell
culture in combination with in vivo studies, we aim to delineate the
roles of both CAFs and NMFs on cancer cell survival under conditions of
differential ECM availability. A more complete understanding of the
nuances dictating cancer cell-fibroblast interactions could yield
informative data relevant to chemotherapeutic research and development.

