Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation analysis in cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer
cells and recurrent ovarian cancer patient samples


Acquisition of platinum resistance following first line platinum therapy
is commonly observed in ovarian cancer patients and is a major obstacle
to clinical effectiveness. Currently there are no options available to
prevent platinum resistance; however, studies show that demethylating
agents may resensitize patients to platinum therapy thereby demonstrating
DNA methylation as a critical contributor to the development of platinum
resistance. Using a cellular model of platinum resistance we have
previously shown that resistant cells have increased DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) activity as well as increased global DNA
methylation. These observations were dependent on cisplatin induced
activation of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) which we
previously identified as a novel a regulator of DNMT activity and DNA
methylation. Inhibition of the EGFR conferred during a platinum
resistance paradigm decreased DNMT activity, decreased global methylation
and attenuated resistance in our platinum resistant model. We
hypothesized that further genome wide analysis of DNA methylation in
resistant, parental and EGFR inhibited cell lines at specific CG sites
would reveal targets of methylation important for the development of
platinum resistance. Using the Illumina 450K methylation array, we found
few significant alterations in DNA methylation for given genes between
control and cisplatin resistant (CPR) cells. However, additional DNA
methylation analysis with the 450K methylation array of patient tumor
samples at initial diagnosis as well as after relapse, while not
significant, showed similar trends in the data for certain genes namely
CSRNP3, LOC400904, LYPD6, MTMR9L, NIPAL4 and RBP7. We are still
evaluating the effects of EGFR inhibition in vitro on DNA methylation
patterns. We suggest that while the in vitro model of platinum resistance
corresponds to patient samples in some aspects, ovarian cancer cells
display a great deal of heterogeneity in DNA methylation as described by
others and a much larger sample size is necessary to draw concrete
conclusions. Current studies are evaluating gene expression in control
and resistant cells to validate whether alterations in DNA methylation
coincide with changes in expression.

