Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in
triple-negative breast cancer


Although the basal-like 1 (BL1) and BL2 subtypes of triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) share similar genetic and biological
characteristics, patients with BL2 type tumors have markedly poorer
prognosis. In addition, despite the overexpression of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) characteristically observed in basal-like TNBC,
EGFR inhibitors have performed poorly in clinical trials. In order to
understand the mechanism of resistance to EGFR inhibition in these
tumors, our laboratory utilized cell line models of BL2 (SUM-149 and
SUM-229) and BL1 (MDA-MB-468; MM468) TNBC, all of which overexpress EGFR,
are PTEN null and exhibit elevated AKT phosphorylation (p-AKT). Compared
to MCF10A and MM-468 cells, AKT phosphorylation in the SUM-149 and
SUM-229 cell lines was resistant to treatment with the EGFR inhibitor
gefitinib, as well as to the PI3K inhibitor BKM120 (BKM) and the mTOR
inhibitor KU-0063794 (KU). Even treatment with the allosteric AKT
inhibitor MK2206 (MK) only partially reduced p-AKT. RT-PCR and immunoblot
analysis of AKT isoform expression showed that in SUM-149 and SUM-229
cells, AKT3 is expressed at higher levels than AKT1 or AKT2 at both the
protein and message level. Because AKT3 has a higher IC50 for MK than
AKT1 or AKT2, increasing doses of MK were used in an effort to abrogate
AKT phosphorylation. The results showed that MK treatment at higher
concentrations (5 M) decreased p-AKT. In addition, shRNA-mediated
knock-down of AKT3 sensitized the cells to inhibition of AKT by BKM, KU
and MK. Interestingly, MK treatment alone had little effect on colony
forming efficiency, even at higher doses, but when added in combination
with gefitinib, MK dramatically reduced colony formation. We then
investigated the effect of PTEN re-expression on signaling in these cell
lines. PTEN re-expression alone had little effect on p-AKT in SUM-149 and
SUM-229 cells, but resulted in a dramatic reduction in p-AKT in MM-468
cells. Although PTEN expression alone had little effect on p-AKT in
SUM-149 and 229 cells, these cells exhibited decreased p-AKT following
treatment with gefitinib and were sensitive to inhibition of AKT by MK.
In addition, treatment of SUM-149/PTEN cells with gefitinib markedly
reduced colony-forming efficiency. Our laboratory has previously
demonstrated that in SUM-149 cells, a set of genes that are essential for
survival, including PLK1, are uncoupled from regulation by EGFR. Thus, we
examined the effect of AKT inhibition on expression of PLK1 and found
that inhibition of AKT or re-expression of PTEN was able to recouple
EGFR-mediated regulation of PLK1 expression. Our results demonstrate that
PI-3 kinase and mTORC2 drive phosphorylation of AKT1 but not AKT3 in
SUM-149 cells, which explains their relative resistance to these targeted
drugs.

