Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymer mediated RNAi-based combination therapy for treating
prostate cancer


Purpose. To determine whether RNAi-based combination therapy targeting
androgen receptor (AR) and XIAP signaling pathways using polymeric
micelles can treat prostate cancer.Methods. Potency of siRNAs targeting
AR and XIAP genes was assessed using real time RT-PCR, Western Blot and
ELISA. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. A library of polymers
designed to degrade via hydrolysis and enhance siRNA delivery was
synthesized by conjugating hexylamine, pentaethylenehexamine and
3-morpholinopropylamine to poly(ethylene
glycol)-block-poly(5-methyl-5-carboxyl-propylene carbonate) backbone
using EDC/HOBT coupling chemistry. Polymer structure and molecular weight
were verified with proton NMR and Gel Permeation Chromatography,
respectively.Results. Three siRNA sequences targeting different regions
of the AR and XIAP genes were designed, blasted against the human genome
database to eliminate cross-silencing of nontarget genes and their
potency screened in LNCaP and C4-2 cells following transfection. All
siRNAs targeting AR (start site: 1172, 1648 and 1768) used in this study
silenced AR mRNA and protein expression in both cell lines. Furthermore,
1172 was identified as the most potent sequence resulting in
approximately 75% knockdown regardless of cell type. Also, the three
siRNAs targeting XIAP (start site: 264, 297 and 458) down-regulated XIAP
mRNA and protein levels in both cells and were generally more potent in
C4-2 cells compared to LNCaP cells. C4-2 cells transfected with siRNA
targeting AR (start site: 1172) and XIAP (start site: 264) alone or in
combination and assayed after 96 hours revealed XIAP and AR
down-regulation resulted in approximately 20% and 50% growth inhibition
in C4-2 cells, respectively, compared to control. However, combined
silencing of XIAP and AR genes decreased cell growth by 62% and was more
potent in inhibiting cell proliferation compared to monotherapy.
Additionally, combination of siRNA targeting AR (start site: 1172) and
XIAP (start site: 264) significantly increased percentage of cells
undergoing apoptosis (85%) compared to control or monotherapy.
Poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(5-methyl-5-carboxyl-propylene carbonate)
copolymer was synthesized by ring opening polymerization and conjugated
with various ratios of hexylamine, pentaethylenehexamine and
3-morpholinopropylamine moieties. The resulting copolymer
(PEG-b-P(CC-g-PHEXYL-g-PMORPH-g-PPHEA) were non-toxic even at
concentration of 1500 g/mL and successfully condensed siRNA at N/P of 25
with average hydrodynamic diameter of approximately 175 nm.Conclusions.
Combination based therapy using siRNA targeting AR and XIAP can
potentially treat prostate cancer.

