Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel agonist antibody (INCAGN01876) that targets the
costimulatory receptor GITR


Activation of costimulatory receptors of the tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNFR) superfamily in T cells is considered a promising
alternative approach to potentiate anti-tumor immunity that may
complement strategies focused on the blockade of co-inhibitory pathways
such PD-1/PDL1. Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related protein (GITR, CD357
or TNFRSF18) is an important T cell costimulatory receptor that can
potentiate T cell receptor (TCR) signaling during CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
priming, effector cell differentiation and memory T cell recall
responses. In humans GITR expression is generally restricted to subsets
of T cells responding to TCR stimulation, and is co-expressed with OX40.
Like other TNFR family members, GITR co-stimulation can enhance T cell
responsiveness to suboptimal TCR signaling by activating the NFB pathway,
leading to enhanced cytokine responses and survival. GITR signaling in T
cells may also promote resistance to the immune suppressive effects of
regulatory T cells, thereby enhancing T cell responsiveness to weakly
immunogenic tumor-associated antigens. INCAGN01876 is a humanized IgG1
monoclonal antibody being developed for the treatment of advanced
malignancies. INCAGN01876 potently binds to human and non-human primate
GITR but does not cross-react with related TNFR family members.
INCAGN01876 has been optimized to mediate receptor forward signaling
under suboptimal TCR stimulatory conditions, leading to increased
production of TNF and IFN by both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. INCAGN01876
achieves this functionality by virtue of its ability to facilitate GITR
clustering in TCR-stimulated T lymphocytes. In mouse preclinical tumor
models, GITR was found to be selectively overexpressed by intratumoral
regulatory T cells, a finding that was also observed in primary human
tumor samples from diverse tumor types. In mouse models, this feature
enabled a surrogate anti-GITR antibody to co-engage activating Fc
receptors expressed by tumor-associated effector cells, and mediate the
selective depletion of intratumoral regulatory T cells. Consistent with
this, INCAGN01876 was designed to co-engage activating Fc receptors and
was shown to efficiently mediate immune effector cell mechanisms,
including ADCC and ADCP. Taken together, the biophysical and functional
attributes of INCAGN01876 make it ideally suited for clinical
development, both as a single agent and in combination with other
immunomodulatory agents.

