Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of interferon regulatory factor-8 (IRF8) during
myelopoiesis is a critical checkpoint for the formation of defective
myeloid cells in cancer


Aberrant myelopoiesis is commonly observed in patients with solid
cancers. This results in the production of myeloid-derived suppressive
cells (MDSCs) which promote tumor growth and metastasis. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying MDSC development have remained poorly
understood. The transcription factor IRF8 is integral for overseeing
myelopoietic fate; high IRF8 expression during normal myelopoiesis favors
monocytic differentiation and directly inhibits granulocytic
differentiation. We recently showed that tumor-derived STAT3/5-activating
cytokines downregulate the expression of IRF8 in myeloid cells leading to
the accumulation of MDSCs in the periphery, which are primarily
granulocytic. However it is unclear if MDSC production is a consequence
of IRF8 downregulation in the periphery or upstream in the bone marrow
during myelopoiesis. To that end, we utilized a novel mouse model
expressing an IRF8-EGFP fusion protein which allowed us to investigate
changes in IRF8 expression during both orthotopic and spontaneous mammary
tumor growth and progression. Our results showed that: 1) the total
granulocyte-monocyte progenitor (GMP) fraction, as with the peripheral
MDSC population, was responsive to tumor burden and greatly expanded with
increasing tumor size, and 2) IRF8 expression within the total GMPs
significantly decreased during tumor growth, reflecting the expansion of
a newly defined primarily IRF8lo granulocyte progenitor (GP) population,
and 3) tumor-induced GPs were hyper-responsive not only to G-CSF, but
also M-CSF to generate a biased granulocytic MDSC-like phenotype.
Expression of IRF8 in other progenitor populations was not affected,
suggesting that IRF8lo GMPs/GPs are a key source of the peripheral MDSC
response. Lastly, genetically enforced IRF8 expression in myeloid
progenitors of the bone marrow constrained aberrant myelopoiesis during
tumor growth, resulting in delayed autochthonous tumor growth and reduced
spontaneous lung metastasis. Altogether, these data reinforce the notion
that modulation of IRF8 in myeloid progenitors is an early consequence of
the neoplastic process and a potential target for therapeutic
intervention.NIH R01CA140622NIH T32CA085183

