Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic targeting of Aurora-A kinase restores ER expression
and endocrine sensitivity through impairment of breast cancer stemness


Background: Intrinsic resistance has been linked to ER down-regulation
and poor clinical outcome in breast tumors. Aurora-A kinase (AURKA)
promotes distant metastases through activation of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) programming and expansion of breast tumor
initiating cells (BTICs) harboring a CD44high/CD24low phenotype.
Moreover, AURKA induces down-regulation of ER expression and resistance
to endocrine therapy that is mediated by SMAD5 transcription factor
(DAssoro et al., Oncogene 2014: 33:599-610). The aim of this study was to
evaluate the role of AURKA in endocrine resistance induced by breast
cancer stemness and ER down-regulation.Materials and Methods: We employed
parental MCF-7 and variant MCF-7 cells ex-vivo (vMCF- 7/LCC9, vMCF-7/FR)
that have high endogenous levels of AURKA, are ERlow, and exhibit in vivo
resistance to fulvestrant. Real-Time Cell Proliferation and Apoptosis
assays were performed to assess response to endocrine and/or
AURKA-targeted therapy using the innovative IncuCyte ZOOM System.
Stemness activity was assessed by culturing breast cancer cells under
non-adherent conditions to generate mammospheres. Expression of ER, CD44
and CD24 markers was characterized by FACS analysis and
immunofluorescence.Results: Pharmacologic inhibition of AURKA activity
with the small molecule, alisertib, significantly restored sensitivity to
fulvestrant in vMCF-7/LCC9 and vMCF-7/FR cells. To establish whether
fulvestrant resistance was linked to enrichment of BTICs, breast cancer
cells were cultured under non-adherent conditions to generate
mammospheres. vMCF-7/FR cells generated mammospheres at higher efficiency
compared to parental cells suggesting that vMCF-7/FR cells exhibited high
self-renewal activity. vMCF-7/FR-derived mammospheres displayed a stem
cell-like CD44high/CD24low phenotype that was further characterized by
low levels of ER expression and resistance to fulvestrant. When vMCF-7
FR-derived mammospheres were treated with alisertib alone or combined
with fulvestrant, the combination was more effective in mediating
restoration of endocrine sensitivity. The phenotype of the
alisertib-treated mammospheres was functionally linked to loss of CD44
expression, restoration of CD24 and ER expression, and sensitivity to
fulvestrant.Conclusions: These findings provide further evidence that
AURKA activity plays a central role in breast cancer progression through
the genesis and clonal expansion of BTICs that are characterized by ER
down-regulation and resistance to endocrine therapy. These results are
important for the treatment of endocrine resistant breast tumors because
they provide the rationale for the development of an innovative
therapeutic approach to combine endocrine therapy with a targeted
inhibitor of AURKA activity.

