Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization of glioma cells by the ketone body
-hydroxybutyrate is associated with enhanced cell cycle arrest in the
G2/M phase


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive primary brain tumor with a
5 year survival rate of 25% in children and less than 10% in adults.
Improvement in the prognosis of GBM patients requires the development of
new therapeutic approaches. One emerging strategy is to target aberrant
cell metabolism, a trait shared by virtually all tumor cells. The
ketogenic diet (KD), a high fat, low carbohydrate and protein metabolic
therapy has been shown to prolong survival in animal glioma models, and
when used in conjunction with radiation cured 9 of 11 mice of their
implanted tumors. We have also shown that the KD alters hypoxia,
angiogenesis, and other hallmarks of glioma progression. To elucidate the
underlying mechanisms through which ketones exert their effects on
glioma, we are doing analyses of the effect of -hydroxybutyrate (HB), the
most prevalent ketone body synthesized during ketosis, on glioma cells in
vitro. We found that HB both alone and in conjunction with radiation
significantly inhibits proliferation of human and mouse glioma cells and
human glioma stem cells (GSC). Alterations in passage through the cell
cycle may affect proliferation, and cells are also more sensitive to
radiation in the G2/M cell cycle phase. We therefore analyzed the effect
of HB on cell cycle distribution of cells treated with HB and/or
radiation. An analysis of cell cycle status by flow cytometry
demonstrated that treating the GSC line L0 with 5mM HB in combination
with 4 Gy of radiation significantly increased the number of cells in
G2/M cell cycle arrest. In GL261-Luc2 mouse glioma cells, 5mM HB alone
significantly enhanced G2/M cell cycle arrest, which could lead to
radiosensitization. Currently we are analyzing proteins involved in cell
cycle progression and apoptosis to better understand HB mediated changes
in growth and radioresistance. In summary, these data provide insight to
the radiosensitization and anti-proliferative mechanisms of HB and may
hold implications for the use of the KD in the treatment of GBM.

