Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New, highly potent antibodies to death receptors having Fc
mutations to increase antitumor activity


Death receptors DR4 (TRAIL-R1) and DR5 (TRAIL-R2 or Apo2) are TNF
receptor superfamily members that are receptors for TRAIL (Apo2 ligand),
an immunomodulatory cytokine. Binding of TRAIL to DR4 or DR5 can activate
the extrinsic apoptotic pathway selectively in tumor cells. Agonist
antibodies to death receptors DR4 and DR5 thus have potential for
treatment of cancer and may be better than derivatives of TRAIL itself
because of their superior pharmacokinetics and receptor selectivity.
However, despite dramatic effects in vitro and in preclinical xenograft
models, several agonist antibodies to DR4 and especially DR5 have not
provided significant therapeutic benefit in clinical trials. While
resistance mechanisms in cancer cells are undoubtedly one reason, another
factor may be inadequate potency of the antibodies tested. We therefore
used intense immunization and screening protocols to develop very potent
anti-DR4 and anti-DR5 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), which were humanized
to make the mAbs denoted HuD114 and HuG4.2 respectively. These mAbs were
substantially more effective at killing tumor cells in vitro than the
mAbs that have been tested in clinical trials. In addition, we introduced
one or two mutations into the Fc (constant) regions of these and other
potent anti-DR4 and anti-DR5 mAbs in order to increase affinity for the
Fc gamma receptor IIb. Cross-linking, as provided by binding of anti-DR4
and anti-DR5 mAbs to Fc gamma receptors on immune cells, is required for
effective transmission of an apoptotic signal through the death
receptors. Accordingly, introduction of these mutations greatly increased
the ability of the mAbs to kill tumor cells in vitro in the presence of
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and to inhibit the growth of
tumor xenografts in mouse models, with two mutations generally more
effective than a single mutation. As a complementary approach to increase
cross-linking, we also developed bispecific antibodies containing two
binding domains from an anti-DR4 mAb and two binding domains from an
anti-DR5 mAb. These bispecific mAbs were made in the IgG-like
Bs(scFv)4-IgG format consisting of a homodimer of two monomers, each
monomer having a single chain Fv from an anti-DR4 mAb linked to a heavy
chain constant region, and a single chain Fv from an anti-DR5 mAb linked
to a light chain constant region. Such a bispecific mAb was more
effective at killing tumor cells than an anti-DR4 or anti-DR5 mAb alone,
or even a mixture of anti-DR4 and anti-DR5 mAbs. Based on their potency
in vitro and in animal models, we believe that HuD114 and HuG4.2,
enhanced by the Fc mutations and/or in bispecific form, have the
potential for greater clinical efficacy than previously tested anti-DR4
and anti-DR5 mAbs and thus merit further investigation.

