Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic reprogramming of osteosarcoma tumor initiating cells
alters histologic and metastatic phenotype


Osteosarcoma (OS) is a pediatric cancer with 40% mortality despite
aggressive treatments. Major treatment challenges are that some tumors do
not respond to therapies or develop resistance over time, processes
partially attributed to cellular heterogeneity within a tumor. We have
previously demonstrated such heterogeneity using a reporter consisting of
an Oct4 promoter driving expression GFP. Cells capable of activating the
reporter, the GFP+ cells, are 100-fold more tumorigenic than the GFP-
cells. Pure populations of GFP+ cells injected into mice produces
heterogeneous tumors, indicating that the GFP- cells arise from the GFP+
cells. The two populations display distinct gene expression profiles,
which are reproducible between tumors and representative of global
changes. These characteristics suggest that the emergence of a GFP- cell
population is due to epigenetic changes. The objective of this study was
to investigate to what extent tumorigenic potential in OS is governed at
the epigenetic level and can be manipulated exogenously by agents that
modify or re-pattern the epigenome.To test this, sorted GFP+ OS cells
were treated with the histone deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA)
in vitro at a dose that increased histone acetylation without inducing
cell death. Although TSA treatment showed promising antitumoral effects
in vitro by inhibiting proliferation and inducing cell cycle arrest,
however, global interrogation of the gene expression changes induced by
TSA treatment revealed an activation of many cancer associated pathways.
In fact, TSA treated Oct4-GFP+ cells injected into NSG mice generated
tumors that displayed enhanced metastatic dissemination, a reduced GFP+
population, and histologic changes. Differential expression analyses
between the GFP+ cells isolated from TSA tumors or tumors generated from
DMSO treated cells showed that the new phenotype was associated with
enrichment for cell cycle pathways and a decrease in extracellular matrix
pathways. This was confirmed at the protein level and with proliferation
assays. As rapidly proliferating cells are generally more sensitive to
chemotherapy, we investigated the sensitivity of the GFP+ cells from TSA
and Control tumors to Doxorubicin (Dox). Cells isolated from TSA tumors
were significantly more receptive to Dox-induced cell death.Our results
suggest that OS malignancy is partially governed at the epigenetic level
and that it is possible to reduce intratumoral heterogeneity. A reduction
in intraturmoral heterogeneity can be exploited in cases of tumors that
are refractory to treatment or have acquired epigenetic resistance.
Intermittent treatment with epigenetic modifiers could potentially
sensitize the tumors to the other treatments, as have been demonstrated
for other cancer types.

