Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NGS-based screening for TP53 mutations in circulating cell-free
DNA: A first step towards early detection of lung cancers


BackgroundThe US National Lung Cancer Screening Trial (NLST) demonstrated
in 2011 that screening with computed tomography (CT) scans could reduce
lung cancer mortality by 20%, but with important financial costs and high
number of false positives. The identification of novel biomarkers is a
need to obtain the maximum benefit from CT screening. Given its
economical and minimally invasive nature, screening for somatic mutations
in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) using next-generation sequencing may
complement existing screening tools. However, for application in early
detection, variant detection must also be done agnostically, i.e. without
prior knowledge from tumour tissue of the mutations expected and
unfortunately, most currently available variant callers are not adapted
for this task.MethodsWe performed multiplex PCR on circulating free DNA
(cfDNA) extracted from the plasma of 35 lung squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) and 64 small-cell carcinoma (SCLC) patients. We additionally
included 133 hospital controls to evaluate the specificity of ctDNA. We
applied (>10,000X) Ion torrent targeted sequencing on the full-coding
region of TP53 since this gene is known to be mutated in more than 70%
and 90% of SCC and SCLC, respectively. Each amplification, library
preparation, and sequencing was performed in duplicate to control for
amplification and sequencing errors. Detecting mutations on ctDNA raises
important statistical and bioinformatics challenges as it represents only
a small fraction of cfDNA. We therefore developed and applied a method
based on the idea that a data-derived model of sequencing errors has the
potential to improve our ability to detect low-allelic fraction (AF)
somatic variants.ResultsWe detected TP53 non-synonymous coding mutations
with AFs between 0.04% and 85% (median 1.7%) in 8 (23%) SCC patients, 28
(44%) SCLC patients, and 8 (6%) controls. We estimated odds ratios of 4.6
(p = 0.006) for SCC and 12.0 (p = 6.710-10) for SCLC. Observations in
controls are surprising, but in this instance there was no information
regarding a subsequent cancer diagnosis.ConclusionWe show that it is
possible to detect ctDNA in the cfDNA of lung cancer patients. Since only
patients with early stage (I-IIA) SCC tumours were included, these
results support the potential utility of the approach for early
detection. Nevertheless, if such mutations are found prior to diagnosis
has not been explored in a prospective study design with pre-diagnostic
plasma samples and individuals without a cancer diagnosis through a
follow-up period.

