Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic addiction in IDH1 mutant cancers


Introduction: Recent efforts have revealed IDH1 mutation not only results
in marked accumulation of 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), it generates genomic
chromatin alterations, altered HIF activity and reprogrammed metabolic
flux. We characterized the metabolic perturbations caused by heterozygous
mutant IDH1 by comparing endogenous IDH1 mutant glioma cells treated with
direct inhibitors of mutant IDH1 (IDH1i) to control cells without
treatment, with the overall aim of identifying novel metabolic
therapeutic targets.Experimental Procedures: We tested the effect of
IDH1i on the in vitro and in vivo phenotype of a panel of patient-derived
endogenous IDH1 mutant solid cancer cells (including gliomas, melanoma,
and sarcomas). We then assessed the effect of IDH1i on the metabolome of
endogenous IDH1 mutant glioma cells using liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry. We further investigated specifically perturbed metabolic
pathways using lentiviral knockdown and overexpression systems.Results:
We found that IDH1i exposure and the resulting 2-HG depletion had a mixed
effect in 12 endogenous mutant IDH1 lines studied both in vitro or in
vivo, including an orthotopic glioma xenograft model. For 10 of 12 lines,
IDH1i treatment had no demonstrable effect on proliferation or survival,
while 2 lines displayed growth inhibition after IDH1i treatment. However,
no significant changes were detected in the genomic DNA methylation
profiles or the global levels of histone tail marks including H3K4me3,
H3K9me2, H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 in IDH1 mutant glioma lines, even after
inhibition of mutant IDH1 for 12 months in vitro. Broader metabolite
profiling revealed that inhibition of mutant IDH1 significantly altered
levels of the canonical metabolite NAD+. We tested the effect of NAD+
depletion using NAD+ biosynthesis inhibitors, and found that endogenously
mutant IDH1 cells were highly dependent on NAD+ for survival, whereas
proliferation and survival of IDH1/2 wild-type cancer cells were
unaffected by NAD+ depletion. Using an inducible mutant IDH1 expression
system we discovered that mutant IDH1 reduced intracellular NAD+ levels,
rendering mutant IDH1 cells susceptible to further NAD+ depletion. Lack
of sufficient NAD+ induced metabolic crisis with reduced ATP levels in
IDH1 mutant cells, triggering the intracellular energy sensor AMPK and
autophagy. In vivo, NAD+ depletion significantly extended the survival of
mice bearing IDH1 mutant xenograft tumors, including intracerebral
gliomas.Conclusions: Although most IDH1 mutant cell lines derived from
solid cancers were resistant to direct IDH1 inhibition, a subset of IDH1
mutant cancers were found to be sensitive. Mutant IDH1 reprograms
metabolism and renders cancer cells highly dependent on NAD+ for
survival. This metabolic addiction presents a potential opportunity for
metabolically targeted therapeutic development.

