Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of MDSC trafficking and function in RCC by CXCR4 in the
presence of a VEGF-R antagonist


Using a murine model of 786-0 and A498 RCC xenografts, we have previously
demonstrated that acquired resistance to sunitinib treatment was
associated with a marked increase in the infiltration of CD11b+/Gr-1+
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC). These cells have also been
implicated in the development of resistance to other anticancer
therapies. Further, we observed that both the influx of MDSC and
resistance to VEGF-targeted therapies could be prevented by concurrent
administration of an HDM2 antagonist, a drug whose biological effects are
mediated primarily through the up regulation of p53. MDSC trafficking
into tumor tissue is regulated by chemokines, many of which (e.g.
SDF-1/CXCL-12) are produced in response to HIF-2 expression. p53 is known
to directly repress CXCL12 transcription, and we have shown that HDM2
blockade suppresses HIF-2 expression, suggesting that the drug has both
direct and indirect effects on CXCL12 expression. Western blot analysis
of tumor lysates confirmed that HDM2 antagonism mediates its effects on
MDSC through the suppression of chemokine production, including CXCL12.
These findings suggested that the ability of HDM2 antagonism to prevent
sunitinib resistance might be due, at least in part, to the suppression
of CXCL12 production and MDSC recruitment. Consequently we hypothesized
that agents that block CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling directly would duplicate
the effects of HDM2 blockade on MDSC trafficking and prevent resistance
to VEGF-targeted therapies.Mice were inoculated with 786-0 and A498 RCC
xenografts, the tumors permitted to grow to 300 mm3, and then treatment
initiated with the CXCR4 inhibitor X4P-001 (AMD11070), axitinib, both
agents in combination, or saline (control). Whereas either drug alone
either had no (axitinib) or modest (X4P-001) effects on tumor growth, the
combination of X4P-001 and axitinib had additive (synergistic) anti-tumor
effects. Specifically, combination treatment resulted in massive tumor
cell death, with the established implants actually regressing in size -
an effect not previously seen with VEGFR-targeted drugs given as single
agents. IHC staining demonstrated, as previously, that mice treated with
axitinib alone had an increase in Ki-67 positive tumor cells. This effect
was not observed in mice that received both X4P-001 plus axitinib,
suggesting an anti-proliferative effect of the combination. Finally, the
tumors from mice receiving axitinib alone had extensive MDSC
infiltration, whereas the tumors from mice receiving either X4P-001 alone
or the axitinib/X4P-001 combination had significantly less MDSC
infiltration. These pre-clinical findings support both the role that
MDSCs play in resistance to VEGF-R antagonists and the use of X4P-001 in
combination with axitinib in upcoming clinical trials.

