Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tMUC1 for the diagnostics and treatment of pancreatic
cancer


Background:Pancreatic Cancer is (PC) is the 4th leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States with 94% of PC patients dying
within 5 years of diagnosis. Treatment options for PC patients are
limited as PC is diagnosed at a late stage from the lack of early
symptoms and inaccessibility of the pancreatic region. Typical early
detection methods involve ultrasound tests or cholangiopancreatography
which can be intrusive or use radioactive materials.Typical treatments
involve ablation, chemotherapy, or a combination of chemotherapy with
radiation. But these methods can have adverse side and off-target effects
due to systemic delivery of drugsThere is a need to diagnose pancreatic
cancer efficiently and to target the delivery of anti-cancer treatments
at optimal dosages to avoid adverse side-effects in patients.Pancreatic
Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDA) represents 90% of PCs and over 80% of PDAs
over-express tumor-associated Mucin-1 (tMUC1), a membrane-tethered
glycoprotein protein. Tumor-associated MUC1 exhibits changes to its
glycosylation pattern that expose its protein core, thus making it
identifiable to the TAB004, a specific antibody we developed and have
shown to only recognizes this form of MUC1.Thus, we hypothesize that
TAB004 antibody can be utilized as a targeting agent to accurately
diagnose PDA and to enable the use of highly cytotoxic anti-cancer
treatments at localized concentrations, which would make the treatment
more effective at lower doses overall.Methods:We determined the
specificity and internalization of TAB004 (OncoTab Inc) in several
MUC1-expressing PDA cell lines in vitro using confocal and high
resolution fluorescence microscopy. NuLink kit (NuChemie) was used in
TAB004-PLGA nanoparticle (NPs) conjugation. Confirmation of NPs to TAB004
conjugation (NP-TAB) was determined using flow cytometry. NP-TAB and NPs
internalization was compared using confocal microscopy in vitro in
several tMUC1-expressing PDA cell lines. Viability of cell lines was
determined using the Dojindo CCK -8 Cell Proliferation Assay and
Cytotoxicity Assay in response to NPs and NP-TAB treatments. Imaging of
mice injected with TAB004 conjugated with ICG (Dojindo ICG labeling
Kit-NH2), NPs with ICG, and NP-TAB with ICG was performed using and IVIS
Spectrum.Results:TAB004 was specific for and internalized significantly
more in tMUC1 expressing cell lines. NP-TAB persist longer in tMUC1
expressing cells in vitro. TAB004 was able to target tMUC1 expressing
orthotopic PDA tumors. NP-TAB had significantly increased accumulation at
the tumor site than NPs. Further experiments are currently being
performed in vivo in an appropriate mouse model of PDA to determine
treatment efficacy.Conclusion:TAB004 is a promising targeting agent for
diagnosing and treating tMUC1 expressing PDA. Given that tMUC1 is
associated with aggressive form of PDA and patients with MUC1-positive
PDA have poor prognosis, these results are significant and clinically
relevant.

