Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEG-LPrA2 is a non-toxic adjuvant for triple negative breast cancer


Background: Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive cancer
with poor prognosis and is difficult to treat. Current standard therapy
for the disease includes a combination of chemotherapeutic drugs:
doxorubicin (DOX), paclitaxel (TAX), and cyclophosphamide (CTX). These
drugs are ineffective as they exhibit shortcomings and several side
effects. TNBC patients develop chemoresistance that may be enhanced by
leptin, which affects survival, proliferation, and angiogenesis. Our lab
developed and tested a novel and specific inhibitor of leptin signaling,
LPrA2. A pegylated derivative of LPrA2 (PEG-LPrA2), with enhanced
bioavailability, was successfully used in mouse breast cancer models.
Preliminary data showed that PEG-LPrA2 was non-toxic in vitro. Therefore,
it is hypothesized that PEG-LPrA2 is not toxic in vivo.Methods: To
determine potential toxicity of PEG-LPrA2, in vitro and in vivo assays
were performed. In vitro toxicity of PEG-LPrA2 was tested in a human
non-malignant mammary epithelial cell line (MCF-10A). MCF-10A cells were
cultured in 96 well plates (5,000 cells/ well) and grown to 70-80%
confluence. Cells were treated with PEG-LPrA2 for 24 hrs and viability
was determined via MTT assay. In vivo toxicity studies were performed in
obese mice. Fifty-seven, eight week old C57BL/6J mice (Charles River
Laboratories) were divided into 6 groups. Control mice were fed a low fat
diet (10% Kcal from fat) and the rest of the mice were fed a high fat
diet (60% Kcal from fat) for 11 weeks. Obesity was characterized as body
weight (BW) 25% BW of control mice. Obese mice were divided into six
groups (n = 7/each). Mice were injected with 50 L of either Sc-PEG-LPrA2
(scramble control) or active inhibitor, PEG-LPrA2, (0.1 mM, 1 mM, or 5
mM) two times a week, for eight weeks. Blood chemistries were analyzed.
Additionally, heart, liver, and kidney tissue were harvested and examined
to determine toxicity. The tissues were probed for OB-R via immuno
histochemistry.Results: The results showed no changes in BW or food
intake. Additionally, no evident changes in blood parameters and organ
histology were found.Conclusions: PEG-LPrA2 is non-toxic and could serve
as an adjuvant therapy for standard TNBC chemotherapeutics.

