Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving T-cell receptor clonotyping of T-cell lymphomas using
hybrid-Capture and next-generation sequencing


BackgroundT-cell clonality assays (TCAs) support a variety of clinical
and research interests including T-cell malignancy clone identification,
minimal-residual disease (MRD) testing and T-cell receptor (TCR)
repertoire characterization for the purposes of immunotherapy.
Unfortunately, many TCAs are unable to interrogate alpha, beta, gamma,
and delta TCR loci simultaneously. Aiming to overcome these limitations,
we designed a T-cell clonality assay (the NTRA), capable of identifying
T-cell gene rearrangements from all four TCR loci, using hybrid-capture
followed by deep next-generation sequencing (NGS). A novel informatics
package exploiting the Burrows Wheeler Alignment algorithm and finding of
CDR3 seed sequences was also deployed. We then validated the assay using
orthogonal methods and in a series of clinical T-cell malignancy
specimens.MethodsWe used DNA probes for hybrid-capture of all V and J
segments in the TCR loci, followed by NGS on the Illumina NextSeq 500
platform. Analytical validation used a series of 10 specimens, including
6 flow-cytometry characterized T-cell specimens of variable degrees of
immunophenotypic uniformity and 4 cell-lines with known TCR
rearrangements. PCR/gel electrophoresis and Sanger sequencing were used
for orthogonal validation, using primer sets designed to test each
specimen for all 90th-centile V-J configurations. Subsequently, 61
clinical T-cell lymphoma specimens were tested, each previously assessed
for T-cell clonality using the clinical gold standard (i.e. PCR/
electrophoresis using the BIOMED-2 consensus primers for the TCR-beta
(TRB) and TCR-gamma (TRG) loci).ResultsPCR confirmed the NTRA-identified
V-J configurations with an area-under-the-curve (AUC) by
receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) analysis of 0.91. Relative to
single-strand Sanger sequencing, the NTRA CDR3 sequence results showed a
ROC AUC of 0.83. In a DNA dilution series employing the results of a
clonal specimen (a Jurkat cell line) spiked into a polyclonal specimen (a
mononuclear peripheral blood specimen), we could identify clonal
specimen-specific V-J combinations and error-corrected CDR3 sequences
down to less than 10-5. In the final clinical validation, the NTRA
performed with a ROC AUC of 0.82 relative to the current TRB & TRG
BIOMED-2 clinical assay.ConclusionsOur novel assay can overcome the
current TCR locus data-yield limitations resulting from primer-based TCAs
in a single-tube. The NTRA shows comparable sensitivity and specificity
relative to current standard assays and excellent performance relative to
current MRD techniques when applied to clinical T-cell lymphoma specimens.

