Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of STAT3 and IL-8 pathways as a novel therapeutic
approach in osteosarcoma


AbstractObjective: Targeting STAT3 signaling represents a potential
therapeutic approach to treatment of osteosarcoma. However, the use of
STAT3 inhibitor as a single agent may not be effective for cancer
therapy. Identify the pathway(s) that may generate synergy in tumor
suppression may be more effective in osteosarcoma therapy.Methods:
Inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-11, and IL-8 secretion of osteosarcoma
after STAT3 inhibition were determined by ELISA assay. The sensitivity to
STAT3 inhibitor was examined by cell viability assay. Cell migration and
colony forming ability were evaluated when combination treatment.Results:
In this study, we observed that the levels of IL-11 were significantly
decreased and IL-6 was slightly decreased by STAT3 inhibitor.
Interestingly, IL-8 levels were increased upon STAT3 inhibition. IL-8 was
originally discovered as one of the major chemokines associated with the
promotion of neutrophil chemotaxis and inflammatory responses. Previous
studies have demonstrated that IL-8 contributes to cancer progression
through its induction of tumor cell proliferation, survival, migration,
and angiogenesis. Knocking down IL-8 expression using RNA interference
resulted in enhanced sensitivity to STAT3 inhibitor. ELISA assay showed
that MEK inhibitor (AZD6244 or Trametinib) and P38 inhibitor (LY2228820)
had the ability to reduce the levels of IL-8 induced by STAT3 inhibition.
Combination treatment of STAT3 and with a MEK inhibitor or with a P38
inhibitor showed more effective cytotoxic effect on osteosarcoma cell
lines compared to single agent alone. Furthermore, the combination
treatment exhibited stronger inhibition of cell migration and colony
forming ability than single agent alone.Conclusion: These results suggest
the IL-8 induction as a possible feedback mechanism for resistance to
STAT3 inhibitor and suggest that simultaneous inhibition of STAT3 and
IL-8 may be a more effective therapeutic approach in osteosarcoma.

