Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an IL13Ralpha2 x CD3 bispecific DART protein for
redirected T-cell killing of solid tumors


Introduction. IL13R2 is a membrane-bound protein expressed on a number of
malignant tumors, but not at significant levels in most normal tissues.
Clinically tested therapies to treat cancer by targeting IL13R2 to date
have included a ligand toxin conjugate (IL13-PE) and IL13R2 directed
CAR-T cells. Both strategies appear to be well tolerated, although with
mixed results in tumor eradication. An alternative strategy for targeting
IL13R2 is an IL13R2 x CD3 Dual-Affinity Re-Targeting (DART) bispecific
molecule designed to co-engage IL13R2 on tumor cells and cytotoxic T
cells through CD3, resulting in killing of tumor cells.Methods. Mouse
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were generated using standard immunization
protocols followed by binding and epitope binning analyses. Cell binding
was performed by flow cytometry and frozen normal and tumor tissues
analyses by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In vitro studies were performed
with cancer cell lines and primary human T cells or peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In vivo studies were performed in
immune-deficient tumor-bearing mice co-implanted with activated human T
cells or reconstituted with human PBMCs.Results. A panel of mAbs that
bind human and cynomolgus monkey IL13R2 proteins were selected,
representing a range of binding characteristics and epitope diversity.
IHC showed favorable normal vs tumor tissue reactivity, with high levels
of IL13R2 expression in glioblastoma and melanoma. The mAb panel was
converted to DART molecules with an anti-CD3 arm, assessed for the
ability to mediate cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activity and cytokine
release and a lead selected for humanization and engineering into an
IL13R2 x CD3 DART molecule incorporating an Fc domain to prolong
circulating half-life. The IL13R2 x CD3 DART protein bound human and
cynomolgus IL13R2 (KD = 0.64 nM and 0.5 nM, respectively) and mediated
CTL activity against LOX-IMVI (melanoma) and SK-MES-1 (lung
adenocarcinoma) target cells. Cytokines (IFN-, IL-10, and TNF-) were
released in the presence of IL13R2-expressing target cells and human
PBMC, but not with PBMCs alone. Administration of the IL13R2 x CD3 DART
molecule (50 g/kg IV for 4 consecutive days) prevented tumor growth when
tumor cells (A375 and LOX-IMVI melanoma, U87 glioblastoma, or DAOY
medulloblastoma cell lines) were co-mixed with activated human T cells
and implanted subcutaneously in NOD/SCID/IL2gamma-chain null mice. Tumor
eradication was also observed in NOD/SCID/IL2gamma-chain/MHCI KO mice
reconstituted with human PBMCs and bearing established LOX-IMVI melanoma
tumors following 2 weekly IV doses of 50 g/kg IL13R2 x CD3 DART
molecule.Conclusions: Robust in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity for
an IL13R2 x CD3 DART protein was demonstrated. Additional studies are
underway to further characterize the molecule as a development candidate
for treatment of IL13R2-positive cancers.

