Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of TRF2 on tumor progression in non-small cell lung
cancer: potential modulating effect on myeloid cells


Background: TRF2 is a key factor involved in telomere protection and has
been found to be upregulated in various human cancers. The recent
discovery by which TRF2 inhibits recruitment of NK cells and prevents
tumor cells from NK-mediated elimination established new strategies for
cancer support. Oncogenic KRAS is found in approximately 30% of lung
adenocarcinomas, the major histologic subtype of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Activating mutations in KRAS gene generates a robust
inflammatory response in lung adenocarcinomas, characterized by an
abundant infiltration of leukocytes including neutrophils. Thus, the
concepts of solid (at the tissue level) and liquid (at the blood level,
with the involvement of circulating tumor cells-CTCs) microenvironment,
are a key element to be taken into account in understanding the
mechanisms of carcinogenesis and tumor progression. This study was
undertaken to, 1) define the impact of TRF2 expressed by lung carcinoma
cells on myeloid cells (both at tissue and circulating level), and, 2) to
analyze whether this effect may vary according to cancer cells KRAS
mutational status.Materials and Methods: Normal human bronchial
epithelial cells (Beas2B) were stably transfected with different variants
of KRAS mutations or wild-type gene. We evaluated TRF2 expression and
neutrophil recruitment according to the KRAS mutational status in an in
vitro Transwell model. In addition, we investigated the presence of CTCs
in patients with metastatic NSCLC, as well as the TRF2 expression on CTCs
(by using a cytomorphological assessement), and the circulating myeloid
cells populations, neutrophils and myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSC), by flow cytometry analysis.Results: The expression of TRF2 was
differentially modulated based on the mutational status of KRAS, being
decreased in KRASG12V cells. We found an increased recruitment of human
neutrophils upon induction of KRASG12D expression. In addition, we found
a significant correlation between the PMN-MDSC phenotype and
TRF2-expressing CTCs in patients with metastatic NSCLC.Conclusion: TRF2
expression in CTCs modulates the phenotypic orientation of MDSC. KRAS
mutational status affects the expression of TRF2 and neutrophil
recruitment. The complexity of the interactions between these different
actors highlights mechanisms requiring an accurate understanding and may
represent potential new therapeutic targets.

