Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell-stromal cell crosstalk drives fibroblast senescence
and tumor progression in large cell carcinoma of the lung in culture and
in vivo


Permanent cell cycle arrest through senescence has been previously
regarded as a protective mechanism against tumor progression. In
contrast, there is evidence that senescence in tumor-associated
fibroblasts (TAFs) enhances tumor growth. Senescence has been reported in
tumor associated fibroblasts (TAFs) from a growing list of selected
cancer types. However, the presence of senescent TAFs in lung cancer
remains undefined. To address this gap of knowledge, we examined common
markers of senescence in primary TAFs from the 3 major non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) subtypes: adenocarcinoma (ADC), squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) and large cell carcinoma (LCC). Given the difficulties in
gathering LCC-TAFs owing to the lower prevalence of LCC compared to the
other subtypes, primary fibroblasts from 2 independent cell collections
were used. We found an enrichment of the myofibroblast-like phenotype in
TAFs regardless their histologic subtype, yet senescence was observed in
LCC-TAFs only. Likewise, co-culturing normal lung fibroblasts with LCC
(but not ADC or SCC) cancer cells was sufficient to induce senescence,
and this induction was prevented in the presence of an antioxidant,
indicating that it is mediated through oxidative stress. Of note,
senescent fibroblasts provided growth and invasive advantages to LCC
cells in culture and in vivo beyond those provided by control
(non-senescent) fibroblasts. These results expand recent evidence that
challenges the common assumption that lung TAFs are a heterogeneous
myofibroblast-like cell population regardless their histologic subtype.
Of note, because LCC often distinguishes itself in the clinic by its
aggressive nature, our findings support that senescent or senescent-like
TAFs may contribute to the selective aggressive behavior of LCC tumors.

