Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker-driven inhibition of MET and EGFR pathways in
hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma models


Introduction: In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocarcinoma
(CK), high levels of c-MET and EGFR have been correlated with poor
prognosis. Moreover, MET and EGFR has been involved in drug resistance.
Our study was aimed at evaluating MET and EGFR inhibition on cell
viability, invasion, MET and EGFR signaling as well as on sorafenib
sensitivity.Material and Methods: SU11274 and lapatinib are specific
inhibitors of activated MET and EGFR/HER2 respectively. Antiproliferative
effects were evaluated in 12 HCC and CK cell lines using MTT assay.
Protein levels were assessed by Western blot. Cell motility was
investigated by wound-healing and matrigel invasion assays. Ex vivo
experiments testing SU11274 were performed on surgical specimens from HCC
patients that were cut into 300M-thick slices and grown in specific media
for 48h. Tumor samples were analyzed by IF or IHC.Results: Expression
levels of MET and EGFR defined two subgroups of cells classified as
high-MET/low-EGFR or low-MET/high-EGFR cell lines. These subgroups
displayed differential sensitivity towards MET and EGFR inhibitors.
High-MET/low-EGFR cells displayed high sensitivity to SU11274 (GI50 =
1,6-3,7M) but not lapatinib (GI50>20M), whereas low-MET/high-EGFR cells
were more sensitive to lapatinib (GI50 = 4,8-10,2M) than SU11274
(GI50>20M). HGF-dependent invasion was more potently inhibited by SU11274
in high-MET/low EGFR than in low-MET/high-EGFR cells. Cells sensitivity
to receptor inhibition could be explained by intrinsic cell
responsiveness to MET and EGFR pathways activation. Increased
responsiveness of high-MET/low-EGFR cells to HGF was translated into
increased sensitivity to SU11274. Similarly, low-MET/high-EGFR cells were
more responsive to EGFR and consequently more sensitive to lapatinib.
Interestingly, SK-Hep1 cells resistant to sorafenib expressed increased
level of MET and were subsequently more sensitive to MET inhibition. Ex
vivo results will be detailed on the poster with c-MET, HE, Ki67, and
caspase 3 expression.Conclusion: MET and EGFR expression profiles defined
two subgroups of HCC and CK cell lines with differential inhibition
sensitivity towards MET and EGFR inhibitors. To maximize the inhibition
potential of these molecules, our results suggest that high-MET/low EGFR
might be the candidate tumor types to evaluate MET inhibitors, whereas
low-MET/high-EGFR tumors may be preferentially tested for EGFR pathway
inhibition. Moreover, these results suggest that MET could be an
attractive target in sorafenib resistant HCC patients.

