Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinations of kinase siRNAs potentiates paclitaxel sensitivity
in ovarian cancer


Drug resistance imposes a major obstacle in ovarian cancer treatment. All
patients with newly diagnosed ovarian cancer are treated with a
combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. While 70% of ovarian cancers
respond to carboplatin, less than 50% respond to paclitaxel. Inhibition
of kinases that modulate primary paclitaxel resistance, could enhance
response to therapy. A Kinase siRNA library was screened in ovarian
cancer cell lines to determine which kinases regulate paclitaxel
sensitivity. Among 45 hits from high throughput screening, 14 target
proteins (AATK, ACRBP, BMP2K, CHUK, EDN2, IKBKB, ILK, RAPGEF3, RAPGEF4,
RFP, SIK2, STK24, STK39 and TBK1) regulated sensitivity to paclitaxel and
were differentially expressed or overexpressed in a fraction of ovarian
cancers. siRNAs against each of these kinases were tested for the ability
to enhance sensitivity to paclitaxel in each of 12 ovarian cancer cell
lines that reflected the heterogeneity observed in ovarian cancers
including mutations of TP53, BRCA1/2, KRAS, BRAF, PI3K and PTEN.
Knockdown of 10 individual genes enhanced paclitaxel sensitivity by at
least two folds in different cell lines. A subscreen using combinations
of these 14 kinase siRNAs in the six most responsive cell lines were
carried out to select pairs of kinase siRNAs which could further
potentiate paclitaxel sensitivity. IKBKB and STK39 kinase siRNAs had the
greatest activity. We discovered that knockdown of IKBKB and STK39
stabilized microtubules judged by a microtubule fractionation assay and
levels of acetylated and detyrosinated tubulin. IKBKB and STK39 kinase
siRNAs also induced apoptosis. Double knockdown of microtubule
stabilizing kinases IKBKB and STK39 resulted in greater enhancement in
microtubule stability and apoptosis, leading to additive sensitization of
paclitaxel. Small molecule inhibitors are available for IKBKB. As
inhibition drugs become available for STK39, these observations can be
translated to the clinic.

