Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel cucurbitacin analogue Cuc D exhibits potent anti-cancer
activity in cervical cancer


Background: Cervical cancer is one of the leading cause of mortality
among women in US. Naturally occurring dietary compounds have gained
increasing attention for their anticancer effects. Cucurbitacins,
tetracyclic triterpenoid compound, belong to a family of Cucurbitaceae
have shown promising anti-cancer activity. Herein, we investigated the
potential anti-cancer effects of a novel analogue of cucurbitacin D (Cuc
D) against cervical cancer in in vitro and in a xenograft mouse
model.Methods: In our study, we used human cervical cancer cells (CaSki
and SiHa). Cells were treated with Cuc D (0.05 to 1M) for 48 and 72 hrs.
MTS and colony formation assays were performed to investigate the effects
of Cuc D on cell viability and proliferation. Western Blot analysis was
performed to investigate the effects of Cuc D on cell proliferation and
apoptotic markers. To determine the therapeutic effects of Cuc D, we used
female athymic nude mice and injected CaSki cells (4 106) into the cervix
to develop orthotopic xenograft tumors. Cuc D (1 mg/kg body weight) was
administered through intratumoral injection four weeks post-tumor cell
injection. Tumor volume in these mice were recorded bi-weekly.Results:
Cuc D inhibited cell viability of cervical cancer cells in a
dose-dependent manner. IC50 of Cuc D was observed 400 nM and 250 nM in
Caski and SiHa cells, respectively. Cuc D treatment effectively inhibited
growth of cervical cancer cells which was determined by decreased cell
proliferation and colony formation assays. Cuc D treatment induced
apoptosis in cervical cancer cells as measured by enhanced Annexin V
staining. Western blot result also illustrated cleavage in PARP protein
in Cuc D treated cells which further confirms apoptosis induction. Cuc D
treatment also inhibited PI3K and c-Myc protein levels and
phosphorylation of STAT3 and Rb proteins. In addition, Cuc D treatment
induced the cell cycle inhibitory proteins (p21 and p27) and PTEN and the
expression of a tumor suppressor microRNA, miR-145, as determined by
qRT-PCR. In an orthotopic tumor xenograft mouse model, Cuc D treatment
effectively inhibited tumor growth as compared to vehicle control treated
mice.Conclusion: Taken together, our results demonstrate potent
anti-cancer efficacy of Cuc D in cervical cancer cells via modulation of
key onco/tumor suppressor proteins. Thus, Cuc D could be a useful
therapeutic agent for cervical cancer treatment.

