Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting drug sensitivity based on gene array data for cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents


The increasing availability of genetic data has led to a demand for
robust methods to extract information and an increased need for complex
computational analysis. The DREAM project consisted of 44 teams assessing
various computational methods to predict drug sensitivity in 53 breast
cancer cell lines. (Nat Biotechnol 32:1202). Results from this and other
studies suggest that gene expression data from microarrays are one of the
more valuable and robust data sets for predicting drug sensitivity. Whole
exome sequencing is a valuable tool for predicting sensitivity to
targeted agents, however the mutational spectrum is not as predictive for
cytotoxic agents (Cancer Res 73:4372). Thus, a systematic analysis of the
predictive ability of gene expression on cytotoxic chemotherapy drug
sensitivity (IC50 values) using multiple cell line panels is an important
component to understanding the versatility and applicability of gene
expression for predicting cytotoxic drug IC50 values in tumor cells.
Using GDSC and NCI60 cell panels, linear regression models were
constructed to predict IC50 values from array data for 13 cytotoxic
agents. To address the limited amount of data compared to a possible
feature space > 22,000 genes, the methods of Principle Least Squares
Regression (PLSR) and Principle Component Regression (PCR) were employed.
Models were generated using four different training and validating
scenarios to evaluate performance. Mean Absolute Differences (MAD)
achieved between expected and predicted IC50 values as low as 11% and
correlations as large as 0.7 (PThe increasing availability of genetic
data has led to a demand for robust methods to extract information and an
increased need for complex computational analysis. The DREAM project
consisted of 44 teams assessing various computational methods to predict
drug sensitivity in 53 breast cancer cell lines. (Nat Biotechnol
32:1202). Results from this and other studies suggest that gene
expression data from microarrays are one of the more valuable and robust
data sets for predicting drug sensitivity. Whole exome sequencing is a
valuable tool for predicting sensitivity to targeted agents, however the
mutational spectrum is not as predictive for cytotoxic agents (Cancer Res
73:4372). Thus, a systematic analysis of the predictive ability of gene
expression on cytotoxic chemotherapy drug sensitivity (IC50 values) using
multiple cell line panels is an important component to understanding the
versatility and applicability of gene expression for predicting cytotoxic
drug IC50 values in tumor cells. Using GDSC and NCI60 cell panels, linear
regression models were constructed to predict IC50 values from array data
for 13 cytotoxic agents. To address the limited amount of data compared
to a possible feature space > 22,000 genes, the methods of Principle
Least Squares Regression (PLSR) and Principle Component Regression (PCR)
were employed. Models were generated using four different training and
validating scenarios to evaluate performance. Mean Absolute Differences
(MAD) achieved between expected and predicted IC50 values as low as 11%
and correlations as large as 0.7 (P<0.05) were achieved for some drugs.
However, several obstacles have presented themselves. Mainly, among 35
cell lines shared by the GDSC and NCI60 direct correlation across common
cell lines averaged only 0.4 highlighting the challenge to obtain,
evaluate, and address consistent data suitable for robust models.
a Low p values of 0 correspond to p values a Low p values of 0 correspond
to p values < 105Model Performance Metrics showing high, average, and low
values across all thirteen drugs.In summary, PCR and PLSR based gene
expression models predict tumor cell sensitivity to some cytotoxic drugs
with varying degrees of accuracy.

