Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MM-310, a novel EphA2-targeted docetaxel nanoliposome


Taxanes are widely used to treat solid tumors either in the curative or
palliative setting, in first or later lines of therapy. Analysis of
docetaxel dose-response relationship strongly suggests that a higher dose
would lead to high response, however will also lead to higher toxicity.
This is likely related to the lack of organ and cellular specificity of
docetaxel leading to high exposures in normal tissues and the relatively
short circulation half-life which indirectly requires higher doses. With
the goal of addressing the pharmacokinetic limitations of free docetaxel
and the lack of cellular specificity, we developed a novel
docetaxel-based nanoliposome (MM-310), targeted against Ephrin receptor
A2 (EphA2) which is overexpressed in a wide range of tumors. MM-310
provides sustained release of docetaxel following accumulation in solid
tumors. Preclinical models have demonstrated that MM-310 leverages
tumor-specific accumulation through the enhanced permeability and
retention effect, and cellular specificity through active targeting of
EphA2 with specific scFv antibody fragments conjugated to the surface of
the liposomes.Pharmacokinetic and biodistribution studies were performed
in mice and rats to compare MM-310 to free docetaxel. Chronic
tolerability studies were performed in rodent and non-rodent models with
focus on overall animal health, as well as hematologic toxicities.
Several cell-derived models of breast, lung and prostate xenografts were
used to evaluate the differences betweenf MM-310 and free
docetaxel.MM-310 had a significantly longer half-life than free docetaxel
with prolonged exposure at the tumor site. In chronic tolerability
studies, MM-310 was found to be 6-7 times better tolerated than free
docetaxel with a maximum tolerated dose of at least 120 mpk, compared to
20 mpk for free docetaxel and no detectable hematological toxicity. At
equitoxic dosing, MM-310 50 mpk showed greater activity than docetaxel 10
mpk in several breast, lung and prostate xenograft models.In conclusion,
we developed a novel EphA2 targeted docetaxel nanoliposome with prolonged
circulation time and slow and sustained drug release kinetics, to enable
organ and cellular targeting. MM-310 was able to overcome hematologic
toxicities observed upon treatment with free docetaxel in rodent and
non-rodent models. MM-310 was also able to induce tumor regression or
control tumor growth in several cell derived xenograft models, and was
found to be more active than free docetaxel in most models.

