Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual peptide-mediated targeted delivery of siRNAs for the
treatment of oral cancer


Two major hurdles for small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated therapies
are cell/tissue-type targeted delivery and endosomal entrapment of
siRNAs, resulting in inefficient gene silencing. As a result, the
objective of this study was to examine the feasibility of utilizing two
peptides, one with cancer cell-targeting specificity and the second with
endosome-disruptive properties, to co-deliver bioactive siRNAs into oral
cancer cells overexpressing the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
and induce silencing of the targeted oncoprotein, CIP2A. Previously, we
designed a novel endosome-disruptive peptide, termed 599, that was
demonstrated to mediate intracellular delivery of bioactive siRNAs
targeting CIP2A (siCIP2A) in vitro. Furthermore, we recently demonstrated
that 599 peptide-mediated delivery of siCIP2A into tumor tissues via
intratumoral injections reduced the expression of CIP2A and significantly
inhibited tumor growth. In order to induce targeted uptake via systemic
administration, we designed the EGFR targeting peptide, GE11R9, which was
found to deliver siRNAs specifically to EGFR-overexpressing oral cancer
cells; however, it was incapable of mediating the delivery of bioactive
siRNAs due to endosomal entrapment. Consequently, we developed a novel
dual peptide delivery strategy, combining the 599 peptide, with the
GE11R9 peptide and examined their ability to co-deliver siRNAs. Our
results demonstrated that the dual peptide complex exhibited effective
binding and specific uptake of siRNAs into EGFR-overexpressing cells
compared to low-EGFR-expressing cells. The co-addition of the 599 peptide
with the GE11R9 peptide also restored siRNA functionality. Furthermore,
when administered systemically to mice bearing xenograft oral tumors, the
dual peptide complex mediated increased targeted delivery of siRNAs into
tumor tissues in comparison to the 599 peptide alone. Together, these
data demonstrate the clinical potential of the dual peptide strategy for
RNAi-based therapeutics by synergistically mediating the effective
targeting and delivery of bioactive siRNAs into EGFR-overexpressing
cancer cells.

