Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NcRNAs fingerprints in colon cancer in vitro model by EGCG,
genistein and their combinatorial effects


INTRODUCTIONEpidemiological studies have associated green tea intake with
reduced risk in cancer. Up to date, thirty-five clinical trials use green
tea polyphenol epigallocathechin-3-O-gallate (EGCG) in cancer treatment.
The mechanism responsible for apoptosis and the perturbation of the
noncoding transcriptome after polyphenols are largely unknown. Our aim
was to examine the combined effects of two compounds, EGCG and Genistein
alone or in various combinations, on two colon cancer cell lines on the
expression of noncodingRNAs.MATERIAL AND METHODSThe experiments were
performed on two colon cancer cell lines RKO (p53+ wild type) and HCT116
(Ras mutated and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF beta 1) and beta
2 (TGF beta 2) expression positive) In order to establish the IC50 dose
we performed MTT assay. For future analysis, cells were treated for 48 h
either with Genistein and EGCG with established IC50 doses for both cell
lines or the following combinations: 30 M EGCG and 10 M Genistein and 30
M Genistein and 10 M EGCG. We performed genome-wide profiling with a
non-codingRNA array composed by probes for about 1500 human miRNAs and
about 3500 lncRNAs, and ncRNA microarray analyses were
performed.RESULTSAfter 48h exposer, both compounds effectively reduced
cell viability in a dose-dependent manner in RKO and HCT116 cells. In the
combined treatment the most interesting results were obtained at 30 M
EGCG and 10 M Genistein and 30 M Genistein and 10 M EGCG, in both cell
lines. Were we observed a 80% decrease of cell viability in the first
situation and more than 80% of the cells maintained their viability in
thesecond one.Bioinformatic analysis was performed using R (version
3.0.1) and Bioconductor (h>p:// www.bioconductor.org/). The raw intensity
for each probe is the median feature pixel intensity with the median
background subtracted.We found eighteen miRNAs and six lncRNAs commonly
DE in HCT 116 cells and 56 miRNAs and 14 lncRNAs commonly DE in RKO cells
by various treatments. Among the former genes we identified the oncogenic
miR-18 and miR-222, as well as the long-non-codingRNAs CCAT2 that we
previously identified as oncogenic in colon cancer, and MALAT-1.
Furthermore, we recognized multiple ncRNA transcripts specifically
disregulated by one specific type of treatment.The expression of specific
miRNAs was negatively correlated with some lncRNAs supporting a potential
direct interaction by sequence complementarity, while for other
miRNA-lncRNA pairs the expression was positively correlated suggesting
common transcriptional mechanisms. We confirmed the array data by qRT-
PCR and a restricted panel of confirmed ncRNAs was tested on the
phenotypic effects in colon cancer cells.CONCLUSIONThis is the first
study to prove that EGCG and /or genistein alone or in combination affect
the expression of multiple types of noncodingRNAs in a correlated manner;
their transcriptomic effects are more extensive as initially expected.

