Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A bioluminescent, homogeneous annexin V microplate-based method
for assessment of apoptosis


The selective elimination of malignant cells via the apoptotic process
continues to be the cornerstone of modern anti-cancer therapy regimens.
Therefore, in vitro screening approaches aimed at identifying clinically
useful apoptosis inducers remain critically important. Recently,
phenotypic screening methods have enjoyed a resurgence due to more
biologically complex and relevant cell models as well as advances in
chemical proteomics which have allowed for more successful target
identification. As a consequence, novel probes and tools with enabling
attributes are required to fully realize this discovery potential. In an
effort to address this unmet need, we have developed a bioluminescent and
homogeneous annexin V binding assay for the assessment of apoptosis.
Unlike traditional fluorescent annexin V methodology, the no-wash reagent
employed in this new assay utilizes binary components of a novel
luciferase separately fused to annexin V. The annexin V-luciferase
subunit fusion pairs have low intrinsic affinity for each other and thus
produce no or low luminescence until phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) exposure
drives annexin-fusion pair oligimerization. Ultimately, this
protein:protein interaction on or near the cell surface reconstitutes
full luciferase activity causing an increase in luminescence in the
presence of a luciferase substrate. A separate, pro-fluorescent,
multiplexed component of the reagent further delineates differences in
annexin positivity based on maintenance or loss of membrane integrity
corresponding to apoptosis or necrosis, respectively. We validated this
method using a panel of diverse cancer cell lines (U2-OS, DLD-1, HeLa,
Jurkat, K562, A549, and PC-3), representing both attachment-dependent and
-independent morphologies after dose-dependent challenge with intrinsic
(bortezomib, panobinostat, staurosporine, and paclitaxel) and extrinsic
(rhTRAIL) inducers of apoptosis as well as agents known to produce
primary necrosis (ionomycin and digitonin). Caspase activation data was
also collected in parallel plates at endpoint as a well-validated and
sensitive orthogonal comparator. The bioluminescent annexin V method
proved sufficiently robust in 384 well microplate formats to routinely
produce Z > 0.7 and rank-order potencies in good agreement with caspase
activation values. In addition to this microplate functionality, the
reagent allowed for sensitive, facile imaging of apoptotic induction in
living cells using different imaging platforms. Taken together, the
method and reagent should provide unparalleled flexibility with regard to
live cell apoptosis detection in both conventional microplate and high
content-like imaging formats and advance the pace of new chemical entity
discovery.

