Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acid-induced collagen remodeling promotes cancer progress as a
result of niche engineering competition between cancer and stroma cells


Early carcinogenesis is an avascular and hypoxic disease that makes tumor
cells export metabolically derived acid through glycolysis. Even in
presence of oxygen cancer cells keep the glycolytic phenotype (Warburg
effect) that acidifies the environment more and constantly. Hence the
physical microenvironment of solid tumors is profoundly acidic.
Pre-malignant cells within this niche must adapt to acidosis in order to
survive this hostile microenvironment. We think pre-malignant cells adapt
to acidosis to not only survive in this hostile microenvironment but also
to acquire an advantage that helps them to outcompete the others and
eventually help them to invade. Recently many evidences have been
provided showing the collaboration of tumor associated stroma cells such
as Fibroblasts (TAF) with tumor cells in cancer progress. Here we also
show how these cells use acidification and acid adaptation as a strategy
to construct and engineer their niche in their own favor for growth and
proliferation. In this study we focused on collagen as major proteins of
extra cellular matrix (ECM) and even arguably the most dominant one. The
unique mechanical properties of fibrillar collagen are mainly controlled
by its structure and any change in it can lead to ECM induced tumor
growth. ECM unique compositions and topographies are generated through a
dynamic biochemical and biophysical interplay between the various cells
and the evolving microenvironment. In this study we developed the window
chamber and intra vital microscopy to study the collagen remodeling
lively. Later we used 3D cell culture and co-culture to validate our
findings. Finally we used proteomics to understand molecular mechanism
behind the changes in acid adapted versus non-adapted cancer cells and
TAfs. We found cancer cells take different strategy than TAFs, although
both changes promote cancer progression.In conclusion, there are
evolutionary advantages behind acid production and adapting to it for
cancer and cancer associated cells. We discuss how acquiring these
advantages can helps us to design new therapeutics against these unique
phenotypes.

