Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of platelet aggregation and tumor metastasis by
anti-podoplanin mAbs recognizing a novel CLEC-2 binding domain


Tumor-induced platelet aggregation promotes tumor growth and hematogenous
metastasis by secreting growth factors from platelets, by avoiding immune
system and shear stress, and by stimulating the formation of tumor emboli
in microvasculature. Thus, tumor-platelet interaction could be a
promising target for cancer therapy. We previously identified a
sialoglycoprotein podoplanin, also known as Aggrus, as a key factor in
tumor-induced platelet aggregation enhancing tumor metastasis. Podoplanin
is expressed in various cancers and reported to be a candidate for cancer
stem cell marker. Podoplanin-induced platelet aggregation depends on
binding to its platelet receptor CLEC-2. Here, we report the discovery of
a novel platelet aggregation-stimulating domain PLAG4 in human podoplanin
critical for the binding to CLEC-2. Mutant analyses indicated that PLAG4
exhibits a predominant CLEC-2 binding ability and platelet-aggregating
function when compared to the previously reported PLAG3. Moreover,
mutation of both PLAG3 and PLAG4 domains could almost completely
attenuate its CLEC-2 binding ability and its platelet-aggregation
activity. To validate the inhibitory effect against PLAG4 domain, we
established anti-PLAG4-neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), PG4D1
and PG4D2. Both mAbs recognized PLAG4 domain and exhibited a high
affinity to podoplanin. We confirmed those neutralizing ability against
PLAG4-CLEC-2 interaction and platelet aggregation. Remarkably, the
administration of each mAbs significantly suppressed pulmonary metastasis
of podoplanin expressing tumor.Taken together, we suggest that PLAG4 is
the novel CLEC-2 binding and platelet aggregation-stimulating domain on
podoplanin and has a role in podoplanin-mediated metastasis formation.
Blocking the podoplanin-CLEC-2 interaction targeting PLAG3 or PLAG4 would
be a promising strategy for suppressing hematogenous metastasis.

