Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-1 signaling mediated lymphangiogenesis in gastric cancer


BackgroundRecent evidence showed that Transforming growth factor (TGF)-1
could have important role for gastric cancer progression and metastasis.
However, the role of TGF- 1 for lymph node metastasis and
lymphangiogenesis, the important steps of gastric cancer progression, is
largely unknown. To investigate the role of TGF-1 on lymphangiogenesis
and its molecular mechanisms is the main purpose of this study.MethodsWe
selected two gastric cancer cell-line models, MKN45 and KATOIII, which
hold appropriate characteristics for the current study. We checked the
possibility of the autocrine function of TGF-1 for lymphangiogenesis in
these gastric cancer cell-lines. We investigated the changes of TGF-1
signaling molecules and VEGF-C expression in responding to TGF-1 and its
inhibitor. To examine the binding of Smad3 to the promoter region of
VEGF-C, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Both
Smad-dependent and Smad-independent pathways were also examined to
elucidate which pathways were involved in lymphangiogenesis. Finally,
tube forming assay was performed to validate phenotypical effect of TGF-1
on lymphangiogenesis.ResultsTwo gastric cancer cell-line models, MKN45
and KATOIII, showed autocrine regulation of TGF-1. TGF-1 signaling was
transduced to VEGF-C, mediated by Smad3. Smad3 was bound to the promoter
of VEGF-C which was confirmed with EMSA. Based on EMSA results, KATOIII
showed stronger reaction between Smad3 and VEGF-C promoter than MKN45
did. In MKN45, TGF-1 also transduced its signal to VEGF-C through
PI3k-Akt pathway, one of the Smad-independent pathway. Lymphatic
endothelial cells cultured in the condition media of MKN45 and KATOIII
underwent tubule structure formation. The growth of HLEC was accelerated
with TGF-1 mixed conditioned media, while failed to induce tubular
structure in the presence of TGF-1 inhibitor. The expression level of
secreted VEGF-C was as same in responding to TGF-1 and its inhibitor as
the lymphatic tube forming results in gastric cancer
cells.ConclusionTGF-1 could promote lymphangiogenesis through VEGF-C
expression in gastriccancer cell line models. TGF-1 signaling could be
transduced through eitherSmad-mediated or non- Smad-mediated depending on
gastric cancer cell-linecharacteristics.

