Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased ALDH7A1 expression enhances the resistance to the
anticancer drugs and colony formation in lung cancer cell lines


Background: Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) forms a superfamily of enzymes
that catalyze conversion of aldehydes into carboxylic acids, and they are
categorized into 19 families in human. Increased ALDH activity was
reported to be a potential marker of cancer stem cell (CSC) in various
solid tumors including lung cancer. Furthermore, High ALDH expression has
been shown to be involved in drug resistance to conventional cytotoxic
drugs. Recent studies revealed that ALDH7A1 is highly expressed in
prostate cancer and associated with recurrence in patients with
surgically resected non-small-cell lung cancer. However, there is not a
fundamental link between ALDH7A1 expression and malignant phenotype,
including drug resistance and colony formation.Material and methods:
Anticancer drug resistant cell lines were established from lung cancer
cell lines (PC-6, DMS53, PC-14, PC-9, NCI-H23 and NCI-H2228 cells) by
exposure to various anticancer drug, including
7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothesin (SN-38), gemcitabine (GEM), cisplatin
(CDDP), etoposide, paclitaxel (TXL), pemetrexed, amrubicin, erlotinib and
crizotinib. Protein expression was determined by western blotting and
gene expression was examined by RT-PCR. ALDH enzyme activity was measured
by ALDEFLOUR TM assay. Proliferation was measured using MTS assay.
ALDH7A1encoding plasmid was stably transfected into PC-14 cell. These
transfected cells displayed sphere formation on ultralow binding plates
and survived for more than 3 weeks.Results: We found that the levels of
ALDH7A1 expression were higher in various anticancer drug-resistant lung
cancer cell lines compared with the parental cells. ALDH enzyme activity
was about 4-9 fold higher in SN-38, TXL, CDDP and GEM resistant cell
lines (PC6/SN38, PC6/TXL, PC14/CDDP and PC14/GEM) than the parents cells.
Up-regulation of ALDH7A1 expression by using a forced expression vector
in PC14 cell altered cytotoxicity to SN-38 and TXL. Furthermore,
overexpression of ALDH7A1in PC-14 cells enhanced sphere formation
relative to the cells transfected with control vector.Conclusion: These
results suggested that increased ALDH7A1 expression in lung cancer cell
lines might be one of the mechanisms of acquired resistance to anticancer
agents and enhance colony formation.

