Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of microRNA-34a promotes cholangiocarcinoma
growth by regulating Notch pathway


Aberrant expression and regulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) have been found
in multiple cancers and their dysregulation importantly contribute to the
tumorigenic processes. Among these miRNAs, miRNA-34a (miR-34a) functions
as a tumor suppressor and its dysregulation has been reported in several
cancers. In this study, we investigated epigenetic regulation and
biological function of miR-34a in human cholangiocarcinoma cells. Our
data indicate that miR-34a expression is epigenetically silenced in human
cholangiocarcinoma cells (CCLP1, SG231, Hucct1 and TFK1) compared to the
nonmalignant biliary epithelial cells (H69). Treatment of human
cholangiocarcinoma cells with the DNA methylation inhibitor,
5aza-2deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR), or the EZH2 (enhancer of zeste 2
polycomb repressive complex 2) inhibitor, GSK126, enhanced the expression
of miR-34a. In parallel, knockdown of EZH2 by shRNA also significantly
decreased miR-34a expression in human cholangiocarcinoma cells. We
further showed that DNA methylation and EZH2-mediated histone H3 lysine
27 trimethylation (H3K27Me3) repressed miR-34a gene expression, as
determined by methylation-specific PCR and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
The DNA methylation and EZH2-mediated H3K27Me3 independently repress
miR-34a expression in cholangiocarcinoma cells since treatment of
5-Aza-CdR and GSK126 had no effect on H3K27me3 and DNMT1 levels,
respectively. Functional analyses revealed that miR-34a mimic decreased
cholangiocarcinoma cell proliferation, colony formation and migration, in
vitro. Moreover, we identified Notch1, Notch2 and Jagged 1, which are the
major receptors and ligands of the Notch pathway, as miR-34a target genes
in cholangiocarcinoma cells. Accordingly, forced overexpression of
miR-34a significantly decreased the expression of Notch1, Notch2 and
Jagged1, as determined by Western blotting and qRT-PCR analyses. Our
results provide novel evidence that miR-34a expression is epigenetically
silenced by DNA methylation and EZH2 in human cholangiocarcinoma cells.
Thus, epigenetic induction of miR-34a or miR-34a replacement therapy may
represent a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of
cholangiocarcinoma.

