Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel 2 adrenergic-nerve growth factor feed forward loop
promotes pancreatic cancer


Introduction and objectives: There is increasing evidence that chronic
activation of sympathetic neurons can lead to increased noradrenaline
levels in the tumor microenvironment (TME) in PDAC. However, the
mechanisms by which adrenergic neurotransmitters are delivered to the TME
are not well understood. In this study we aimed to investigate the effect
of locally and systemically delivered catecholamines into the TME in two
well established genetically engineered mouse models of PDAC
(Pdx1-Cre/KRasG12D (KC) and Pdx1-Cre/KRasG12D/Trp53R172H (KPC)).Methods:
Adrenergic signaling was induced or inhibited in KC or KPC mice and in
pancreatic organoids using various pharmacological compounds. Adrenergic
receptor expression was assessed by RT-PCR, WB and IHC. Downstream
pathways were identified by phosphorylation assays and WB. Adrenergic
signaling was modeled in vivo applying restraint stress. To elucidate the
crosstalk between nerves and cancer cells, pancreatic spheres and PDAC
cells were co-cultured with DRGs and neuronal plasticity was quantified.
NGF secretion was measured by RT-PCR and ELISA. Sympathetic denervation
of the pancreas and blockage of the 2-receptor was employed as a
treatment strategy in KPC mice. Overexpression of NGF was targeted to the
mouse pancreas using a novel NGF knockin mouse, which was crossed to KC
and KPC mice.Results: ADRB2 was upregulated during pancreatic cancer
development. Furthermore, in vitro stimulation of cells harboring an
oncogenic KRas mutation with catecholamines resulted in significantly
increased sphere forming efficiency. The non-specific -blocker
propranolol and the selective 2-blocker ICI 118,551 inhibited this
effect. Selective blockade of 2-adrenergic signaling suppressed
pancreatic sphere formation caused by co-cultures with DRGs.NGF secretion
was stimulated through beta2-adrenergic signaling. Furthermore, restraint
stress accelerated PDAC development in KC mice. The effects of stress
were prevented by treatment with the selective ADRB2 antagonist ICI
118,551. Specific 2-blocker treatment as well as sympathetic denervation
in addition to GEM significantly increased the survival of mice with 3-5
mm tumors in comparison to controls treated by GEM alone. Targeted
overexpression of NGF in the mouse pancreas using a novel NGF knockin
mouse resulted in marked acceleration of PanIN lesions in the KC mouse
and shortened overall survival in KPC mice significantly. Finally,
retrospective analysis of a PDAC patient cohort revealed a extension of
overall survival in PDAC patients on non-selective -blockers.Conclusions:
Taken together, these studies suggest that increased catecholamines can
engender a feed forward loop, whereby upregulation of NGF can lead to
increased innervation and local NE accumulation, thereby enhancing tumor
growth. Therapies targeting these adrenergic and NGF pathways may prove
useful in the treatment and prevention of pancreatic cancer.

