Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of prostate cancer to chemo-radiation by ribosomal
protein S6 inhibition


Radiation Therapy (RT) is curative for most localized prostate cancer
(PCA) patients, but is limited by dose-related toxicities and
radioresistance. Administration of Nexrutine (Nx), an inexpensive
supplement from Phellodendron amurense bark extract prior to RT inhibited
progression to poorly differentiated carcinoma in transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice. However, the precise
molecular mechanism underlying Nx-mediated tumor growth inhibitory
effects in combination with RT is unclear. Using global transcriptome
profiling coupled with GeneSpring analysis, we have identified
significant modulation of number of signaling pathways including genes
involved in mTOR and NFB signaling. Based on these data, we hypothesized
that downregulation of ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6) sensitizes prostate
tumor to overcome radioresistance. PCA cell lines had higher levels of
total and p-rpS6 compared to non-tumorigenic prostate cell lines. Using
clonogenic assays, we observed that pretreatment of Nx for 8h could
potentiate the effect of low dose RT in LNCaP (AR positive with WT p53),
PC-3 (AR negative & p53 null) and PC-3 AR (AR expressing & p53 null)
cells. The combinatorial effect depicted strong synergism and had similar
effects as high dose RT. Notably, we observed increased activation of
Akt/mTOR/NFB signaling molecules after treatment of PC-3 cells with RT,
which was either abrogated (p-rpS6, p-NFB & p-p70S6K) or decreased
(p-Akt) in cells pretreated with Nx prior to RT. Also, Nx pretreatment
inhibited the levels of HIF1- and CyclinD1, which are downstream targets
of rpS6. Using immunofluorescence assay, we saw that the combination
treatment increased the H2AX foci compared to 2 Gy alone, indicating
increased DNA damage. This is associated with increased protein levels of
key G2/M regulatory proteins including Wee-1, p-cdc2 levels and decreased
Chk1, p-cdc25C resulting in prolonged RT-induced G2/M arrest. The
combination treatment also caused a significant increase in apoptosis,
which was evidenced by increased cleaved PARP levels, subG1 levels and
Annexin/PI staining. Strikingly, knockdown of rpS6 sensitized PC-3 cells
to RT and reversed the observed effects of Nx, indicating the importance
of rpS6 in mediating these changes. Remarkably, p-mTOR, p70S6K, NFB, Ki67
& Cyclin D1 were decreased in the prostate tissue of mice receiving the
combination compared to RT alone. Recently, a phase 0/1 clinical trial of
Nx in PCA patients receiving RT decreased PSA levels and was
well-tolerated. Interestingly, tumor tissue from Nx treated patients
showed decreased rpS6 staining intensity compared to the normal tissue.
Collectively, our data suggests that Nx has radiosensitizing effect in a
range of PCA cell lines and could prevent progression to advanced PCA by
inhibiting rpS6. Supported by NCCAM (R01 AT-007448) & VA-MERIT Award (I01
BX 000766)

