Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-500a is involved in breast cancer-related gene expression
pathways and associated with patients survival


MicroRNAs act as negative regulators of target genes by reducing their
mRNA level. Despite numerous algorithms of target prediction, many
microRNAs targets are still not known with enough confidence, making
unclear their actual role in biological processes. In this study, we used
an integrative approach combining bioinformatics and in vitro experiments
to identify hsa-miR-500a as a key player in breast cancer survival.The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, dataset release of 2012) data were analyzed
using recently developed bioinformatics algorithm (Lee et al., 2015) that
considers not only expression levels of microRNAs, but also its activity,
determined by the relative changes of expression of potential target
genes. High activity of miR-500a (hsa-miR-500a-5p, MIMAT0004773) was
significantly correlated with poor survival of patients with ER-positive
breast cancer. Noteworthy, in both TCGA and GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus)
datasets, this form was typically expressed at very low levels (26th
percentile in ranking among detectable microRNAs) while another strand,
miR-500a* (hsa-miR-500a-3p, MIMAT0002871) was hundred times more abundant
(81th percentile ranking), but did not correlate with the survival.We
carried out functional validation of miR-500a in a set of breast cancer
cell lines including estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF-7, ER-negative
MDA-MB-231 and their derivatives. In order to define actual targets
(direct and indirect), MCF-7 cells were transfected with miR-500a mimics
or inhibitors (miRCURY LNA, Exiqon), followed by analysis of gene
expression with Illumina Human HT-12 microarray. Genes that displayed the
strongest suppression upon transfection with miR-500a mimics are involved
in hormone signaling: members of aldo-keto reductase family known for
steroid hormones processing and thioredoxin reductase that can regulate
transcriptional activity of estrogen receptors. We found that expression
of miR-500a is increased in highly tumorigenic derivative of MDA-MB-231
cell line comparing to its low tumorigenic parental cell line. D3H2LN
cell line (a MDA-MB-231-derived line by introducing luciferase construct)
displayed higher proliferation rates and enhanced spheroids formation
capacities comparing to the parental cell line; RNA-seq (by Illumina
HiSeq) also revealed that this cell line has higher level of miR-500a
expression and lower level of some genes detected as potential miR-500a
targets.Our results indicate potential role of miR-500a in regulation of
signaling pathways involved in breast cancer progression. Experimental
data lend further support in its functional role in breast cancer
survival, which may help develop future intervention strategies.

