Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotype-based discovery and development of novel therapies for
the treatment of colorectal cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed
cancer in the world. The treatment of late stage CRC using Bevacizumab, a
targeted anti-VEGF therapy, produces insufficient response rates among
patients and inevitable acquired tumour resistance. There is a clinical
need for improved treatment options.Methods: Previously, anti-angiogenic
screens in Tg[fli1:EGFP] zebrafish identified quininib, a small molecule
drug subsequently shown to be as effective as bevacizumab at reducing
tumour volume in vivo and which reduces tumour CD31 expression in
xenografted mice. Here, structural analogues of quininib were synthesised
to identify novel chemical entities with higher anti-angiogenic and
anti-inflammatory efficacy. Analogues were examined for anti-angiogenic
effects in the Tg[fli1:EGFP] zebrafish intersegmental-vessel assay. Hits
were then progressed for safety analyses in cytotoxic assays,
anti-angiogenic efficacy in aortic explants, and effects on cell
proliferation and tubule formation using HT29_Luc2 and HMEC cells. Leads
were then tested in ex vivo human CRC tumour explants to determine
effects on angiogenic and inflammatory factor secretion. Following
determination of the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of the highest ranking
analogues, CRC-specific murine xenograft models created by subcutaneous
injection of HT29_Luc2 cells were assessed for anti-tumorigenic
analysis.Results: Five out of 12 drug candidates (CC16_HCl, CC12_HCl,
Z_HCl, CC8_HCl & OS_1) reduced developmental angiogenesis in
Tg[fli1:EGFP] zebrafish significantly more than quininib (***PBackground:
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in
the world. The treatment of late stage CRC using Bevacizumab, a targeted
anti-VEGF therapy, produces insufficient response rates among patients
and inevitable acquired tumour resistance. There is a clinical need for
improved treatment options.Methods: Previously, anti-angiogenic screens
in Tg[fli1:EGFP] zebrafish identified quininib, a small molecule drug
subsequently shown to be as effective as bevacizumab at reducing tumour
volume in vivo and which reduces tumour CD31 expression in xenografted
mice. Here, structural analogues of quininib were synthesised to identify
novel chemical entities with higher anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory
efficacy. Analogues were examined for anti-angiogenic effects in the
Tg[fli1:EGFP] zebrafish intersegmental-vessel assay. Hits were then
progressed for safety analyses in cytotoxic assays, anti-angiogenic
efficacy in aortic explants, and effects on cell proliferation and tubule
formation using HT29_Luc2 and HMEC cells. Leads were then tested in ex
vivo human CRC tumour explants to determine effects on angiogenic and
inflammatory factor secretion. Following determination of the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) of the highest ranking analogues, CRC-specific
murine xenograft models created by subcutaneous injection of HT29_Luc2
cells were assessed for anti-tumorigenic analysis.Results: Five out of 12
drug candidates (CC16_HCl, CC12_HCl, Z_HCl, CC8_HCl & OS_1) reduced
developmental angiogenesis in Tg[fli1:EGFP] zebrafish significantly more
than quininib (***P<0.01). These analogues were well tolerated in human
endothelial and CRC cell cytotoxic assays and were more effective than
quininib at reducing tubule formation and angiogenic factor secretion in
HMEC cells. Two analogues reduced aortic ring vessel sprouting equally or
more effectively than quininib. Some analogues can reduce inflammatory
and angiogenic factor secretion from ex vivo human CRC explants more
significantly than quininib. The analogue with the highest efficacy
ranking was identified and its maximum tolerated dose study (MTD)
determined using balb/c wild type mice. The anti-tumorigenic effects of
the highest ranking analogue is being assessed by i/p injection in an
optimised model of HT29_Luc2-CRC tumourigenesis in Balb/c nude
mice.Conclusions: 5 analogues significantly more effective than quininib
at reducing inflammation and angiogenesis were identified. The highest
ranking analogue is tolerated by i/p injection in mice up to 50 mg/kg
with no obvious adverse effects. The highest ranking analogue is
currently being tested in murine xenografts with preliminary data
suggests it is more effective than quininib at reducing tumour growth.

