Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo modeling of NRAS-mutant melanoma reveals differential
preventative efficacy amongst SPF30 sunscreens


Cutaneous melanoma claims the life of one American every hour, and while
the etiology of this tumor type is not entirely understood, exposure to
ultraviolet (UV) radiation (280-340nm) is a major risk factor. For this
reason, the use of UV-blocking sunscreens is strongly advocated; however,
few studies have tested the relative efficacy of these agents in
preventing melanoma formation in vivo. Here, we employed a new
genetically engineered mouse model (TpN61R) to examine the ability of 6
chemically distinct SPF30 sunscreens to prevent melanoma. In this TpN61R
model, topical 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT) treatment induces the
melanocyte-specific expression of oncogenic NRas as well as inactivation
of the p16INK4a tumor suppressor. These genetic lesions co-occur in 24%
of all human melanomas, making the TpN61R model biologically relevant.
Since NRAS mutations are an early and UV-independent event in human
melanoma, TpN61R mice were first painted with 4OHT and then exposed to a
single dose of 4.5 kJ/m2 UVB light one day later. Exposed skin from
TpN61R mice showed transient cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD)
formation, however no evidence of edema or inflammation was observed.
Despite these mild effects, UVB exposure reduced the melanoma-free
survival of TpN61R mice by 80% and increased tumor incidence rate from
1.2 to 3.4 tumors/mouse. Further experiments using a variety of UVB doses
(0.25, 1.0, 2.3 and 9.0 kJ/m2) in the TpN61R model revealed a
dose-dependent increase in early melanoma incidence. Together, these data
establish the exquisite cooperation of UV light and oncogenic NRas
mutations in driving melanoma. Taking advantage of this unique model, we
tested the preventative efficacy of SPF30 sunscreens with differing
chemical composition. Sunscreens components included UVA (avobenzene),
UVB (homosalate, octisalate) and broad spectrum (oxybenzone, octocrylene,
zinc oxide) blocking agents. Application of sunscreen prior to UVB
exposure decreased DNA damage, delayed melanoma onset and reduced tumor
incidence in a sunscreen-dependent manner. Thus, SPF30 sunscreens do not
equally prevent UVB-induced, NRAS mutant melanoma. This work establishes
the first in vivo system to test sunscreen efficacy in NRAS-driven
melanoma and will help direct the development of improved melanoma
preventatives.

