Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing of brain metastasis in non-small cell
lung cancer


Introduction: Molecular analysis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
has provided a detailed classification of NSCLC. Activating mutations in
the EGFR gene are both prognostic and predictive in that they are
associated with improved survival irrespective of therapy and are
associated with a significant response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) such as gefitinib or erlotinib. Patients with EGFR mutations show
a significant improvement in progression free survival compared to
standard chemotherapy. In addition, a recent study showed that ALK gene
rearrangement was significantly associated with pericardial spread and
pleural disease and those patients with either ALK gene rearrangements or
EGFR mutations were predisposed to liver metastasis. These results
support the hypothesis that the dominant molecular oncogenes in NSCLC are
associated with different biological behaviors which manifest as distinct
patterns of metastatic spread at the time of diagnosis. To date, no
pattern of molecular variation has been linked to brain metastasis. Here
we use next generation sequencing to identify a pattern of genomic
variation associated with the development of brain metastases in NSCLC.
Methods: Three patient groups were analyzed: samples from NSCLC patients
who did not develop metastasis (n = 8), samples from NSCLC patients who
developed metastasis not associated with the central nervous system (n =
7), and brain metastasis samples of NSCLC patients (n = 16). DNA was
isolated, and libraries prepared using Qiagen's Comprehensive Cancer
Panel which focuses on 160 cancer-related genes. Libraries were sequenced
on the Illumina NextSeq 500. Alignment was done using SoftGenetic's
NextGENe with subsequent biological interpretation with Ingenuity Variant
Analysis. Results: At the variant level, a missense mutation in CDK12
(chr1:37686934) was found in 7 of the 16 cases with brain metastasis
while only 1 of 8 cases with no metastasis and 0 of 7 cases with non-CNS
metastasis had the variant. However, no other variants were found in 6
cases of brain metastasis and 1 or less of the control cases. After
filtering variants that occurred in more than 1 control (no metastasis or
non-CNS metastasis), the TP53 gene was altered in 11 of the 16 cases with
brain metastasis. This included 14 different variants with none of these
variants present in the controls. Additionally, BRCA1 and CDK12 had
variants in 9 cases with brain metastasis, but the variant was also
present in 1 of the controls. Taken together, all 16 cases contained
alterations in at least 1 gene involved in PI3K/AKT signaling including
variants in JAK1, MTOR, TP53, TSC1, and TSC2. Conclusion: This pilot
study has delivered valuable results to better characterize the pattern
of genomic variants in NSCLC. While no single variant was associated with
brain metastasis, this study implicates PI3K/AKT signaling and, in
particular, variants of TP53 as crucial for determining the potential
development of NSCLC brain metastasis.

