Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell detection of protein and RNA: Development of a novel
method combining immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization in breast
cancer cells


Immunocytochemistry (ICC) utilizes antibodies to visualize the
localization of specific proteins in cells while in situ hybridization
(ISH) is a useful research tool for examining the presence and changes in
levels of gene expression in cells. The ability to simultaneously
visualize the co-localization of protein and RNA species in individual
cells is necessary to address important biological questions.
Additionally, studying both protein and RNA can be useful in cases where
expression levels vary between mRNA and protein and to detect
post-translational modifications. However, a combined technique has
proved challenging due to the incompatibility of ICC and ISH protocols.
Furthermore, traditional ISH methods have lacked sensitivity to detect
low abundance RNA species and have limited multiplexing capability. Here,
we describe a novel technique combining ICC staining with RNA ISH (based
on the ViewRNA Assay), which utilizes branched DNA signal amplification
technology allowing for single copy mRNA sensitivity. We demonstrate the
utility and versatility of this technique using a variety of antibody and
probe combinations relevant for cancer research. We compared expression
of protein and mRNA of HER2, estrogen receptor alpha, and progesterone
receptor in several breast cancer cell lines (MCF7, SKBR3, MDA-MB-175,
MDA-MB-231, and BT474) known to express differential levels of these
targets. We also compared expression of several microRNAs (let-7a,
miR-17, miR-30d, miR-107, and miR-93) known to play a role in cancer
development in combination with staining for proteins involved in
proliferation (Ki-67), anti-apoptosis (survivin), and cell structure
(tubulin). We show successful detection of low abundance RNA species
together with various protein markers. This novel technique is a valuable
tool not only for cancer researchers, but also for investigators across
numerous fields in biological research.

