Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel leukemia stem cell-targeted therapy for acute myeloid
leukemia based on dual inhibition of EZH1/EZH2


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a clonal malignant disorder originating
from a small number of leukemic stem cells (LSCs). Selective targeting of
LSCs is a promising strategy for the prevention and treatment of AML
relapse. Polycomb repressive complexes 1 (PRC1) and 2 (PRC2) are
important epigenetic regulators that maintain the stemeness of ES cells
and hematopoietic stem cells. Enhancer of zeste homolog 1 and 2 (EZH1/2)
is catalytic components of PRC2 that trimethylates histone H3 at lysine
27 (H3K27) to repress the transcription of target genes. Mutations and
overexpression of EZH1/2 are associated with cancers including
hematopoietic malignancies. Here, we used genetic deletion of EZH1/2 or a
novel dual inhibitor of EZH1/2 activity to show that loss or inhibition
of EZH1/2 eradicates dormant AML stem cells.To examine the effects of
genetic deletion of EZH1/2 on AML cells, Ezh1-null, Ezh2-conditional and
double knock-out mice were generated. Hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
prepared from single knock-out mice or double knock-out mice were
transduced with various types of AML fusion-genes, such as MOZ-TIF2, MLL
fusions, AML1-ETO, and others by retroviral infection, and cultured in
vitro or transplanted into irradiated recipient mice to induce AML in
vivo. When the cells were cultured in vitro, double deletion of Ezh1/2
induced cell differentiation and apoptosis more severely than single
deletions in all subtypes of AML tested, resulting in complete loss of
cells. In AML mice, deletion of Ezh1/2 induced AML cell differentiation
and complete remission of AML, which was not achieved by single deletion
of Ezh1 or Ezh2. Genetic deletion of both Ezh1 and Ezh2 on the LSC
fraction dramatically reduced the number of LSCs (L-GMP), especially
quiescent LSCs, whereas deletion of either Ezh1 or Ezh2 did not have such
a strong effect. The transcriptional profiles of LSCs deficient in both
Ezh1 and Ezh2 were characterized by the upregulation of cell
cycle-related genes such as Cyclin D1/D2, which is the main regulator of
G0/G1 transition, along with differentiation-related genes. These results
suggested that deletion of both Ezh1 and Ezh2 is required for eradication
of LSCs.To investigate whether pharmacologic inhibition of EZH1/2 could
serve as a therapeutic strategy in AML, we developed a novel EZH1/2 dual
inhibitor with potent inhibitory activity against both EZH1 and EZH2. The
drug induced cell differentiation and apoptosis in most subtypes of AML
tested in vitro and its effects were similar to those of genetic
depletion of EZH1/2. Oral administration of the EZH1/2 dual inhibitor
reduced the number of LSCs effectively in AML mice in a manner similar to
the effect of genetic deletion of EZH1/2.Taken together, these results
strongly suggest that dual inhibition of EZH1 and EZH2 is a promising
therapeutic strategy to eradicate LSCs in a wide range of AMLs, which
could lead to important advances in the treatment of AML.

