Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR17-92 in the miRegulatory landscape of Ewing sarcoma


MicroRNAs (miRNA) serve to fine-tune gene expression and thus play an
important regulatory role in tissue specific gene networks. The
identification and validation of miRNA target genes in a given tissue
still poses a significant problem since the presence of a seed sequence
in the 3UTR of an mRNA and its expression modulation upon forced ectopic
expression of the miRNA do not reliably predict regulation under
physiological conditions. The chimeric oncoprotein EWS-FLI1 is the
driving pathogenic force in ES. Recently, we reported on the EWS-FLI1
microRNA (miRNA) signature based on knockdown experiments in ES cell
lines and on differential expression in primary tumors versus mesenchymal
stem cells. Comparison of both datasets revealed the miR17-92 cluster to
be the top EWS-FLI1 activated miRNA, which is one of the most potent
oncogenic miRNAs. The whole cluster is among the small number of miRNAs
down-regulated upon knockdown of EWS-FLI1 in multiple ES cell lines. We
now report the use of a combination of AGO2 pull-down experiments by
PAR-CLIP - to enrich and sequence RISC-associated RNAs - and of RNAseq
upon miRNA depletion by ectopic sponge expression to identify the
targetome of miR17-92 in Ewing sarcoma (ES) cellsWe found a significant
enrichment of PAR-CLIP hits for members of the miR-17-92 cluster in the
3UTRs of genes up-regulated in response to mir-17-92 but not miR9 and 10b
specific sponge expression. Among them, we consistently identified known
(i.e. CTGF, MXD1, CYLD1) and a multitude of so far unknown targets of the
oncomir-1 cluster in ES in three PAR-CLIP experiments. Interestingly,
approximately a quarter of these genes annotate to the TGFB/BMP pathway,
the majority mapping downstream of SMAD signaling.Gene reporter assays
using 3UTRs of select novel candidate genes showed enhancement of
luciferase activity upon transfection of a sponge specific to miR-17-92
and 20a, but not to unrelated miR-9 and 10b. Site directed mutagenesis of
seed sequences in these 3UTR confirmed the direct regulation of these
genes by miR17-92. Current research focuses on the functional validation
of TGFB pathway modulation by miR17-92. This study provides a
paradigmatic approach to the comprehensive definition of the targetome
for a defined group of miRNAs under physiological conditions.This study
was supported by the 7th framework program of the European Commission
(FP7-259348, ASSET) and the Austrian Science Fund FWF (24708-B21)

