Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROR agonists regulate immune checkpoint receptors to enhance
anti-tumor immunity


As the master transcription factor for Type 17 T cells, RORt activates a
program of gene expression associated with enhancing effector function
and overcoming immune suppression. Lycera is developing synthetic, small
molecule ROR agonists for immunotherapy of cancer.We have previously
reported that ROR agonists increase type 17 cytokine and chemokine
production, enhance cell survival and have single agent anti-tumor
activity in syngeneic tumor models. Interestingly, transcriptional
profiling and cytometry studies revealed that treatment of murine and
human Th17 or Tc17 cells with ROR agonists increases the expression of
costimulatory receptors such as CD137 and decreased expression of
coinhibitory receptors like PD-1.Given the importance of PD-1 in
anti-tumor immunity, we further characterized the effects of ROR agonist
on this pathway. In vitro treatment with ROR agonists significantly
decreases mean fluorescent intensity and percent PD-1+ cells after
resting and repetitive restimulation of Type 17 T cells. ROR agonists do
not modulate PD-1 expression in ROR-/- T cells. In co-cultures of wild
type and ROR-/- T cells in the presence of the agonist, ROR-/- T cells
have reduced PD-1 expression suggesting that ROR agonists induce a
transmissible effect on ROR-/- T cells. However, ChIP-seq data indicates
that RORt does not directly bind to the promoter or enhancer element of
PD-1. Transcriptional and epigenetic profiling experiments have
identified several pathways modulated by ROR agonists that may regulate
PD-1 expression. Reduced PD-1 expression following ROR agonist treatment
has a functional impact as treated cells also resist PD-L1-mediated
inhibition of cytokine production and proliferation.Importantly, the
decreased PD-1 expression observed after in vitro treatment with ROR
agonists is maintained following adoptive transfer of tumor specific T
cells. These cells are highly effective at controlling tumor growth
without further agonist treatment in vivo, suggesting that in vitro ROR
agonist treatment results in durable epigenetic changes.In summary, ROR
agonists have been shown to decrease checkpoint receptor expression while
enhancing cytokine production and promoting long term survival and
self-renewal of T cells. These results provide rationales for combining
an ROR agonist with checkpoint inhibitor such as anti-CTLA4 or anti-PD-1.
By integrating effects on different effector pathways, ROR agonists
represent a promising immunotherapy approach for the treatment of cancer.

