Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxic bio-reduction of novel NBQ48 in treated tumor cells and
the activity of cytochrome P450 reductase


The main goal of this research was to evaluate the reduction activity of
a novel Nitrobenzazolo[3,2-a]quinolinium (NBQ48) compound under hypoxic
environment thru the formation of a fluorescent metabolite and further to
evaluate the activity of the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) reducatase in the
reduction of these compounds. To evaluate the reduction of NBQ48 and the
formation of its fluorescent metabolite two (2) tumor cell lines in
culture Toledo (lymphoma) and A431 (endothelial) where treated under
nitrogen or argon saturated environments to create a hypoxic (low oxygen)
environment. In a 15 ml conical tube 4106 cells in RPMI 1640 media were
treated with NBQ 48 (3mM) for a final volume of 5mL and incubated with
argon or nitrogen saturated environment at 37C, 5%. Cells were exposed at
different time periods (0 to 48 hours) to evaluate the effect of exposure
time in the reduction of the NBQ48 by detecting the reduced fluorescent
product, the amino-substituted ABQ48. In addition NBQ48 treated tumor
cells were located inside a hypoxic chamber to evaluate the formation of
the fluorescent metabolites indicative of a metabolically active cell. To
determine if the CYP450 reductase enzyme is activated in the reduction of
the NBQ towards the formation of the ABQ metabolite, an experiment
containing the NBQs and the CYP reductases was designed. Four (4) samples
were prepared: blank media hypoxic, NBQ experimental hypoxic, positive
ABQ spiked and negative aerobic control NBQ. Samples with NBQ48 (0.4mM)
were incubated for 24 hours. After the incubation period, fluorescence
emissions indicating the reductive fluorescent product were measured
using a Modulus fluorometer (blue filter). The results on tumor cells
treated with NBQ48 under hypoxic conditions demonstrated reduction and
the formation of a fluorescent product, amino-substituted ABQ48. The time
dependent increase in fluorescence in comparison with non treated cells
indicated that the reduction of the NBQ increased with time. Results on
the determination of the activity of CYP450 in the reduction of the NBQ48
indicated that only samples containing the CYP450 showed the formation of
a fluorescent species presumably, ABQ48. This study provides evidence of
the reduction of NBQ48 and the formation of a fluorescent metabolite thru
the activations of the CYP450 reductases. The implemented experimental
design could also be used to determine activity of hypoxic tissues with
clinical applications.

