Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A splicing variant of TERT identified by GWAS interacts with
menopausal estrogen therapy in risk of ovarian cancer


Menopausal estrogen-alone therapy (ET) is a well-established risk factor
for serous and endometrioid ovarian carcinoma. Genetics also plays an
important role in ovarian carcinoma etiology, which is partly
attributable to 18 confirmed susceptibility loci identified by
genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Each of these common variants is
associated with a modest relative risk estimate, but it is possible that
interactions between non-genetic and genetic risk factors exist, thereby
putting some women at higher risk. This interplay among the 18 loci, ET
use, and ovarian carcinoma risk has yet to be evaluated.In our analysis,
we used individual questionnaire data from 1,414 serous cases, 337
endometrioid cases, and 4,051 controls across 10 case-control studies
participating in the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium (OCAC). The
genotype data was based on information from three GWASs, their
replication efforts, and two large-scale arrays. Conditional logistic
regression was used to determine the association between the 18 confirmed
variants and risk of serous and endometrioid ovarian carcinoma among ET
users and non-users separately. A likelihood ratio test was used to test
for statistical interaction (i.e., departure from a multiplicative
model).After controlling for well-established ovarian carcinoma risk
factors as well as genetic ancestry, a splicing variant in TERT,
rs10069690, showed a significant interaction with ET use for risk of
serous ovarian carcinoma (pint = 0.014). ET users carrying the T allele
had a 50% increased risk of disease (OR = 1.50, 95% CI 1.16-1.93); the
impact of this allele was even stronger for long-term ET users of 10+
years (OR = 2.13, 95% CI 1.39-2.37, pint = 0.036). Non-ET users showed
essentially no association with the disease (OR = 1.09, 95% CI
0.97-1.22). In addition, two SNPS, rs7207826 (C allele) and rs56318008 (T
allele), in other genomic regions had significant interactions with ET
use for the endometrioid histotype (pint = 0.030 and pint = 0.042,
respectively).Overall, we have shown evidence of statistical interactions
between postmenopausal ET use and three confirmed ovarian cancer
susceptibility alleles with risk of serous and endometrioid ovarian
cancer. We observed four statistically significant interactions, which is
twice as many as would be expected by chance at the p0.05 level, although
none survived correction for multiple comparisons. This is the first
study, to our knowledge, to suggest potential gene-environment
interactions in ovarian carcinoma in the context of hormone therapy use
with confirmed susceptibility alleles. It is also intriguing that the
identified interactions include confirmed variants that are located in or
adjacent to genes in which estrogen is biologically involved. These
findings, if replicated, may be critical for future risk prediction
modeling.

