Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The isolation of prostate cancer specific circulating tumor cells
in the blood of patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer


Background:Circulating tumor cells (CTC) consist of a heterogeneous
population of very rare cells of the primary tumor or its own metastases.
A growing amount of evidence has shown that subpopulations of carcinoma
cells undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions (EMT), resulting in
their increased motility which facilitates their intravasation into the
blood circulation. Gold standard of CTC-isolation is the CellSearchSystem
based on epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) enrichment, though it
is known that EpCAM is downregulated in al advanced prostate cancers and
in all CTCs. Furthermore these CTC isolation techniques are not able to
isolate organ specific CTCs. The aim of this pilot study is the
development of a prostate cancer specific functionalized wire, which
detects prostate cancer specific circulating tumor cells (PCTC) in
metastatic PCa patients. The CTC detection rate will be compared between
an EpCAM functionalized wire and a PCa specific functionalized
wire.Methods:We combined 4 antibodies against Prostate specific membrane
antigen (PSMA), Prostate specific antigen (PSA), Prostate specific stem
cell antigen (PSCA) and epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM).
Evaluations of these antibodies were performed by immunofluorescence
analysis of the human prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and LNCaP. PCa
specific functionalization of the wire was determined with spiking
experiments. Blood samples from healthy donors were spiked with PC-3 and
LNCaP cells to test the wire for cell-binding. Afterwards blood of 15
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients with
metastatic progression, documented by prostate-specific antigen or
radiologic criteria, was investigated. These samples were simultaneously
analyzed in the flow system with two different functionalized wires. The
captured CTC and PCTC were identified by immunofluorescence staining
using pan cytokeratin and Hoechst-33258 positive signals as well as CD45
negative criteria.Results: The spiking experiments indicate that a
sensitive ex vivo isolation with different functionalized wires is
possible. In summary, PCTC counts ranged from 0-122 per PCTC (median 9)
and CTC counts ranged from 0-22 per CTC (median 3). Our data shows that a
more sensitive isolation of PCTCs is possible using prostate cancer
specific functionalized wire compared to EpCAM functionalized wire (p
0,001). The CTC isolation sensitivity was about 86% for
PCa-functionalized wire and about 73% for EpCAM functionalized
wire.Conclusions: PCTC can be isolated with prostate cancer-specific
functionalization of the wire. Simultaneously CTC that underwent EMT can
be isolated. These organ specific subpopulations might have a prognostic
effect on the clinical outcome and on the development of personalized
medicine. This proof of concept shows how important it is to optimize the
EpCam based CTC-detection.

