Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly sensitive detection of MYB-NFIB fusion transcripts in
adenoid cystic carcinoma


In recent years, the understanding of genomic events underlying head and
neck cancer has significantly advanced. Several of the newly discovered
genomic aberrations observed in salivary gland neoplasms were found to be
recurrent and uniquely associated with specific disease entities. Adenoid
cystic carcinoma (ACC), one of the most common salivary gland
malignancies, demonstrates a particular challenge in head and neck
oncology due its relentless growth, high local recurrence rate and poor
long-term prognosis. Recent identification of the MYB-NFIB gene fusion as
a recurrent and pathognomonic feature of ACC created new opportunities
for the molecular diagnostics of this malignancy. Liquid biopsy
techniques coupled with droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) platform may be
feasible aiming for non-invasive detection of disease-specific genetic
markers such as gene fusions. Given the prevalence of MYB-NFIB transcript
in ACC, detection of the fusion event in patients saliva may present a
unique opportunity for an accurate diagnostics as well as for long-term
patient monitoring. Our goal is to develop a highly-sensitive ddPCR-based
assay that would precisely detect and identify MYB-NFIB transcripts in
tumor tissue and patients bodily fluids. RNA sequencing (RNAseq)
performed in fresh frozen ACC samples identified MYB-NFIB fusion in 56%
(10/18) of the cases and revealed large variability in MYB gene break
sites and alternative splicing of NFIB component. 84% of ACC cases
demonstrated high expression of 5 MYB fragment by ddPCR based RT-PCR,
62.5% of which were MYB-NFIB fusion positive in RNAseq. We developed a
panel of RT-PCR assays to detect a range of different MYB-NFIB
transcripts observed by our RNAseq data and/or previously reported. We
identified all ACC cases harboring the most commonly reported MYB-NFIB
fusions (9/9) and validated the fusion products with conventional Sanger
sequencing. Additionally, our preliminary results indicate that the
assays are feasible for PCR multiplexing retaining the high sensitivity
and specificity observed in singleplex experiments. Evaluation of the
assay performance in ddPCR and assessing the detection limit is currently
in progress. Once the methodology is validated, we will be able to
evaluate a cohort of salivary gland neoplasms and matched RNA samples
isolated from saliva. The detection of MYB-NFIB fusion in bodily fluids
using a highly sensitive ddPCR platform will open a new avenue for the
diagnosis and the clinical management of patients with ACC. Furthermore,
our work creates the possibility of a liquid biopsy-based detection of
other disease-specific gene fusions increasingly identified in different
solid tumors.

