Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of PTP4A3 phosphatase disrupts colorectal cancer cell
adhesion and extracellular matrix interactions


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in
the United States and the world and the 5-year survival rate in the
United States of 60% highlights the need for better treatment options.
The central challenge in the design and development of drugs to treat CRC
has been the validation of novel drug targets and the generation of new
therapies aimed at those targets. The goal of this project is to better
understand the role of one such potential CRC molecular target. Protein
Tyrosine Phosphatase 4A3 (PTP4A3) is currently among the most
consistently up-regulated proteins seen in colorectal tumors but it
suffers from an incomplete understanding of its substrate(s) and of its
participation in tumor formation and progression. To clarify how PTP4A3
expression impacts cell behavior, we isolated primary colon tumor
epithelial cells from Ptp4a3fl/fl mice. PTP4A3 was deleted in vitro by
adenoviral infection of Ptp4a3fl/fl cells with Cre recombinase
accompanied by a green fluorescent protein (GFP) marker. As a control,
the Ptp4a3fl/fl cells were infected with GFP alone. Virally infected
cells were selected by fluorescence activated cell sorting. In the sorted
cells, the expression of Cre resulted in a complete lack of PTP4A3
protein by western blotting and undetectable Ptp4a3 mRNA as determine by
quantitative RT-PCR. Analysis of these genetically similar cells revealed
that Ptp4a3/ tumor cells had significantly reduced colony formation and
migration as compared to Ptp4a3fl/fl cells. Notably, the growth rate of
Ptp4a3fl/fl and Ptp4a3/ cells was similar when cultured on plastic in a
2D monolayer. In contrast, Ptp4a3fl/fl spheroids grew significantly
faster than the Ptp4a3/ cells when cultured in Matrigel. Moreover, while
the Ptp4a3fl/fl cells were able to form cohesive spheroids when cultured
in cell repellent plates, there was a striking inability of the Ptp4a3/
cells to form these 3D structures. In addition, treatment of the
Ptp4a3fl/fl cells with a potent and selective PTP4A3 phosphatase
inhibitor, thienopyridone, phenocopied the appearance of the Ptp4a3/
cells grown in cell repellent plates. These results suggest PTP4A3
expression-dependent changes in tumor cell behavior may be rooted in a
disruption in the adhesion and extracellular matrix-signaling axis. This
hypothesis was supported by significant changes in the gene expression
profile of adhesion and extracellular matrix proteins in the Ptp4a3/ CRC
cells. The isogenic Ptp4a3fl/fl and Ptp4a3/ CRC cells provide an
invaluable tool to elucidate further the function of PTP4A3 and its link
to adhesion and the extracellular matrix interactions.

