Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Micro RNAs as promising therapeutic targets for anti-metastatic
therapy in colorectal cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer and
is a leading cause of cancer related death worldwide and arises by
accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) play critical roles in tumor
progression in various cancers. In this study, we tried to find miRNAs
associated with distant metastasis and poor outcome and evaluate those
miRNAs as therapeutic target for advanced CRC.Methods: MiRNA array was
done on CRC specimens derived from tumors with various gene status
(KRAS/BRAF/microsatellite instability [MSI] status) with reference of
their normal mucosal specimens. The array analysis revealed that a set of
miRNAs was specifically down-regulated in CRC with BRAF V600E mutation
without MSI, considered to be the poorer outcome. To examine whether the
set of miRNAs causes distant metastasis or not, we investigated malignant
potential of cell lines transfected and knock-downed the set of miRNAs by
siRNA. Expression status of ZEB2 and Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
(EMT) markers, E-cadherin, were evaluated. In addition, we analyzed
expression level of the set of miRNAs in a cohort of 67 stage IV CRCs
(TNM staging system by UICC 7th) by quantitative reverse transcription
PCR using a comparative Ct method and examined association of
target-miRNA fold change (tumor/normal tissue) and their
clinocopathilogical findings. Patient survival analysis were performed by
Cox proportional hazard model and Kaplan-Meier analysis.Results: In
vitro, cell lines transfected the set of miRNAs significantly reduced
their malignant potentials. In contrast cell lines knock-downed the set
of miRNAs by siRNA obviously increased their malignant potentials.
Finally, to confirm our results obtained from in vitro assays, we
analyzed expression level of the set of miRNAs in a cohort of stage IV
CRCs. Of 67 patients with stage IV CRCs, 15 patients showed KRAS
mutation, 4 patients showed BRAF mutation. CRCs with the lower expression
level of the set of miRNAs showed poor outcome compared with those with
the higher expression level by Cox proportional hazard model and
Kaplan-Meier analysis.Conclusions: Our data indicate that miRNAs
associated with BRAF mutant CRCs is promising prognostic biomarkers and
therapeutic targets for anti-metastatic therapy in CRC.

