Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and proteomic characterization of anti-androgen resistant
cell lines


Background: Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and second most
frequent cause of cancer-related deaths for men in the United States.
AR-axis inhibitors have been shown to improve both progression-free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) in castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) patients however an estimated 50% of patients will go on to
develop resistance to these therapies. Some mechanisms of resistance
observed in the clinic include Androgen Receptor (AR) dependent events
such as increased AR copy number, activating point mutations in AR, or
splice variants (ARV7) both of the latter leading to constitutively
active versions of AR. Alternatively, AR-independent resistance
mechanisms include up-regulation of other oncogenic signaling pathways
such as FGFR and PI3/Akt and induction of the nuclear hormone
Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR). Finally, an increase in the emergence of a
neuroendocrine phenotype is observed in the clinic with CRPC patients and
is thought to be associated with chronic AR-antagonist treatment. To
better understand the specific proteomic and genomic changes that occur
during chronic AR inhibitor treatment we developed two enzalutamide
(ENZA) resistant cell lines and performed targeted proteomic and global
gene expression analysis.Methods: We generated LnCaP and VCAP
ENZA-resistant (ENZA-Res) prostate cancer cell lines. We performed gene
expression analysis by using both cDNA microarray and RNA-SEQ techniques
to identify novel or differential gene expression patterns between
ENZA-Res and sensitive phenotypes. We also employed a targeted proteomic
approach to identify changes in the relative expression levels of
proteins that have historically been associated with anti-androgen
resistance including, ARV7, GR and SGK-1.Results: We have shown that
ENZA-Res cell lines can undergo a significant change in morphology that
is associated with an elongated neuronal-like appearance. This phenotype
is associated with an induction in the mRNA expression of neuroendocrine
markers, CHGA and REST along with a strong induction of GR mRNA and
protein expression. We have shown that the neuroendocrine derived
prostate cancer cell line, H660, also demonstrates high GR mRNA and
protein content suggesting that GR may have a role in the maintenance of
neuroendocrine and/ or ENZA-Res phenotypes when AR is absent. In VCaP
ENZA-Res cells a significant increase in ARV7 mRNA and protein content
was observed compared to parental ENZA sensitive VCaP cells. Lastly, we
employed a combination of cDNA microarray and RNA-SEQ techniques to
identify a molecular signature associated with anti-androgen resistance.
We have identified a unique subset of genes that are differentially
up-regulated in ENZA-Res cell lines compared to ENZA-sensitive cell
lines. This novel molecular signature identifies several candidate genes
as potential therapeutic targets that may be important in mediating
anti-androgen resistance.

