Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging the kinetics of targeted nanoparticles to pancreatic cancer


Purpose: The purpose of this work is to image the kinetics of targeted
lipid nanoparticles to an SCL transporter of pancreatic cancer using a
near infrared (NIR) fluorescent dye DyLight 747 and a mouse orthotopic
model of fluorescent pancreatic cancer.Methods: Initially and before the
in vivo experiments, the uptake of nanoparticles by human pancreatic
cancer cells was evaluated in vitro using fluorescent microscopy and flow
cytometry. A quantity of 1.5 x105 PANC-1, MIA PaCa, or BxPC-3 cells/ml
was placed in each well of a six-well plate and incubated for 5 hours
with different formulations of fluorescent lipid targeted and
non-targeted nanoparticles encapsulation daunorubicin which has natural
fluorescence. After incubation, the growth media were removed and the
cells were washed with PBS. The uptake of the fluorescent lipid
nanoparticles by the cancer cells was evaluated an EVOS microscope. All
the in vitro experiments were done in triplicate. For the in vivo
targeting studies, nude mice (Balb/c Ola Hsd-Fox1 nu) were implanted
orthotopically (in the tail of the pancreas) with 3 x106 PANC-1 cells
expressing GFP. The injection volume for the implantation was 50
microliters and contained 3 x106 PANC-1-GFP cells mixed with serum free
media and HC Matrigel (1:1). One month after the orthotopic implantation,
the implanted pancreatic tumor was visualized in live, anesthetized
animals using UVP Scientia (UVP, Upland, CA). The animals were separated
into three groups (three animals in each group) and injected via the tail
vein as follows: Group A, was injected with only the fluorescent dye,
Dylight 747; group B was injected with fluorescent non-targeted
nanoparticles; and group C was injected with fluorescent targeted
nanoparticles.Results: Both the flow cytometry and fluorescence
microscopy data show a significantly higher uptake of the targeted lipid
nanoparticles compared to the non-targeted ones. The imaging of the
fluorescent lipid nanoparticles in live mice shows that both targeted and
nontargeted nanoparticles reach the pancreatic tumor. The nontargeted
nanoparticles reside less than 48 hours on the tumor, whereas the
targeted nanoparticles can reside for 96 hours on the tumor. The
non-encapsulated fluorescent dye did not reach the tumor and was excreted
in the urine.Conclusion: The results show that Dylight 747 can be used to
image the kinetics of a drug delivery system in a live animal.
Furthermore while both lipid nanoparticles reach the tumor, the targeted
lipid nanoparticles reside significantly longer on the tumor and this may
translate to a better therapeutic outcome.

