Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of 18F-IL2: a PET radiotracer for imaging activated
T-cells


Introduction: Activation of T-cells is accompanied by a strong
up-regulation of interleukin-2 (IL2) receptor (CD25). Therefore PET
imaging of IL2 receptors might be a suitable imaging biomarker for T-cell
activation. 18F-IL2 PET could detect CD25-positive T-cells and the
migration of these T-cells to distant sites of inflammation in SCID mice
subcutaneously injected with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells1
and NOD mice with insulitis. Also a strong correlation was found between
the accumulation of 18F-IL2 and the number of injected activated T-cells
in immune-competent rats.2 In tumor bearing mice, 18F-IL2 PET could
detect treatment-induced accumulation of activated T-cells in the tumor
following local radiotherapy and/or vaccination.Cancer immunotherapy is
increasingly obtaining a place in clinical practice. However not all
patients benefit. A biomarker for upfront or early response prediction
for these immunotherapies might support patient selection before and
during therapy. Potentially 18F-IL2 PET might serve this purpose.
Therefore we aimed to accommodate the production of 18F-IL2 for use in
clinical imaging studies.Material and methods: In order to produce a
GMP-compliant tracer the production is being implemented on the Eckert &
Ziegler PharmTracer synthesis module. In this synthesis module,
disposable cassettes, reactors and vials are used to avoid
cross-contamination between productions. First the prosthetic group
N-succinimidyl 4-fluorobenzoate (18F-SFB) is produced in 3 steps from
cyclotron-produced 18F-fluoride. Subsequently, 18F-SFB is conjugated to
human recombinant IL2 (Proleukin). Various methods for synthesis and
purification of 18F-SFB have been evaluated. Also purification of 18F-IL2
has been optimized. Quality control has been performed using ultra
performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) and Thin Layer Chromatography
(TLC).Results: 18F-SFB was successfully synthesized with the Eckert &
Ziegler PharmTracer synthesis module with decay-corrected radiochemical
yields comparable to literature (range 28-64%). Major challenges have
been encountered, most importantly regarding the purification of the
18F-SFB and 18F-IL2, stability of the IL2 and specific activity. The
activated ester 18F-SFB was purified by high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) to remove any impurities that could interfere with
the conjugation. 18F-IL2 has been purified using PD-10 columns with PBS
containing 0.05% SDS as mobile phase.Conclusions: Several challenges for
the GMP-compliant production of 18F-IL2 have been overcome. In the near
future this tracer will be used in preclinical and clinical studies to
non-invasively image activated T-cells before and during cancer
immunotherapy. This can provide insight in the effects of cancer
immunotherapy on the immune response.References:1. Di Gialleonardo V, et
al. J Nucl Med.2012;53(5):679-86.2. Di Gialleonardo V, et al. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging.2012;39(10):1551-60.

