Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of mitochondrial transcription (IMT) specifically
affect cancer cell proliferation


Mitochondria contain a unique DNA genome (mtDNA) that encodes a number of
key components of the respiratory chain. Levels of mtDNA gene expression
correlate with the metabolic requirements of mammalian cells. Recently,
the role of mitochondrial function for the development and progression of
cancer has been highlighted. Oncogenes have been identified to redirect
mitochondrial functions to increase cancer cell survival. Increased
levels of oxidative phosphorylation have also been implicated in cancer
cell resistance towards drugs. In agreement with this notion, compounds
that inhibit respiration may specifically target such resistant cells.
Finally, it was demonstrated that inhibition of mitochondrial gene
expression leads to apoptosis in rapidly dividing cells. Based on these
observations, we present a completely novel principle different from
known electron transfer chain blockers to treat cancer by inhibiting
mtDNA transcription. To this end a study to identify and characterize
inhibitors of mitochondrial transcription (IMTs) with lead-like
properties was initiated. A high throughput biochemical screening
campaign was performed identifying small molecular weight inhibitors of
PolRMT, the mitochondrial RNA polymerase, which controls mtDNA
transcription. Upon hit optimization, potent compounds with biochemical
and cellular IC50s in the low nanomolar range have been identified. IMTs
displayed good physicochemical and pharmacological properties. They have
been shown to be inactive on other RNA polymerases proving their
excellent specificity. Testing IMTs in assays for cancer cell
proliferation revealed potent inhibition of sensitive cell lines (double
digit nanomolar range). Interestingly, none of the tested primary
non-cancer cell lines was affected by the IMTs, indicating a good
therapeutic window. Testing selected IMTs in pharmacokinetic studies in
vivo revealed high exposures and no detectable adverse effects (single
and repeated dosing). Medicinal chemistry optimization will help to
identify candidate compounds for efficacy testing in xenograft models.

