Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAX5 methylation as a novel biomarker of esophageal cancer for
both potential tumor malignancy and cisplatin sensitivity


Therapeutic strategy of esophageal cancer largely depends on
histopathological assessment just like tumor differentiation and TNM
stage. In order to make appropriate choice for individual case, we have
to pay attention to background molecular characteristics about tumor
malignancy or chemotherapy sensitivity.In order to find extremely
tumor-specific marker of esophageal cancer, we picked several methylation
markers from what we previously used in the research of head and neck
cancer, which has the same background of smoking and alcohol and the same
tissue-type. As a result, we identified PAX5 gene methylation as a very
tumor-specific marker also in surgically resected 90 esophageal cancer
cases. Then, we continued to examine PAX5 expression, function and other
functions.Quantitative MSP (QMSP) assay revealed significantly higher
methylation score (100x[PAX5 QMSP]/[ACTB QMSP]) in tumor tissues
(16.22.4) than in normal tissues (0.40.2) (PTherapeutic strategy of
esophageal cancer largely depends on histopathological assessment just
like tumor differentiation and TNM stage. In order to make appropriate
choice for individual case, we have to pay attention to background
molecular characteristics about tumor malignancy or chemotherapy
sensitivity.In order to find extremely tumor-specific marker of
esophageal cancer, we picked several methylation markers from what we
previously used in the research of head and neck cancer, which has the
same background of smoking and alcohol and the same tissue-type. As a
result, we identified PAX5 gene methylation as a very tumor-specific
marker also in surgically resected 90 esophageal cancer cases. Then, we
continued to examine PAX5 expression, function and other
functions.Quantitative MSP (QMSP) assay revealed significantly higher
methylation score (100x[PAX5 QMSP]/[ACTB QMSP]) in tumor tissues
(16.22.4) than in normal tissues (0.40.2) (P<0.001, Mann-Whitney U test).
Also, 77/90 (85.6%) of these cases showed tumor-specific QMSP elevation.
Similarly, all 9 esophageal cancer cell lines (TE1, TE2, TE3, NUEC1,
NUEC2, NUEC3, T.T, T.Tn and WSSC) showed high QMSP scores over 10. The
inverse correlation of PAX5 methylation and expression was confirmed by
Quantitative RT-PCR of clinical samples and 5-aza-dC treated cell lines.
PAX5 downregulated cases indicated significantly poor overall survival (P
= 0.037, log-rank test). For functional analysis, we examined WST1 assay
and BrdU assay using ectopically PAX5 knock down NUEC1 cell line, which
has secondly high PAX5 expression. The result showed significantly high
cell proliferation and cell cycle acceleration. Since PAX5 is reported to
bind p53 promoter and regulate its expression, we hypothesized
epigenetically downregulated PAX5 might affect p53 expression and
therefore cisplatin sensitivity of esophageal cancer. Actually, PAX5
downregulated NUEC1 cell line acquired significantly cisplatin-resistant
character after siRNA transfection. Moreover, among postoperatively
cisplatin-treated cases (25 cases), PAX5 hyper-methylated clinical cases
(n = 6) demonstrated significantly worse survival than PAX5
hypo-methylated cases (n = 19) (P = 0.002, log-rank test). We also
surveyed another downstream mechanism of PAX5 dysregulation. Human Cancer
Pathway Finder PCR Assay identified three key molecules including SLC2A1
(Fold change: 4.6), CCL2 (12.5) and IGFBP5 (-5.0).Epigenetic inactivation
of PAX5 gene may affects malignant potential of esophageal cancers and
cisplatin-based chemotherapy through p53 dysregulation or other
carcinogenic pathways. It could be utilized for planning individual
multidisciplinary therapy.

