Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXXC5 is overexpressed in human prostate epithelial cancer cell
lines in culture and human prostate cancer tissue


Background: CXXC5 encodes a retinoid-inducible nuclear factor that plays
an essential role in human hematopoiesis (1, 2). We have previously
identified the differential expression of this gene in rat cancer cell
lines with different cancer phenotypes (3). However, knowledge on the
expression of this gene in human prostate cell lines or tissue is
lacking, both at the transcript and protein level.Methods: Prospective
study conducted between January-2012 through June-2015 at the University
of Cartagena, Colombia. Expression of CXXC5 was evaluated by quantitative
PCR, both in prostate cancer cell lines and tissue biopsies from patients
undergoing transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate needle biopsy for
suspected prostate cancer (PCa). A total of 65 prostate tissue samples,
consisting of 24 benign prostatic tissue biopsies and 41 prostate cancer
tissue biopsies were included in the study. Transcript levels in
individual biopsies from each group were normalized to transcript levels
of beta-actin of the corresponding sample and compared. The protein
expression level of CXXC5 was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in benign
and malignant prostate tissue. A final score was determined by
multiplying the highest intensity of staining by the mean percentage of
positive cells stained to yield a value between 0 and 300 for each case.
For statistical analysis we compared parameters between group of cases
with PCa and without PCa. This study was approved by the Ethical Review
Board of the academic institution.Results: CXXC5 transcript expression
levels were significantly lower in immortalized non-tumoral prostate cell
line PWR-1E compared to PCa cell lines: LNCaP (Fold change: 10.5, p =
0.001), and PC3 (Fold change: 2.8, p = 0.014). In prostate tissue we
observed a significant higher expression in low grade prostate cancer
compared to benign prostate tissue (p = 0.034). IHC evaluation showed
that CXXC5 staining was higher in tissue samples from patients with
prostate cancer compared to patients with benign disease (p = Background:
CXXC5 encodes a retinoid-inducible nuclear factor that plays an essential
role in human hematopoiesis (1, 2). We have previously identified the
differential expression of this gene in rat cancer cell lines with
different cancer phenotypes (3). However, knowledge on the expression of
this gene in human prostate cell lines or tissue is lacking, both at the
transcript and protein level.Methods: Prospective study conducted between
January-2012 through June-2015 at the University of Cartagena, Colombia.
Expression of CXXC5 was evaluated by quantitative PCR, both in prostate
cancer cell lines and tissue biopsies from patients undergoing
transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate needle biopsy for suspected
prostate cancer (PCa). A total of 65 prostate tissue samples, consisting
of 24 benign prostatic tissue biopsies and 41 prostate cancer tissue
biopsies were included in the study. Transcript levels in individual
biopsies from each group were normalized to transcript levels of
beta-actin of the corresponding sample and compared. The protein
expression level of CXXC5 was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in benign
and malignant prostate tissue. A final score was determined by
multiplying the highest intensity of staining by the mean percentage of
positive cells stained to yield a value between 0 and 300 for each case.
For statistical analysis we compared parameters between group of cases
with PCa and without PCa. This study was approved by the Ethical Review
Board of the academic institution.Results: CXXC5 transcript expression
levels were significantly lower in immortalized non-tumoral prostate cell
line PWR-1E compared to PCa cell lines: LNCaP (Fold change: 10.5, p =
0.001), and PC3 (Fold change: 2.8, p = 0.014). In prostate tissue we
observed a significant higher expression in low grade prostate cancer
compared to benign prostate tissue (p = 0.034). IHC evaluation showed
that CXXC5 staining was higher in tissue samples from patients with
prostate cancer compared to patients with benign disease (p = <0.001). In
the prostate cancer group, immunostaining was also stronger in malignant
acini than in adjacent, benign acini, within the same patient
sample.Conclusions: CXXC5 exhibits differential expression in prostate
cell lines with different cancer phenotypes and between cancer and benign
prostate tissue. Additional studies are required to determine the
biological and clinical significance of CXXC5 in prostate
cancer.References1. J Biol Chem, 2009. 284(6): p. 3672-81.2. Oncotarget,
2013. 4(9): p. 1438-48.3. Biomedica, 2007. 27(2): p. 190-203.

