Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved sensitive detection method of FLT3 (FMS-like tyrosine
kinase) internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutation using next-generation
sequencing technology and nested PCR


Sensitive detection of internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutation of FLT3
is very important in acute myeloid leukemia. To increase detection
sensitivity of FLT3-ITD, we developed new detection algorithm using next
generation sequencing (NGS) data. We validated results using nested
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods. We compared results of NGS data,
nested PCR and conventional PCR methods.First, using whole exome
sequencing data of 83 AML patients, we applied calling algorithm for
FLT3-ITD. Briefly, to detect ITDs with NGS data, the reads are aligned to
a reference sequence (UCSC hg19), with BWA which is a read aligner
allowing soft-clipping. Some reads can be an indication of the occurrence
of ITD and BWA aligns those reads as soft-clipped.Second, we deigned two
types of primer for Nested PCR. The first primer was targeted wildly for
between exon14 and exon15 of FLT3 gene. Nested PCR primer was deigned to
target previously reported regions which are frequently occurred ITD
mutation. PCR reactions of two steps were performed using the PCR primers
sequentially.In these 83 patients, FLT3-ITD was positive only in 7
patients when tested by conventional PCR methods. When NGS detection
method was applied, this resulted in positive FLT3-ITD in 11 patients
(11/83, 13%). When validation was performed using nested PCR, FLT3-ITD
was confirmed in all of 11 patients. Nested PCR detected additional 4
patient positive for FLT3-ITD in this population. For 68 patients,
FLT3-ITD was negative by both NGS and nested PCR method. Overall, NGS
method improved sensitivity of FLT3-ITD detection by 57% in this
population. And the concordance rate of NGS method and nested PCR was
95.2% (79/83).Then we investigated clinical significance of sensitive
FLT3-ITD detection. For this, we performed nested PCR and conventional
PCR at the same time in 238 AML patients to detect FLT3-ITD. Positive
rate for FLT3-ITD was 20% (48/238) and 10% (24/238) by nested PCR and
conventional PCR respectively. When survival analysis was performed,
among patients with negative FLT3-ITD result by conventional PCR,
patients who showed positive for FLT3-ITD by nested PCR had shorter
overall survival compared to those who showed negative for FLT3-ITD by
nested PCR. (p = 0.03). This implies that sensitive FLT3-ITD detection
using nested PCR is clinically meaningful.Diagnosis of FLT3-ITD is very
important genetic factor, leading a therapeutic direction for AML
patient. Here we report that we have developed alternative more sensitive
detection methods for FLT3-ITD based on nested PCR and NGS. Sensitive
detection of FLT3-ITD was clinically meaningful, suggesting that these
methods should be incorporated in a future clinical practice. Also, we
want to note that, NGS method is capable of quantifying FLT3-ITD size and
amount in AML patients.

