Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell isolation using antibody/aptamer-based multivalent
binding


Isolation and enumeration of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in peripheral
blood have been used for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and theragnosis.
The majority of the CTC isolation methods, including the FDA-approved
CellSearch, employ one antibody to capture tumor cells. Using such a
monovalent-binding capture agent likely results in lower cell capture
efficiency than multivalent-binding methods, which tend to have stronger
binding force (or lower dissociation constant).We have investigated in a
multivalent-binding-based tumor cell isolation method by immobilizing a
mixture of aptamers and antibodies on the surfaces of microfluidic
devices. Since aptamers are much smaller in the size (8-15 kDa) than
antibodies (150 kDa), aptamers and antibodies could interact with
different receptors on cell surfaces, resulting in a configuration that
one cell simultaneously interacts with multiple different types of
capture agents. The microfluidic devices we used are in the size of a
microscope slide and each of them consists of an inlet, eight parallel
channels connected via consecutive bifurcation, and an outlet. There are
micromixers inside the channels for enhanced interactions. Biotinylated
aptamers and biotinylated antibodies were coated onto microchannel
surfaces using avidin-biotin chemistry.We tested the devices by isolating
human leukemia cells (CCRF-CEM) in devices immobilized with a mixture of
sgc8 aptamers and protein tyrosine kinase-7 (PTK7) antibodies. Both sgc8
aptamers and anti-PTK7 exhibited strong binding with CCRF-CEM cells
according to flow cytometry. An antibody-to-aptamer ratio of 1:300 showed
the highest capture efficiency among the range we studied (from 1:30 to
1:3000). We found that the antibody-aptamer surfaces had higher capture
efficiency than antibody-alone or aptamer-alone surfaces; the degree of
enhancement increased with the flow rate. Control experiments using
non-specific aptamer (TD05) and non-specific antibody (anti-EpCAM) were
carried out to verify the benefits of multivalent binding. We also found
that the multivalent-binding surfaces have higher specificity than
monovalent-binding surface, especially at a high flow rate. A calibration
curve was obtained by spiking leukemia cells into human whole blood.In
summary, antibody/aptamer-coated multivalent-binding surfaces in
microfluidic devices showed higher capture efficiency and specificity
than monovalent-binding surfaces, suggesting their potential for the
isolation and enumeration of CTCs for clinical applications.

