Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orlistat decreases endometrial cancer cell proliferation:
implications for a novel treatment strategy


Objectives: Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is a key enzyme involved in fatty
acid synthesis. It also plays an important role in tumorigenesis and is
highly expressed in many cancers, including endometrial cancer. Orlistat
is a weight loss medication that has been shown to be a potent inhibitor
of FAS. The goal of this study was to evaluate the anti-tumorigenic
potential of orlistat in endometrial cancer cell lines.Methods: The
endometrial cancer cell lines ECC-1 and KLE were treated with varying
doses of orlistat (0.01-500 M). Cell proliferation was assessed using the
MTT assay. Cell cycle progression was evaluated by Cellometer and
apoptosis was assessed using the Annexin V assay. Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) was measured using the DCFH-DA assay. Western immunoblotting was
performed to determine changes in FAS, cellular stress, cell cycle
progression and the AMPK/mTOR pathways.Results: Orlistat inhibited cell
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in both cell lines (IC50 = 81.7
M in ECC-1; IC50 = 145.5 M in KLE). Treatment with orlistat resulted in
G1 arrest but did not affect apoptosis. Orlistat increased ROS at high
doses (500 uM, p = 0.008 for ECC-1 cells and p = 0.012 for KLE cells) and
induced expression of BIP and PERK. Western immunoblot analysis
demonstrated that orlistat decreased expression of FAS, acetyl-CoA
carboxylase (ACC), and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A),
important proteins in fatty acid metabolism. Treatment with orlistat also
increased expression of phosphorylated AMPK and decreased expression of
the downstream S6 protein.Conclusions: Orlistat suppressed cell growth in
endometrial cancer cell lines through inhibition of fatty acid
metabolism, induction of cell cycle G1 arrest, and modulation of the
AMPK/mTOR pathway. Given that patients with endometrial cancer have high
rates of obesity, orlistat should be further investigated as a novel
strategy for endometrial cancer treatment and prevention.

