Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapeutic, chemomodulatory and vascular protective effects
of naturally occurring hydroxyphenylalkanes and diarylheptanoids


Hydroxyphenylalkanes and diarylheptanoids possess potential therapeutic
values in different patho-physiological conditions such as inflammation,
oxidative stress, cardiovascular disorders and malignancy. Doxorubicin is
widely used chemotherapeutic agent against several types of neoplastic
disorders. In the current study, naturally isolated hydroxyphenylalkane
and diarylheptanoid compounds were investigated for their potential
chemo-modulatory effects on the top of their potential vascular
protective role with doxorubicin. Shogaol and 4-methoxygingerol showed
considerable cytotoxic effects against HCT116, HeLa, HepG2 and MCF7 cells
with IC50 ranging from 3.1 to 18.7 M and from 9.1 to 19.4 M,
respectively. Using DPPH free radical scavenging assay, diarylheptanoids
were stronger antioxidant than hydroxyphenylalkanes with EC50 ranging
from 0.5 to 5.9 M and from 4.6 to 9.5 M, respectively. In addition, all
tested diarylheptanoids significantly ameliorated CCl4 induced disturbed
intracellular GSH/GSSG balance. Gingerol moderately enhanced the
cytotoxic profile of doxorubicin against HepG2 and Huh7 cells decreasing
their IC50's from 0.52 to 0.37 M and from 50 to 30 nM, respectively.
Combination index of gingerol with doxorubicin (combination at equitoxic
ratio of 1/100) was indicative of additive interaction (CI-value were 1.1
and 1.0, respectively). To further investigate the interactive
characteristics between doxorubicin and gingerol, cell cycle distribution
of HepG2 and Huh7 cells was studied using DNA cytometry after exposure to
their single and equitoxic combination. Doxorubicin induced cell
accumulation at S-phase and G2/M-phase while, gingerol combination with
doxorubicin significantly induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M-phase. To
study the potential vascular protective effect of gingerol against
doxorubicin induced vascular toxicity, doxorubicin (10 M for 1h) was
incubated with or without different concentrations of 6-gingerol (3, 10
and 30 M for 1h) on isolated aortic rings and their response to
phenylephrine (PE) and acetylcholine (ACh) was examined. Co-incubation of
6-gingerol (30 M) completely blocked the exaggerated vasoconstriction and
impaired vascular relaxation induced by doxorubicin

