Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subcellular localization of the cell polarity protein Scribble
defines its oncogenic activity in hepatocellular carcinoma


Background:Disturbance of hepatocyte polarity is frequently observed in
liver cancer tissues; however, it is still controversially discussed if
this phenotype represents the cause or the result of tumorigenesis. Due
to their multi-functional properties, hepatocytes are characterized by
distinct luminal, lateral and basal domains that are defined by specific
protein complex. These cell protein complexes such as the apical Crumbs-
(CRB3, Pals1, Patj), the lateral Par- (Par3, Par6, aPKC) and the
basolateral Scribble-complex (Scrib, Dlg, Lgl) are essential for the
formation of hepatocellular polarity. So far, it is unknown if and which
protein complex constituents are involved in liver tumor development and
how these factors induce possible downstream effector
mechanisms.Methods:To identify complex proteins that affect
hepatocellular polarity, a siRNA screen targeting all relevant polarity
factors was performed in HCC cells that form bile canaliculi in vitro
(HepG2). Localization of Scribble in HCC cell lines and human HCC tissues
was analyzed by western immunoblotting and immunofluorescence. Expression
vectors containing wildtype Scribble and an isoform lacking polarity
complex binding capacity were cloned (Scrib-wt, Scrib-P305L) and stably
transfected in HCC cells. The impact of these isoforms on PI3K/AKT
signaling pathway activity and cell viability were analyzed. In addition,
the interaction of Scrib-wt, Scrib-P305L with phosphatases regulating the
PI3K/AKT pathway was tested by Co-IP analysis.Results:The siRNA screen
revealed that Scribble strongly affects hepatocellular polarity. Scribble
located near the membrane in polarized cells (e.g., HepG2, HuH-1) but in
the cytoplasm in non-polarized cells (HLE, HLF). Scribble overexpression
and cytoplasmic accumulation correlates with poor overall survival of HCC
patients. In vitro, the inhibition of Scribble reduced and overexpression
of cytoplasmic Scribble (Scrib-P305L) induced AKT phosphorylation. In
addition, Scrib-P305L supported HCC cell viability in an AKT-dependent
manner. Immunofluorescence revealed co-localization of Scribble with the
AKT phosphatases PTEN and PHLPP1. Co-IP studies revealed a physical
interaction between PHLPP1 and both Scribbles isoforms (wildtype and
P305L mutant).Conclusion/Outlook:Our data demonstrate that the
cytoplasmic accumulation of Scribble in HCC cells promotes tumor cell
growth in an AKT-dependent manner probably through the interaction with
AKT phosphatases. These results indicate that the disturbance of cell
polarity (e.g. by Scribble overexpression) can foster oncogenic effects
and therefore must be regarded as initiating event in
hepatocarcinogenesis.

