Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of BET family proteins as cancer targets using
phenotypic-based profiling and affinity capture mass spectrometry


As part of a multi-year technology integration strategy to identify
unprecedented targets, AbbVie has committed to building broad-endpoint
profiling assays to enable phenotypic screening campaigns and compound
prioritization. Early on, phenotypic cell-based screening employing a
panel of protein-fragment complementation assays (PCAs) identified
A-1107604 as a hit with potent activity against a subset of endpoints.
While its activity profile had some commonalities with known anti-cancer
agents, the overall profile of PCAs that were significantly and
concomitantly modulated represented a unique signature. Further analysis
revealed A-1107604 to have potent and selective activity in a panel of
human tumor cell lines. Inhibitor affinity capture from cellular lysates
coupled with mass spectrometry identified the BET family of proteins as
the putative cellular targets of A-1107604. Binding was localized to the
bromodomain of the target proteins using affinity capture-protease
digestion and was confirmed by thermal shift assay, solutionbinding and
X-ray crystallography. This binding was found to be highly selective when
A-1107604 was counter-screened against a 150-member kinase panel and an
80-member receptor panel. To correlate target affinity with cellular
efficacy, a series of analogs were prepared with affinities spanning 3
orders magnitude. Affinity for BRD4, a BET family member, strongly
correlated with efficacy in human tumor cell lines. Finally, A-1107604
was evaluated in human tumor xenograft models where it demonstrated
significant tumor growth inhibition. This discovery effort laid the
foundation for our BET inhibitor program. Disclosures: All authors are
employees of AbbVie. The design, study conduct, and financial support for
this research were provided by AbbVie. AbbVie participated in the
interpretation of data, review, and approval of thepublication.

