Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of IFN induced PDL1 expression by combined in situ RNA
analysis and protein profiling from a single FFPE slide


PD1 ligands (PDL1) are often upregulated on the cell surface of many
different tumors. The primary role of PDL1 in cancer is to inhibit T-cell
mediated immune response. Two general mechanisms for PDL1 expression on
tumor cells have been proposed. Innate immune resistance, in which PDL1
expression is induced by the constitutive oncogenic signaling, and
adaptive immune resistance, in which PDL1 expression is induced by
T-cells releasing interferon- (IFN) and activating the STAT signaling
pathway. In order to differentiate between these two mechanisms, IFN mRNA
expression is measured as an effective alternative to detecting IFN
protein. Detection of cytokines by IHC is challenging as secreted
proteins are widely diffused and the associated staining pattern appears
to lack cellular specificity. RNAscope RNA in situ hybridization (ISH)
assay is utilized to measure Interferon- (IFN) mRNA expression, and
MultiOmyxTM multiplexed assay (demonstrated to stain up to 60 protein
biomarkers) is utilized to measure CD3, CD4, CD8, CD56, CD68, PD1, and
PDL1 protein expression. In this study, combined MO and RNAscope ISH
assays, enabled identification of individual cells with characteristic
mRNA and protein expression profile.The MultiOmyx assay utilizes a pair
of directly conjugated Cyanine dye-labeled (Cy3, Cy5) antibodies per
round of staining. Each Cy-dye conjugated antibody recognizes different
target proteins. Each round of staining is imaged and followed by novel
dye inactivation chemistry, enabling repeated rounds of staining.
RNAscope is a novel RNA ISH assay capable of single-molecule detection in
individual cells, utilizing hybridization mediated signal amplification.
The assay utilizes a pair of RNA target specific oligonucleotide probes,
which sequentially hybridize to preamplifier, amplifier, and fluorophore
label probes.Utilizing MultiOmyx and RNAscope assays, this study proposed
to profile both RNA and protein expression in lung, breast, melanoma,
colorectal, esophageal, and prostate cancer samples.Differentiating PDL1
expression induced in response to inflammatory signals produced by an
activated T-cell, from PDL1 expression induced by constitutive oncogenic
signaling, has potential implications in effectiveness of PD1 blockade
therapy. According to the proposed mechanisms, PD1 blockade as a mono
therapy may only benefit individuals with strong endogenous immune
response. In individuals with weak endogenous immune response,
combinational therapies consisting of both immune activation and
PD1-pathway blockade may be more effective than either mono therapy alone.

