Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of early recurrence after resection of metastatic liver
tumors from colorectal cancer using circulating cell-free DNA


Background: We have reported that the amount of total circulating
cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) increases with tumor growth and decreases upon
tumor shrinkage. However, adverse effects of drugs and surgical stress
can increase total ccfDNA because ccfDNA is derived from both normal and
cancer cells. Thus, the ability to determine how much ccfDNA is derived
from cancer cells is a critical issue. It has been reported that the
length of ccfDNA derived from cancer cells is greater than 200 bp while
that from normal cells undergoing apoptosis is less than 200 bp.
Furthermore, the ratio of ccfDNA to -globin reflects the amount of
mitochondrial DNA derived from normal cells undergoing stress-induced
apoptosis. We developed a new biomarker readout, the LINE-1 long fragment
(longer than 200 bp) to -globin ratio (LBR), based on this principle. In
this study, we evaluated the clinical utility of the LBR to detect early
recurrence of liver metastasis from colorectal cancer after liver
resection.Methods: We enrolled 20 patients who underwent curative liver
resection of metastatic liver tumors from colorectal cancer. Total ccfDNA
and LBR were measured pre-surgery, and at 1 week and 1 month
post-surgery. ccfDNA was purified from 1 mL serum using the QIAamp
Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit. Total ccfDNA was measured using Qubit
Fluorometer. LINE-1 long fragment and -globin in ccfDNA were measured
using real time PCR. The Ethics Review Committee of our institution
approved the study protocol. Written informed consent was obtained from
each patient.Results: We completed 1-year follow-up in 13 of 20 patients.
Recurrence was detected in 7 patients and no signs of recurrence were
detected in the other 6. Total ccfDNA increased 1 week after surgery in
all 13 patients, which could have been caused by surgical stress. Total
ccfDNA 1 month after surgery increased in 5 of 7 patients with
recurrence. Total ccfDNA 1 month after surgery increased in 3 of 6
patients without recurrence. The 3 patients with increased ccfDNA had
post-operative complications or drug-induced liver dysfunction. Notably,
LBR increased in the 7 patients with recurrence and decreased in the 6
patients without recurrence 1 month post-surgery.Conclusion: LBR has
potential as a novel biomarker readout for early detection of recurrence
after liver resection of metastatic liver tumors from colorectal cancer.

