Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-focal control of mitochondrial gene expression by oncogenic
MYC provides effective therapeutic targets in cancer


The MYC transcription factor is the most dramatically overexpressed gene
product in human cancer. However, defining the MYC-driven transcriptome
critical to malignant transformation has remained a challenge, in part
because MYC controls several thousand genes. Consequently, little
progress has been made in the identification of sensitive nodes
downstream of MYC that might be targeted therapeutically in order to
interrupt its oncogenic signaling. To overcome this impediment, we
performed a screen for downstream MYC effector pathways that are
selectively linked to MYC's functional properties. Via this strategy, we
identified the mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT) as a direct
downstream target of MYC. POLRMT induction by MYC regulates transcription
of the mitochondrial genome, as well as mitochondrial DNA replication.
Recent studies have shown that POLRMT also interacts with a mitochondrial
ribosomal RNA methyltransferase TFB1M to regulate mitochondrial ribosome
assembly. Notably, blocking induction of POLRMT (or TFB1M) by MYC
converts the cellular response to MYC activation from enhanced cell cycle
progression to apoptotic cell death. Of immediate clinical relevance,
compounds blocking mitochondrial gene expression at any of several steps
cause acute synthetic lethality with oncogenic levels of MYC. Among these
compounds, the mitochondrial targeting antibiotic Tigecycline is
FDA-approved and well-tolerated in patients. Tigecycline eliminates tumor
formation and dramatically improves survival in our animal model of
MYC-driven lymphoma. Evidence presented here demonstrates that uncoupling
of MYC's nuclear and mitochondrial transcriptomes exposes a point of
exquisite vulnerability in tumor cells. Although targeting MYC as a
therapeutic strategy has proven to be challenging in the past, our
identification of a new node of sensitivity in MYC-driven cancers offers
a potential for broad therapeutic implications.

