Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical validation of circulating DNA analysis for the detection
of point mutations and of the longitudinal metastatic colorectal patient
follow up for detecting emergence of resistance to targeted therapy


Clinical validation of circulating DNA analysis as liquid biopsy for the
detection of point mutations and of the longitudinal metastatic
colorectal patient follow up for detecting emergence of resistance to
targeted therapyWe carried out two clinical studies in metastatic
colorectal cancer patients (i) the clinical real-time evaluation of
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) analysis for detecting point mutations in
comparison with tumor tissue analysis before initiation of anti-EGFR
therapy and (ii), the study of the emergence of associated resistance
mutation in refractory patients under treatment.(i) We realized a
real-time blinded prospective multicentric clinical study on 140 patients
comparing KRAS (exon 2,3 and 4) and BRAF V600E mutations determination by
plasma and tissue analysis carried out in the conditions of standard
management care. On 121 patients where both analysis were made, 43% were
found mutant by tumor tissue analysis while 57% were found KRAS mutant by
ctDNA analysis. 7.2% of patients were found BRAF mutant by tumor tissue
while 14.4% were determined mutant by ctDNA analysis. 13% of plasma
samples carried multiple KRAS point mutations and 4% of plasma samples
exhibited at least one KRAS point mutation combined to the presence of
BRAFV600E point mutation. Median data turnaround time was 16 [3-273] days
for tumor tissue while it was 2 [0.5-10] days for ctDNA analysis. CtDNA
analysis appears much more sensitive than tissue analysis and may be more
accurate in respect to the intra-tumor or inter-tumor heterogeneity and
the clonal evolution dynamics. We present the first RAS and BRAF mutation
distribution which takes into account the presence of multiple mutations
in the same mCRC patient.(ii) In the other blinded clinical study, we
retrospectively analyzed RAS (KRAS and NRAS) and BRAF mutations in serial
plasma samples from 42 refractory mCRC patients to Folfox + cetuximab or
dasatinib. 98% of the plasma were found mutant before or during
treatment. 50% of KRAS mutant samples were missed by tumor tissue
analysis before treatment. 4.8% of patients were found BRAF mutant by
tumor tissue analysis while 7% were found mutant by ctDNA analysis.
Longitudinal plasma analysis shows that 80% of initially WT patients
acquire at least one RAS or BRAF mutation during treatment and that 38%
of initially mutant patients acquire at least one newly KRAS or BRAF
point mutation during treatment. CtDNA analysis allows tracking acquired
resistance by studying the real-time clonal evolution of the
tumorPatients may harbor mutations at very low frequency on ctDNA down to
0.01% before initiation or during treatment revealing the need of a high
sensitive technique to detect mutant subclones. Our results indicate that
plasma analysis could advantageously replace tumor tissue analysis and
enables longitudinal examination of tumor molecular profiling.

