Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid peroxidation-derived DNA adduct formation in obesity-related
hepatocarcinogenesis


In this study we are investigating the role and mechanism of formation of
Lipid-peroxidation (LPO)-derived DNA adduct formation in obesity-related
hepatocarcinogenesis. Obesity has been implicated as a risk factor for
many types of cancer, particularly hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCC
incidence correlates with the increasing prevalence of non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in
the US. The mechanisms underlying this increased risk of liver cancer in
the obese population are still unclear. Liver tissue damage from fat
accumulation in NAFLD and NASH produce inflammation and increased levels
of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS induce LPO of polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFAs) in cell membranes leading to the formation of reactive
aldehydes, such as acrolein and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE), which react
with DNA forming the DNA adducts -OHPdG and DHH-dA, respectively. -OHPdG
is derived from -6 and -3 PUFAs, while DHH-dA is specifically from -6
fatty acids. Previous data has indicated that mutational hotspots
targeted by -OHPdG and DHH-dA may be within key cancer driver genes, such
as p53. Research has shown that B-6 mice fed a high fat diet (HFD)
develop fatty liver disease and eventually HCC. The livers of B-6 mice
fed a HFD showed an increased -6/-3 PUFAs ratio. We have detected and
quantified -OHPdG and DHH-dA by LC-MS/MS in livers from six healthy
individuals and six NAFLD patients and found that levels of DHH-dA in the
DNA of the fatty liver samples were nearly three-fold higher than that in
normal liver samples. Preliminary in vitro data using primary human
hepatocytes has indicated that treatment with oleic and palmitic acid
promote the formation of -OHPdG. Similarly, treatment of these cells with
the epoxide of HNE, 2,3-epoxy-4-hydroxynonanal (EH), and the omega-6
fatty acid, arachidonic acid, induce the formation of DHH-dA, supporting
the proposed mechanism of adduct formation. In an 80-week tumor bioassay
using C57Bl/6J mice on a HFD, we have observed through live-animal MRI
imaging and immunohistochemistry, an increase in pro-inflammatory white
adipose tissue accumulation, infiltration of fat into the liver and an
increase in overall body weight compared to a low fat diet control. In
addition, in mice fed a HFD combined with the green-tea derived
antioxidant Theaphenon E, we observed through MRI, reduction in body
weight gain, white adipose tissue, and lipid accumulation in liver.
Theaphenon E has the potential to decrease fat accumulation and
inflammation within the liver that lead to decreases in LPO-derived
adduct formation and consequently, the mutations critical for HCC
development.

