Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel analog of Leonurine inhibits melanoma growth and survival
through STAT3 signaling pathways


Previous studies have shown that a major alkaloid of Leonurus japonicus
Houtt, Leonurine, displays a variety of biological effects including
inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase, kidney fibrosis, and osteoporosis.
However, the full potential of this alkaloid as a cancer therapeutics has
not been explored, primarily due to the lack of potency. A limited
reports however, do suggest that Leonurine induces apoptosis in lung and
liver cancer cells. We hypothesized that this natural product's structure
can be optimized to create a more potent and drug-like molecule. A recent
structure-activity relationship (SAR) study in our laboratory based on
Leonurine structure has led to the identification of three novel analogs
which were >100 times potent than Leonurine in killing solid cancer
cells. The aim of the current study is to determine whether the novel
analogs of Leonurine exhibit anti-proliferative effects against tumor
cells through suppression of the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) activation pathway. We investigated the effects
of Leonurine analogs on constitutive STAT3 activation, modulation of
tyrosine kinases and phosphatases in STAT3 activation, STAT3-regulated
gene products, and growth modulation of tumor cells. We found that these
compounds inhibited constitutive STAT3 activation in metastatic melanoma
cells. The suppression was mediated through the inhibition of activation
of the upstream kinases Janus-like kinase (JAK) 1, and JAK2. Leonurine
derivatives down-regulated the expression of STAT3-regulated gene
products such as survivin, Bcl-xL, Bcl-2, cyclin D1, and Mcl-1 leading to
the suppression of proliferation and induction of apoptosis. Moreover, we
found that these Leonurine analogs significantly inhibited the
proliferation of variety of cells derived from solid tumors including
breast, pancreatic, prostate, and colon cancer. Overall, these results
suggest that these new compounds are novel blockers of STAT3 activation
and thus may have potential to suppress melanoma cell proliferation and
chemoresistance.

