Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The roles of x-linked Midline 1 interacting protein 1 (MID1IP1) in
gender disparity and development of hepatocellular carcinoma


HBV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a male predominance,
with a male-to-female ratio of about 5:1, suggesting gender difference is
one of the major risk factors for HCC development. However, up till now,
no concrete evidence is obtained to elucidate the male predominance of
HCC. It is believed that the gender-specific signaling pathway is
critically involved and targeting this pathway may provide a significant
treatment outcome.To target candidates that are implicated in the male
predominance in HCC, aberrant expression of sex-linked genes between HCC
tumors and non-tumorous livers (NT-L) draws particular attention.
Previously, we performed transcriptome sequencing on sixteen pairs of
human HCC tumors and NT-Ls. Our preliminary data show that a potential
target, Midline 1 interacting protein 1 (MID1IP1) which is involved in
hepatic lipogenesis and microtubule stabilization, was remarkably
overexpressed in HCC tumors as compared to the NT-Ls (fold change = 2.73;
p = 0.017). Moreover, the expression of MID1IP1 was significantly higher
in male non-tumorous liver tissue than that of female (fold change =
2.63; p = 0.001). In addition, the upregulation of MID1IP1 correlated
with less tumor encapsulation, more tumor microsatellite formation, more
venous and direct liver invasion, and poorer tumor stage, features of a
more aggressive biological behavior in our clinicopathological
correlation study. Moreover, upregulation of MID1IP1 in the tumors was
associated with a poorer overall survival. In its functional study, upon
knockdown of MID1IP1, HCC cells (BEL7402, SMMC7721 and HepG2) had reduced
proliferation rates in the cell proliferation assay and colony formation
assay. Here, we also showed that the migratory abilities of the HCC cell
lines with MID1IP1 knockdown were remarkably reduced in the transwell
assay. Furthermore, the STRING interaction network analysis suggests that
MID1IP1 interacts with Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), which is a regulator
of Gli in the hedgehog (HH) pathway. To examine its regulatory pathway,
we showed that the mRNA expression of the negative regulator of HH
pathway, Gli3, was increased in the MID1IP1 knockdown HCC cells. The
downstream target of Gli, cyclin D, was also downregulated upon MID1IP1
knockdown. In summary, our data suggest that the MID1IP1 plays a
significant role in the male predominance of human HCC. MID1IP1 may also
play a novel role in the regulation of hedgehog signaling.

