Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging single cell drug target engagement in vivo reveals
heterogeneous fractional occupancy


To produce effective therapeutic treatment, drugs need to reach and
engage the cognate target in the cells of interest. Incomplete target
occupancy may lead to cell survival and disease progression. Therefore,
for maximum efficacy, it is critical to achieve high target occupancy
within each cell of a tumor. However, the tumor microenvironment likely
creates a dynamic, heterogenous distribution of drug that limits target
occupancy in some cells. Unfortunately, we lack the tools to determine
target engagement at the cellular level, which prevents studies on
heterogeneous target occupancy and contributes to the poor understanding
of drug failure mechanisms. Here, we developed an approach to measure
target engagement of small molecule inhibitors within single cells in
mouse xenograft in vivo tumor models. Our method uses fluorescently
labeled, target specific companion imaging drugs, fluorescence
polarization imaging, and intravital microscopy, to measure target
occupancy of unlabeled, clinical drugs in single cells. We calculated the
equivalent in vitro exposure of ibrutinib, a covalent BTK inhibitor, in
vivo, but found increased cellular heterogeneity, highlighting
differences between in vivo activity and in vitro measurements.
Additionally, following systemic delivery of the reversible PARP
inhibitor olaparib, we found cells with substantial uninhibited target
when average measurements indicated all target was occupied, illustrating
drug activity heterogeneity that may lead to tumor survival. These
results demonstrate that our technique, which is the first to measure
unlabeled drug engagement with target in single cells, can quantitate
cellular fractional occupancy heterogeneity during drug treatment. We
expect this approach to serve as a valuable tool when measuring cellular
pharmacology in vivo, providing insight on dosing, drug activity in the
tumor and sources of heterogeneous drug distribution.

