Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining Chk1/2 inhibition with cetuximab and irradiation
enhances in vitro and in vivo cytotoxicity of head and neck cancer models


Background:Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) overexpression is
present in 80-100% of head and neck cancers, and targeting EGFR with
cetuximab has improved outcomes when combined with radiotherapy (XRT).
However, over half of these patients still succumb to this disease,
necessitating novel therapies. Checkpoint kinase 1 and 2 (Chk1/2) are
serine/threonine kinases that prevent cell cycle progression and serve as
critical regulators of the DNA-damage response. LY2606368 monomesylate
monohydrate (CHKi), a potent inhibitor of Chk1/2, exhibits single agent
activity in tumors of squamous cell histology, including head and neck.
Because of the role of Chk1/2 in DNA damage response, we hypothesized
that CHKi may enhance the cytotoxicity induced by cetuximab and XRT in
head and neck cancer.Methods:The HPV-negative UM-SCC1 and HPV-positive
UM-SCC47 head and neck cancer cells were used. Doses of drug compounds
are as follows: CHKi (LY2606368, Eli Lilly) 1nM; Cetuximab 0.25g/mL. Cell
proliferation was assessed using a Beckman Coulter Counter. Clonogenic
survival was measured with colony formation assays. Apoptosis was
analyzed using Annexin V-FITC staining and western blot analysis for
cleaved and full length caspase-3 and 9. DNA damage and checkpoint
signaling was investigated via western blot analysis for phospho- and
total Chk1, Chk2, ATM, ATR, and -H2AX. Animal studies were performed
using orthotopic tongue injection of UM-SCC1-Luc or heterotopic flank
injection of UM-SCC47 cells in athymic nude mice, which were then
subjected to 3 cycles of once-weekly CHKi (4mg/kg), cetuximab (0.1mg),
and 2Gy XRT.Results:The addition of CHKi to cetuximab and XRT resulted in
the greatest reduction of cell proliferation and increased cytotoxicity
in both HPV positive (HPV+) UM-SCC47 and HPV negative (HPV-) UM-SCC1
cancer cells in vitro. Triple combination treatment effectively reduced
cell growth by 89% in UM-SCC1 and 63% in UM-SCC47 at 96hrs compared to
untreated cells. A robust decrease in clonogenic survival in both cell
lines was also observed (approximately 90% at 2Gy). Furthermore, this
combination abrogated the DNA damage checkpoints induced by cetuximab and
XRT, resulting in persistent DNA damage and activation of apoptosis.
Specifically, we observed CHKi-mediated downregulation of total and
phospho- Chk1, Chk2, ATR, and ATM, with concomitant increases in cleaved
caspase-3 and caspase-9. Importantly, combining CHKi, cetuximab, and XRT
led to a significant tumor growth delay in mice bearing orthotopic or
heterotopic head and neck tumor xenografts compared to control mice.
Additionally, no significant weight loss or toxicity was observed in the
treatment.Conclusions:CHKi enhanced the in vitro and in vivo cytotoxicity
of cetuximab and XRT against human head and neck tumor models. A clinical
trial to test this treatment for head and neck cancer patients is
underway (NCT02555644).

