Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic profiling of circulating tumor cells (CTC) in metastatic
breast cancer (MBC) patients


Introduction: Cancer-associated mutations are present in circulating cell
free plasma tumor DNA (ptDNA). We have previously reported mutation
profiles of DNA extracted from CTC (CTC-DNA) from two patients with MBC
(#2 and 24 in table). Here, we report an expanded cohort with an updated
gene panel.Methods: We studied seven patients (two previously reported,
along with five additional patients) with MBC who were enrolled in
Mi-CTC-ONCOSEQ, had 5 CTC/7.5 ml whole blood (WB), and had at least one
CTC with high quality DNA determined by the Ampli1 quality control kit.
CTC were enriched from WB with CellSearch and purified from white blood
cells (WBC) (DEPArray). DNA from individual CTC and WBC was isolated and
subjected to whole genomic amplification (Ampli 1 WGA) and genotyped by
multiplexed PCR-based next generation sequencing with the Oncomine
Comprehensive Panel (OCP) on the Ion Torrent Proton. Exome sequencing of
research biopsies of metastatic tissue was performed using an Illumina
HiSeq 2500 platform. Previously reported patients (#2 and 24) sequenced
with a beta version of the OCP were re-run, and updated results are
provided.Results: Six of seven patients were ER positive. Patients #2,
12, and 24 had CTC with mutations also found in the research biopsy
(table). Novel alterations were found in comparison to research biopsy in
five of the seven patients (table). In two patients (#19, 24), two
potential actionable mutations (PTCH1 and NOTCH1) were found in CTC-DNA
but not in tissue-DNA. No mutations were detected in any WBC.Conclusions:
We demonstrate the ability to purify CTC, and to isolate and amplify DNA
of suitable quality for genetic analysis using a comprehensive targeted
sequencing panel. Mutations found in tissue as well as novel mutations
were found in CTC-DNA. Two potential actionable mutations were identified
in CTC, but not in tissue, opening potentially new therapeutic
opportunities. We conclude that mutational analysis of CTC-DNA and of
tissue may be complementary.
Legend: NA = not applicable; + = mutation present in pooled CTC; Y = Yes;
N = No; *CTC-DNA from the pool of 3 CTC had low and high
quality.Prioritized mutations in CTCs

