Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ewing sarcoma associated long non-coding RNA determines neural
cell fate of the tumors


BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a highly invasive pediatric bone and soft
tissue malignancy with a 20% 5-year survival rate for patients with
metastatic disease. 85% of Ewing sarcomas express a chimeric oncogene,
mainly EWS-FLI1, which drives the gene expression signature in these
tumors. The exact cell of origin for these primitive small round cell
tumors is unknown. These undifferentiated tumors express some
neuroectodermal, mesenchymal, and epithelial markers. Recently published
work suggests that these tumors may have risen either from neural crest
or mesenchymal stem cells. These genomic and phenotypic features may be
responsible for the aggressive nature of this disease and understanding
the tumor biology may help better treatment options for this metastatic
cancer.RESULTS: Our study on expression analysis of primary Ewing tumors
using Affymetrix's Human Exon arrays identified a highly expressed novel
long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA), FEZF1-AS1 in these tumors. Its
DNA sequence has no homology in most vertebrates. RNA-mediated knockdown
of the lincRNA in Ewing cell lines decreased expression of some of the
neural lineage genes as well as genes associated with cell adhesion and
migration. In vitro matrigel assays detected a decrease in cell invasion
capability of the lincRNA-knockdown cells. In the in vivo studies, the
lincRNA-overexpressed cells had better engraftment and tumor growth in
the liver than the normal controls. On attempt to differentiate the
lincRNA-knockdown Ewing cell lines, we noted that a decrease in the
lincRNA expression led to a decrease in the expression of neuroectodermal
markers after a week of differentiation when compared to the control
cells. We further detected temporal expression of this lincRNA during
neuronal differentiation from embryonic stem cells.CONCLUSIONS: Our study
identified a unique lincRNA in Ewing sarcoma that may be partly
responsible for inducing expression of the neural lineage genes in these
tumors as its reduced expression impaired differentiation in the Ewing
cell lines. Its prometastatic behavior helps the aggressive nature of
these tumors. Its expression during neural differentiation along with its
involvement in cell migration suggests that FEZF1-AS1 may be responsible
for imparting neural stem cell like-characteristics to Ewing sarcoma.

