Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemo-induced biology of PD-L1 and in vivo combination immune
therapy for ovarian cancer


Rationale: Ovarian cancer patients receive platinum/taxane-based
chemotherapy as standard of care. Five year survival has remained
unchanged for several decades, at less than 45%, pointing to the need for
new and improved therapies. We recently reported in vivo anti-tumor
efficacy of PD-L1 immune checkpoint blockade in a new transplantable
ovarian cancer mouse model. However, chemo-induced effects on ovarian
tumor PD-L1 expression have not been addressed. We studied here the
effect of platinum/taxane on tumor PD-L1 expression in vitro and in vivo
and tested the efficacy of PD-L1 blockade in combination with cisplatin,
using several treatment regimens.Methods and Results: Our results
demonstrate that in vitro exposure of several human ovarian cancer cell
lines, with various baseline susceptibilities to cisplatin and taxol,
triggers PD-L1 upregulation. Similar effects were observed when newly
tumor-derived, platinum sensitive (2F8) and platinum resistant (2F8cis)
murine ovarian cancer cell lines were exposed to chemo drugs in vitro.
Based on these findings we postulated that PD-L1 immune checkpoint
blockade in combination with cisplatin may provide therapeutic benefit in
ovarian cancer. In vivo, we have challenged n = 37 mice IP with 0.8
million 2F8 cells. Tumor-bearing mice were treated with cisplatin,
anti-PD-L1 antibody, both drugs or isotype control every two weeks for
three doses starting at day 14 post-inoculation. Study endpoint was
overall survival. Secondary endpoints were tumor CD8 infiltration,
changes in Th1/cytotoxic immunity. Tumors and ascites-derived cancer
cells were analyzed with flow cytometry. RNA was extracted from
splenocytes and analyzed with Nanostring using probes for n = 511 immune
genes.In line with in vitro results, tumor cells isolated ex vivo from
cisplatin-treated mice expressed increased PD-L1. Compared to control
treated mice, both Cisplatin alone and anti-PD-L1 alone increase overall
survival (p = 0.002 and p = 0.02, respectively). No increase in survival
was observed in anti-PD-L1/Cisplatin-treated mice, due to an
over-responsive immune cascade overwhelming the animal. Addition of
celecoxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, to the anti-PD-L1/cisplatin
combination was well tolerated and led to improved overall
survival.Conclusion: Ovarian cancer cells upregulate PD-L1 in response to
chemotherapy exposure in vivo and in vitro. Though effective
independently, combination cisplatin and anti-PD-L1 blockade did not
improve survival, likely due to cytokine release syndrome. Celecoxib
added to cisplatin and anti-PD-L1 improves overall survival. Anti-tumor
immunity in responder mice revealed a cytotoxic T cell mediated gene
signature. These findings reveal benefits and pitfalls of chemotherapy in
combination with immune checkpoint blockade and have high translational
potential for ovarian cancer treatment.

