Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative analysis of IGF1R/AKT/mTOR pathway using multiplex
immunoprecipitation and targeted mass spectrometry


Background: The quantitative measurement of protein expression and
modification status of AKT/mTOR pathway proteins is necessary for precise
characterization of the disease, monitoring cancer progression and
determining treatment response. A major bottleneck in the quantitation of
signaling pathway proteins is the lack of rigorously validated
methods/reagents and a reliance on semi-quantitative results from current
immunoassay technologies (Western blot, ELISA and Luminex). Mass
Spectrometry (MS) is increasingly becoming the detection methodology of
choice for proteins and their post-translational modifications (PTMs).
Immunoprecipitation (IP) is commonly used upstream of MS as an enrichment
tool for low-abundant protein targets. In addition to protein
identification, IP can be combined with targeted MS to quantitate
proteins of interest and identify protein-protein interactions. The
objective of this study was to determine the efficacy of multiplex IP to
targeted MS technique for measurement of the total and phosphorylated
AKT/mTOR pathway targets and to evaluate whether multiplex IP-MS assays
are as effective as the current single-plex immunoassay (WB and ELISA)
and multiplex Luminex assays.Methods: Serum starved HCT116, MCF7 and A549
cells were stimulated with IGF-1. Multiplex IP to targeted MS assays
(mIP-tMS) were developed and validated for absolute quantitation of
eleven total and ten phosphorylated AKT/mTOR pathway targets (IGF1R, IR,
IRS1, PTEN, AKT, mTOR, GSK3, GSK3, TSC2, p70S6K and PRAS40). Validated
mIP-tMS assays were benchmarked against currently available WB, ELISA and
multiplex Luminex immunoassays across three unstimulated and IGF-1
stimulated cell lysates.Results: In previous work, we showed that an
optimized IP-MS workflow for Protein A/G and Streptavidin magnetic beads
can increase target protein yield with low non-specific background. In
this study, we validated multiple antibodies for eleven total and ten
phosphorylated AKT/mTOR pathway targets using the optimized IP-MS
workflow. mIP-tMS assays allowed absolute quantitation for all eleven
total and ten phosphorylated targets in low to sub nanogram
concentrations across three unstimulated and IGF-1 stimulated cell
lysates. The benchmarking of mIP-tMS assays showed high correlation for
quantitation of total target relative abundance compared to WB, ELISA and
Luminex assays. However, for some phosphorylated targets, mIP-tMS assays
had low concordance to the other immunoassays possibly due to differences
in the specificity of anti-phospho antibodies used for each
assay.Conclusion: Overall, the multiplex targeted MS assay can be used
for identification and quantification of AKT/mTOR pathway proteins in
cancer cell lines or tissue samples. Major advantages of this mIP-tMS
assay are high confidence in target identity coupled with simultaneous
quantitation of multiple targets and their PTMs.

