Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel, selective, reversible inhibitors equipotent
against wild-type and C481S Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK)


Redx Oncology has developed novel, differentiated, reversible small
molecule inhibitors of BTK, combining current best-in-class potency with
improved selectivity profiles, which are suitable for oral, once daily
dosing, designed to be equipotent against wild-type and C481S BTK.BTK is
a member of the src-related Tec family of cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases.
BTK plays a key role in the BCR signaling pathway, which is required for
the development, activation and survival of B-cells. BTK inhibitors have
therefore been developed with the aim of treating B-cell malignancies
that are dependent on BCR signaling, such as CLL and NHL. Ibrutinib is an
irreversible BTK inhibitor that has been approved for the treatment of
CLL, MCL and WM.Irreversible and covalent reversible BTK inhibitors
specifically target a cysteine residue C481 within BTK. Following
treatment with ibrutinib, cases of secondary resistance have emerged in
both CLL and MCL patients. Acquired mutations within BTK such as C481S,
C481Y, C481R, C481F have been reported in the literature and clearly
interfere with covalent drug binding. It has been predicted that the
incidence of observed resistance will increase as clinical use outside
clinical trials expands over time. Here, we present our reversible BTK
inhibitor series demonstrating subnanomolar binding affinity for WT and
C481S forms of BTK, that inhibits formation of pBTK in both WT and C481S
BTK expressing cells. In addition, the compound demonstrated significant
in vitro potency against a number of lymphoma cell lines including
inhibition of BCR signaling and proliferation in OCI-Ly10 cells at
nanomolar concentrations. To further investigate the binding nature of
these compounds, PBMC wash out studies, measuring CD69 as a marker of
B-cell activation, were used to highlight the reversible activity of
these compounds.Some BTK inhibitors also inhibit ITK, which plays a
critical role in FcR-stimulated NK cell function that is required for
ADCC. ADCC is the mechanism that anti-CD20 antibodies, such as rituximab,
are believed to activate, and ibrutinib has been shown to antagonize this
mechanism in vitro. As rituximab-combination chemotherapy is today's
standard of care in B-cell malignancies, it would be desirable to have a
BTK inhibitor with high selectivity for BTK over ITK.At 1 M, our lead
compound is highly selective when tested against 469 kinase and did not
show significant inhibition against other kinases involved in BCR
signaling (e.g. Syk, Lyn). Furthermore, the compound has high selectivity
versus structurally related cysteine-containing kinases (including EGFR
and ITK) both in enzyme and cellular assays.Our lead compound has a
favorable in vitro safety profile and drug-like properties, displaying an
improved CYP profile to competitor compounds. In vivo PK demonstrated
good oral bioavailability and in vivo efficacy has been demonstrated.

