Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome microRNA profiling in functionally validated invasive
GBM cells identifies a novel set of microRNAs driving GBM invasion


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant brain tumor that
occurs in both adults and children. One of the key features that makes
GBM particularly difficult to treat is the diffuse invasion of tumor
cells into surrounding normal brain tissue. We hypothesize that direct
comparison of matched invasive (GBMINV) and tumor core GBM cells (GBMTC)
would facilitate the discovery of drivers of GBM invasion. However,
GBMINV cells that have migrated deep into normal brain tissues are
extremely difficult to obtain from patients as resection of normal human
brain tissue can result in debilitating morbidities. To overcome this
barrier, we utilized a panel of 6 pediatric patient tumor-derived
orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) mouse models to isolate matched pairs of
GBMTC cells from the visible tumor mass and GBMINV cells from the normal
mouse brains. Global profiling of 768 human microRNA using a real-time
PCR-based Taqman system identified 23 microRNAs were upregulated in the
GBMINV cells in at least 5 of the 6 GBM models as compared with the
matching GBMTC cells. Functional validation was performed by
lentivirus-mediated silencing of miR-126, miR-487b and miR-369-5p, the
top three overexpressed microRNA in the GBMINV cells. Compared with the
untreated parental cells and tumor cells transduced with non-target
control lentiviruses, silencing of miR-126, miR-487b or miR-369-5p
suppressed GBMINV cell (both as neurosphere and monolayer) migration in
vitro without affecting tumor proliferation and significantly inhibited
the in vivo invasive growth of GBMINV cells, which were pre-enriched
through 3 rounds of in vivo selections, into normal mouse brains. The
depth of the invasive fronts were remarkably decreased/eliminated,
exhibiting sharp, well-demarcated margins between tumor and normal mouse
brain. To identify target genes of the 3 microRNAs, whole genome gene
expression profiling from the same pairs of GBMINV and GBMTC cells was
performed and identified a subset of genes suppressed by miR-126 (n =
74), miR-487b (n = 46) and miR-369-5p (n = 2) that occurred in at least 4
of the 6 pairs. Among them, RDX was inhibited by all three microRNAs,
MANEA by miR-126 and miR-369, and a 32 genes (including PDK1, CREBZF,
PRKAA2, TMF1 and HSPA13) by miR-126 and miR-487b. In conclusion, our
novel strategy of utilizing functionally validated pairs of GBMINV and
GBMTC cells has identified a set of microRNAs that are selectively
over-expressed in GBMINV cells and allowed functionally confirmation of
miR-126, miR-487b and miR-369-5p as drivers of GBM invasion.

