Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum biomarkers in patients treated with stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) for prostate cancer


Purpose: The goal of this study was to determine the feasibility for
developing prognostic protein biomarkers in serum samples from patients
undergoing Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT) for organ confined
prostate cancers.Methods: 130 patients presenting with organ confined
prostate cancers were treated with SBRT to doses of 35-36.25 Gy in 5
fractions. Peripheral blood samples were collected prospectively from
patients at time 0 prior to radiation and serially after the first
treatment (24 hours), follow-up months 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 during the
first year, and every 6 months thereafter, for up to 3 years. Processed
study samples were analyzed by SomaLogic, Inc., using the SOMAscan
Version 3 proteomic assay. Statistical analysis was performed on
log-transformed data, with statistically significant differences
identified by evaluating false discovery rate corrected p-values. Protein
correlations were discovered with the Jonckheere-Terpstra (JT) test.
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software was used to analyze cellular
signaling pathways. PSA levels and clinical recurrence information were
prospectively obtained at each follow-up visit and maintained in an
institutional database.Results:Patient stratification by risk assessment
identified 27 low-, 71 intermediate- and 32 high-risk patients in the
study cohort. Proteins that function in cell proliferation, angiogenesis,
protein signaling, gonad development, and cell migration correlated with
Gleason's grade. CGA.LHB, KLK3, and CNTFR correlated both with tumor
stage and Gleason's grade. With a median follow up of 3 years, ten
patients experienced biochemical failures. While no proteins identified
as differentially expressed in recurrent patients achieved significance,
IPA pathway analysis of the top differentially expressed proteins
converged on the IL-6 canonical pathway.183 proteins were attributed to
radiation effects on differential expression in patients by comparing
pre-treatment to the 3 months post-treatment specimens. IPA network
pathway analyses of these paired samples revealed changes in cell
activation and signaling pathways, with the primary regulatory networks
associated with ERK1/2, NF-B, IFNG, ADIPOQ, histone 3, and histone 4. Of
particular interest, high adiponectin levels in patients presenting with
higher tumor stage decreased after radiation exposure, underscoring the
potential for this molecule as a signal for determining response to
radiation treatment.Conclusion:These hypothesis-generating experiments
show differential serum protein levels in prostate cancer patient cohorts
that have been stratified by risk factors and in longitudinal studies of
patients following treatment with SBRT. Candidate biomarker proteins and
molecular pathways have been identified for validation as potential
predictors of prostate cancer response to radiation treatment.

