Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring arrayed synthetic CRISPR for functional genomic screening


Over the past decade, RNAi has been the workhorse for loss-of-function
genomic screening. Although powerful, RNAi is hampered by a high rate of
false positives driven by off-target effects. New screening technologies
based on the CRISPR/Cas9 system are being rapidly adopted, and appear to
be significantly less prone to off-target effects. CRISPR/Cas9 screens
are conducted in pooled formats for positive and negative selection.
However, this format is not amenable to many assay types (e.g., protein
translocation assays). In an effort to expand and achieve a more
comprehensive approach to functional genomics, we explored the use of
arrayed CRISPR/Cas9 screening with synthetic CRISPR RNAs. Testing was
performed by reverse transfecting synthetic CRISPR reagents into HCT 116
cells stably expressing Cas9, thereby making the workflow analogous to
high-throughput siRNA screening. We first explored and optimized the
system with reagents targeting genes associated with DNA replication,
including geminin (GMNN). Loss of GMNN is known to result in enlarged
nuclei due to aberrant DNA replication, which is easily observed and
quantitated by automated microscopy. Analysis of individual cells by
microscopy also enables the identification of effects that are only
observed in a fraction of the population. After optimizing transfection
and assay conditions, we observed CRISPR-induced phenotypes similar to
siRNA knockdown. Surprisingly, these effects were observed within 72
hours and affected the vast majority of cells. These effects were even
more pronounced in some clonal populations of HCT 116 Cas9. Loss of GMNN
was confirmed by immunofluorescence, western blot, and enzyme mismatch
cleavage assay. We then expanded this approach to other genes with
similar success. By testing and validating the utility of synthetic
CRISPR on cells already harboring Cas9, we show that arrayed synthetic
CRISPR screening can be a valuable new tool for hit validation and
screening.

