Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of c-Met inhibitor tepotinib (MSC2156119J) and a
third-generation EGFR inhibitor can overcome double resistance mediated
by EGFR T790M mutation and c-Met amplification in non-small cell lung
cancer models


In clinical practice, acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
causes EGFR TKI treatment failure. Several resistance mechanisms have
been identified; EGFR T790M mutation and aberrant activation of c-Met
through c-Met gene amplification and/or HGF upregulation are the two most
common mechanisms. We have previously shown that combining the highly
selective c-Met inhibitor tepotinib with 1st or 2nd-generation EGFR TKIs
overcomes gefitinib resistance caused only by c-MET amplification.
Third-generation EGFR TKIs such as rociletinib have been developed
specifically to overcome T790M-mediated resistance to EGFR TKIs. We
hypothesized that combining a 3rd-generation EGFR TKI with tepotinib
could overcome resistance to a 1st or 2nd-generation EGFR TKI (e.g.
gefitinib) regardless of the mechanism of resistance.We assessed the
efficacy of tepotinib and a Merck-synthesized version of rociletinib
(MSR) as monotherapy or in combination in a NSCLC cell line xenograft
model (HCC827-GR-T790M) with an EGFR del 19 mutation, c-Met
amplification, and exogenous T790M expression, and in a patient-derived
xenograft model (DFCI081) with an EGFR del 19 mutation and c-Met
amplification, but not a T790M mutation.Single-agent tepotinib,
erlotinib, and afatinib did not show antitumor activity in
HCC827-GR-T790M xenografts and tumors progressed on treatment (median
tumor volume [TV] changes >73%). The combinations of tepotinib +
erlotinib and tepotinib + afatinib delayed tumor regrowth more than
single-agent therapy, but were no more effective than single-agent MSR.
In contrast, the combination of tepotinib + MSR had strong antitumor
activity in this model with double resistance due to c-Met amplification
and exogenous T790M expression, resulting in complete tumor regression
(median TV change -97%).In the patient-derived xenograft model DFCI081,
tumors progressed under single-agent therapy with the EGFR TKIs
erlotinib, afatinib, and MSR, as expected given that this cell line
expresses c-Met. In contrast, tepotinib induced complete tumor regression
as monotherapy and when combined with each of the EGFR TKIs (median TV
change -100%). Complete regression was maintained until the end of the
60-day observation period after treatment termination.These findings are
compatible with the hypothesis that combining tepotinib with a
3rd-generation EGFR TKI to overcome double resistance to 1st and
2nd-generation TKIs mediated by T790M and c-Met in NSCLC is more
effective than using either agent alone. Furthermore, whereas EGFR TKIs
were not effective in tumor models showing c-Met amplification and EGFR
del 19 mutation but not T790M mutation, ie resistance is c-Met mediated,
tepotinib monotherapy induced complete tumor regression.

