Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying a novel mechanism underlying the enzalutamide and
bicalutamide resistance in African-American prostate cancer patients


Recently, FDA approved the Enzalutamide as a drug for
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Recent studies reported patient
populations which are non-responsive to the Enzalutamide therapy.
Notably, African-American patients do not fare well for the
castration-therapies (Bicalutamide and Enzalutamide). To identify a new
therapeutic strategy for such populations, it is very important to
understand the mechanism underlying the resistance to Bicalutamide or
Enzalutamide. This would involve the use of an appropriate Bicalutamide
or Enzalutamide-resistant model. We hypothesized that heterogeneous
sub-populations contribute to Enzalutamide and bicalutamide resistance.
In this study, we generated cell models representing Bicalutamide- and
Enzalutamide-resistant phenotypes of primary prostate tumor of
African-Americans. We next isolated subpopulations of Enzalutamide
RC-Enz; Eht-Enz) and bicalutamide-resistant (RCbc; Eht-bc) cells. The
cell sub-populations were ranked into three major classes viz., (1)
highly stem-cell like (expressing several stemness markers BMI1 & CD133),
(2) less stem-cell like (express one stemness marker BM1), and (3)
non-stem cell like (negative for BMI1 and CD133). Notably,
African-American primary CaP cells exhibited higher number of stem
cell-like populations than Caucasian primary (22R1) and metastatic cells
(PC3). When compared, the African-American
Enzalutamide/Bicalutamide-resistant stem cell-like (RC-EnzCD133+/BM1+,
RC-bcCD133+/BM1+, Eht-bcCD133+/BM1+ & Eht-EnzCD133+/BM1+) cells exhibited
increased rate of proliferation, invasiveness and migration than
Enzalutamide-resistant Caucasian stem cell-like
cells(LNCaP95EnzCD133+/BM1+). We show that RC-EnzCD133+/BM1+ and
RC-bcCD133+/BM1+ cells resistant cells exhibit increased (i) promoter
activity of BMI1 gene, (ii) localization of BMI1 protein on PTEN gene,
and (iii) physical interaction of BMI1 tumor to E4F1 tumor suppressor
protein. This was validated in prostatic tumors of African-Americans. We
provide evidence that E4F1 under normal conditions negatively regulates
the activity of Androgen receptor (AR)-associated signaling and inhibits
growth of cells. We show that BMI1 protein sequesters E4F1 protein and
inhibits its check-point type or negative regulation of AR-pathway in
Enzalutamide and Bicalutamide-resistant cells. This leads to the growth
of stem-cell like tumor cells during the Enzalutamide and Bicalutamide
therapies. To conclude, we suggest that (1) E4F1-regulated AR-signaling
plays an important role in prostate cancer, particularly in
African-Americans, (2) ratio of E4F1 and BM1 expression has the potential
as a biopsy biomarker for deciding the disease phenotype and (3)
E4F1/BMI1 as a therapeutic target could be exploited to increase the
sensitivity to Enzalutamide and Bicalutamide therapies in
African-Americans.

