Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Hsp90 affects stem cell signaling in triple negative
breast cancer


Background: Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) exhibit dismal survival
rates due to their propensity to develop distant metastases. Heat shock
protein 90 (Hsp90) is a molecular chaperone that aids in the folding and
maturation of various proteins involved in breast cancer progression and
resistance to therapy. Many studies have also suggested that breast
cancer's ability to proliferate, progress, and spread is due to the
presence of a rare subpopulation of cancer stem cells. The aim of this
study is to investigate the efficacy of HSP90 inhibitors celastrol and
triptolide (from the Chinese herb Thunder God of Vine (Tripterygium
wilfordii) on stem cells as a novel therapy for TNBC.Methods: We
performed in vitro studies using the TNBC cell lines BT20 and MDA-MB-231.
We performed mammosphere assays to determine self-renewal capacity. For
in vivo, we injected BT20 cells into flanks of athymic nude mice and
treated with celastrol and triptolide at 3 mg/Kg bw and 0.25 mg/Kg bw,
respectively.Results: Both celastrol and triptolide significantly
suppressed mammosphere size and number. Furthermore, expression of breast
cancer stem cell markers DCLK1, ALDH1 and CD133 were significantly
reduced in the two cell lines following treatment. Flow cytometry also
suggested a significant reduction in DCLK1+, ALDH+ and CD133+ cells.
Recently, Notch signaling has been shown to be critical for self-renewal
of cancer stem cells. In cells treated with either celastrol or
triptolide, there was a significant reduction in activated Notch
intracellullar domain (NICD), and its downstream target Hes-1. However,
in cells where we ectopically overexpressed NICD, neither compound was as
potent as control, vector transfected cells in reducing 2D cell
proliferation or 3D mammosphere formation, suggesting the direct role for
inhibiting Notch activation as a mechanism of action for the two
compounds. Furthermore, inhibition of Notch signaling pathway by using
-secretase inhibitor DAPT shows further reduction in mammosphere
formation and Notch and its downstream target gene. We confirmed these
finding in vivo using BT20 tumor xenografts grown in athymic nude mice.
There was a reduction in the size and weight of tumors in mice treated
with celastrol or triptolide. Western blot data showed that there is a
decrease in activated Notch-1 protein and stem cell marker, DCLK1+ and
ALDH+ in celastrol and triptolide treated xenograft tissue.Conclusion:
Taken together these data suggest that both celastrol and triptolide
affect cancer stem cells in TNBC, in part through inhibition of Notch
signaling.

