Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem cell altruism may serve as a novel drug resistance mechanism
in oral cancer


Background: The mechanism of oral squamous cell carcinoma resistance to
platinum-based chemotherapy is not clearly known. Previous studies
indicated that glutathione (GSH), a cellular antioxidant may detoxify
cisplatinum (CDDP), a commonly used chemotherapy agent in oral cancer.
Our previous research in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) indicated the
altruistic behavior of ABCG2+ hESCs that secrete high level of GSH to
protect other hESCs exposed to oxidative stress (Das B et al. Stem Cells,
2012). Here we investigated if CDDP exposure lead to altruistic stem cell
reprogramming of ABCG2+ oral squamous cell carcinoma cells and subsequent
GSH-mediated resistance against CDDP. Methods: Two oral squamous cell
cancer cell lines SCC-25 and SCC-15 were treated with 3-10 uM CDDP for
three-days, and then subjected to flow cytometry and immunomagnetic
sorting based evaluation of ABCG2+ cells. The conditioned media (CM)
obtained from ABCG2+ cells were examined for GSH content. The CM treated
cancer cell lines were examined for resistance against CDDP toxicity.
Next, the post-CDDP treated ABCG2+ cells were examined for enhanced
stemness phenotype that corresponds to altruistic stem cell phenotype
(Das B et al, Stem Cells 2012). Results: We found that CDDP treatment
increases the ABCG2+ self-renewal capacity of SCC-25 and SCC-15 cells as
measured by serial transplantation assay. The CM of the post-CDDP treated
cells exhibited high level of GSH. When the SCC-15 and SCC-25 cells were
treated with CM plus CDDP, the cancer cells exhibited 10-15-fold increase
in resistance against CDDP toxicity. Next, the post-CDDP treated SCC-25
and SCC-15 cells exhibited enhanced stemness reprogramming phenotype
characterized by very high HIF-2alpha, Sox-2 and Nanog transcriptional
activity. Furthemore, we found increased expression of EMT (epithelial
mesenchymal transition) marker expression including Snail, Twist and
vimentin as evaluated by flow cytometry. siRNA HIF-2alpha treatment led
to marked loss in the in vivo self-renewal capacity of ABCG2+ SCC-25 and
SCC-15 cells. We then noted that post-CDDP ABCG2+ cells exhibited
reversible state, as after two weeks of culture, most of the cells either
differentiated or underwent apoptosis. Conclusions: These results
indicate that oral cancer cells exhibit altruistic defense mechanism to
resist the toxicity of CDDP. The altruistic defense mechanism involved
high secretion of GSH. Thus, we suggest that similar to bacterial
altruism as a mechanism of drug resistance, stem cell altruism may also
serve as a novel mechanism of drug resistance in cancer.

