Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defective collagen production by mammary epithelia leads to
increased breast cancer metastasis: a novel role of vacuolar ATPase


In cancer cells, vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase), a multi-subunit enzyme, is
expressed on the plasma as well as vesicular membranes and critically
influences metastatic behavior. Recently, we have shown that by
inhibiting a2 isoform of V-ATPase a subunit (a2V) in cancer cells, in
vivo tumor growth can be delayed through decreasing essential macrophage
population in breast cancer. Here, we investigated whether the same tumor
growth inhibition can be attain by deleting a2V in host tissue instead of
cancer cell. For this purpose, we deleted a2V gene in the mouse mammary
gland using MMTV-Cre lox system. Breast tumors were generated by
inoculating E0771 mammary carcinoma in mammary fat pad of a2V knockout
(KO) mice. We observed faster tumor growth in KO mice compared to wild
type (WT). KO mice tumors showed more infiltration and metastasis of
cancer cell as evident by the number of lung and liver lesions. KO mice
did not display the characteristic solid tumor phenotype of breast
cancer. Based on these observations, we evaluated expression and
production of collagen protein which is an important component of the
extra cellular matrix, in KO breast tissue. Trichrome staining showed
less collagen protein in tumorous as well as in non-tumorous breast
tissue of KO mice. Total collagen was measured by the hydroxyl proline
assay and analysis showed that KO mice have significantly (PIn cancer
cells, vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase), a multi-subunit enzyme, is expressed
on the plasma as well as vesicular membranes and critically influences
metastatic behavior. Recently, we have shown that by inhibiting a2
isoform of V-ATPase a subunit (a2V) in cancer cells, in vivo tumor growth
can be delayed through decreasing essential macrophage population in
breast cancer. Here, we investigated whether the same tumor growth
inhibition can be attain by deleting a2V in host tissue instead of cancer
cell. For this purpose, we deleted a2V gene in the mouse mammary gland
using MMTV-Cre lox system. Breast tumors were generated by inoculating
E0771 mammary carcinoma in mammary fat pad of a2V knockout (KO) mice. We
observed faster tumor growth in KO mice compared to wild type (WT). KO
mice tumors showed more infiltration and metastasis of cancer cell as
evident by the number of lung and liver lesions. KO mice did not display
the characteristic solid tumor phenotype of breast cancer. Based on these
observations, we evaluated expression and production of collagen protein
which is an important component of the extra cellular matrix, in KO
breast tissue. Trichrome staining showed less collagen protein in
tumorous as well as in non-tumorous breast tissue of KO mice. Total
collagen was measured by the hydroxyl proline assay and analysis showed
that KO mice have significantly (P<0.05) less amount of hydroxyl proline
compared to WT mice. (16.77 3.74 vs 43.67 6.89). To validate our
observation, we knock down a2V in HMEpC mammary epithelial cell line to
measure the effect on collagen production. After a2V inhibition, the
production of collagen in culture media was reduced. The data show that
for an efficient tumor growth, a2V is required in both cancer cell and
host tissue.

