Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of the mitochondria: An evaluation of the
transcriptional link between the antioxidant response and autophagy


Mitoquinone (MitoQ), a mitochondrially targeted chemotherapy induces
autophagy via excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Elevations
in ROS stimulate nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) in
breast cancer cell lines. Nrf2 is a nuclear transcription factor that
activates the antioxidant response element when under oxidative stress.
The aim of this study was to evaluate transcriptional and protein changes
associated with Nrf2 activation to identify potential links between
oxidative stress, autophagy and cell death. By suppressing Nrf2 and its
targeted antioxidant enzymes we should induce elevated ROS levels, which
can thereby alter cellular homeostasis and impact the ultimate fate of
cancer cells. In the breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 RNA was extracted
after 24 hours of Nrf2 or non-target pool (NTP) silencing and 18 hours of
MitoQ treatment. RNA was sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq and
differential expression was analyzed using DESeq in the statistical
program R. To avoid bias, raw read counts were filtered to remove low
counts possibly due to constraints of the instrumentation. To validate
efficient silencing of Nrf2 we confirmed that Nrf2 transcript levels
decreased and that there were observed reductions in transcripts
containing the Nrf2 transcriptional promoter, the antioxidant response
element (ARE) including FTH1, FTL, HMOX1, SRXN1, TXNRD1, NQO1, GCLC,
GCLM, GSR and SQSTM1. From there we validated RNAseq data with qPCR using
25 random transcripts and found significant positive correlation between
the two methods. Comparisons were first made between the MitoQ and DMSO
treatment by silencing (NTP or Nrf2). 2775 genes were differentially
expressed (DE) for MitoQ vs DMSO NTP siRNA and 1869 genes were DE for
MitoQ vs DMSO Nrf2 siRNA both at an |1|. We then compared the degree of
overlap in DE gene lists between the NTP and Nrf2 siRNA comparisons to
identify genes affected only by Nrf2 silencing in combination with MitoQ
treatment. 1405 mRNAs were common between silenced and non-silenced
sample sets, only 464 mRNAs were due to Nrf2 silencing alone. We are
currently performing pathway analysis on these transcripts to determine
the role of Nrf2 silencing with redox-active therapies. We are also
evaluating autophagic protein levels at later time points, 24 to 48
hours, to further evaluate the potential signaling between oxidative
stress and the autophagic response driven by Nrf2.

