Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concordance of genomic alterations by next generation sequencing
(NGS) in tumor tissue vs. cell-free DNA


Introduction:Genomic analysis of circulating tumor cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
represents a non-invasive method of assessing genomic alterations using
peripheral blood. We compared the concordance between cfDNA and tissue
biopsies across genomic alterations in 65 genes in this pilot
retrospective study.Methods:54 consecutive patients with cfDNA NGS
testing (Guardant360) were identified. Of these, 28 had tissue DNA NGS
testing (Foundation One). 65 genes were common to both assays.
Concordance was defined as the absence or presence of the identical
genomic sequencing alteration(s) in a single gene. The analysis included
non-synonymous DNA mutations, rearrangements, and copy number variants
regardless of clone percentage.Results:There were 14 lung cancers and 14
other advanced solid tumors. Including all alterations and variants of
unknown significance (VUS), the average number of alterations per patient
for tissue and cfDNA was 4.82 (SD 3.02) and 2.96 (SD 3.01), respectively.
Concordance between the two assays was 91.9%. Among only genes with
reported genomic alterations in either assay (n = 170), concordance was
12.4%. Concordance was similar when stratifying based on timeframe
between biopsies (median time interval between assays; 89 days). 21.5% of
alterations found in tissue were detected in cfDNA. 34.9% of alterations
found in cfDNA were detected in tissue. Across the 5 most common genes,
sensitivity and specificity were 40.0% and 94.2%, respectively (Table
1).Discussion:Concordance between tumor tissue and cfDNA NGS was 91.9%.
The cfDNA assay had high specificity, but low sensitivity. In addition,
more mutations were detected in tissue. Reasons for these findings may
include different sequencing techniques, spatial and temporal factors,
tumor heterogeneity, and inclusion of subclones.[AD and YC contributed
equally.]Table 1: Diagnostic Accuracy across 5 Most Common Genes
PPV: positive predictive valueNPV: negative predictive value

