Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unbiased detection of disseminated tumor cells in murine bone
marrow


Approximately 20-30% of prostate cancer patients develop disease
recurrence and metastasis years after initial therapy. This is thought to
be largely due to the presence of growth-arrested and chemoresistant
disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) in secondary sites, such as bone. Bone
metastasis is found in 90-100% of prostate cancer patients who succumb to
the disease. There are still many gaps in knowledge about the biological
mechanisms by which DTCs home to bone, resist chemotherapy, become
dormant, and escape dormancy to grow into clinical metastases. As such,
it is important to be able to detect, quantify, and study bone marrow
DTCs. In particular, it must be possible to do this in metastatic cancer
mouse models, which are critical to study the process of tumor
dissemination. DTC detection techniques currently exist, usually as
either a positive selection or negative selection methodology. Positive
selection techniques use markers or cell size to isolate and purify tumor
cells out of the bone marrow. Positive selection markers are generally
epithelial-specific, such as EpCam, E-cadherin, or Cytokeratin, and
therefore may miss cells that lose epithelial marker expression and may
gain mesenchymal markers. DTCs can also be as small as or smaller than
white blood cells, meaning that positive selection based on size may miss
some DTCs. Negative selection enriches for DTCs by removing blood and
bone marrow cells from the population, usually using cell-specific
markers. A popular strategy is CD45-based depletion, which removes white
blood cells, and theoretically leaves behind DTCs. In our hands, this
strategy causes loss of DTCs in the depletion process. To capture these
heterogeneous and rare DTCs, we have developed a strategy to detect DTCs
in murine bone marrow in an un-biased manner. The procedure entails
removal of the bone marrow via centrifugation from the long bones (femur
and tibia) of mice that have been injected with cancer cells (the
injection site may vary depending on the experimental setup). The bone
marrow then undergoes red blood cell lysis, and further centrifugation.
The white blood cells are then counted, and the bone marrow is spread
onto glass slides. The cells on the slide are fixed, permeabilized, and
stained (immunofluorescence and RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization can
be used). The staining can include any type of marker, including
epithelial, mesenchymal, disease-specific, species-specific, or other
biologically interesting markers, such as cell cycle markers. The
unbiased nature of this procedure is based on the lack of positive or
negative selection based on cell size or protein expression. Some DTC
loss is noted in this protocol, due to the centrifugation and staining
steps, but the cell population on the slide should include all DTC types.
Notably, this protocol can be used to detect human or mouse cells in the
mouse bone marrow and can thus be used in immune-compromise and
immune-competent mouse models of metastasis.

