Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progranulin targeting in urothelial cancer cells inhibits
motility, tumor growth in vitro and in vivo and sensitizes cells to
cisplatin


Introduction and Objective: Bladder cancer is a major public health
problem and affects more than 74,000 Americans with more than 16,000
estimated deaths in 2015. The majority of deaths are due to metastatic
spread, commonly to the lungs. Understanding the molecular mechanisms
regulating bladder tumor cell invasion and progression toward metastases
is essential for developing better therapies to treat bladder cancer
patients. The growth factor progranulin has emerged in recent years as an
important regulator of transformation in several cancer models. We have
previously established a critical role for progranulin in bladder cancer
as in fact progranulin acts as an autocrine growth factor and promote
motility and invasion of invasive urothelial cancer cells. In addition,
progranulin is upregulated in high grade bladder cancer tissues compared
to normal tissue controls suggesting that progranulin might work as a
novel biomarker with predictive value for bladder cancer progression.
However, whether progranulin is important for anchorage-independent
growth and in vivo tumor formation of urothelial cancer cells has not
been previously established.Methods: Progranulin depletion was achieved
by stably transfecting tumorigenic T24T, UMUC3 urothelial cancer cells
with a plasmid expressing an anti-progranulin shRNA. Progranulin-depleted
and control UMUC-3 and T24T cells were tested for motility, invasion and
anchorage-independent growth by soft-agar assays. Tumor formation in vivo
was assessed in various UMUC-3-derived cell lines by xenograft
andorthotopic models. Sensitivity to cisplatin was assessed by cell
survival curves. Progranulin expression levels in a bladder tissue
microarray were analyzed by HIC.Results: Progranulin-depleted T24T and
UMUC-3 cells were significantly inhibited in their ability to migrate,
close a wound and invade through Matrigel compared to control cells in
both serum-deprived and 1% serum media. In addition, progranulin
targeting strongly reduced the ability of T24T and UMUC-3 cells to grow
in anchorage-independency and form colonies in soft-agar. Significantly
progranulin-depleted UMUC-3 cells were severely inhibited in tumor
formation in vivo as assessed by both xenograft and orthotopic models in
immunocompromised mice. Importantly, progranulin depletion sensitized
UMUC-3 cells to cisplatin. Finally, progranulin levels correlated with
tumor progression in bladder cancer tissues.Conclusions: Our data are
translationally relevant as indicate that progranulin exerts an essential
functional role in the regulation of bladder cancer progression. Thus,
progranulin may constitute a novel target for therapeutic intervention in
bladder tumors. In addition, progranulin may serve as novel biomarker for
diagnosis and prognosis of bladder cancer.

