Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune profiling of malignant effusion from metastatic gastric
cancer patients as a predictive biomarker for immune checkpoint inhibitors


Many types of cancers are able to circumvent immune surveillance by the
host's immune system. It has been well established that many tumor
infiltrating T cells are in a state of non-responsiveness due to the
immune suppressive tumor microenvironment. The main mechanisms of T cells
that confer suppressive anti-tumor immune response in tumor
microenvironment could be regulatory T cells (Treg) and exhausted T
cells. In advanced stage cancer patients, detailed evaluation of Treg
cells in tumor microenvironment is hampered by limitation for enough
tumor tissue, because surgical resection for sample is not standard
treatment in these patients. In order to overcome this limitation of
research, we performed the studies using lymphocytes and tumor cells
isolated from malignant effusion including pleural effusion or ascites
from advanced gastric cancer patients.We collected 25 malignant effusion
specimens from advanced gastric cancer patients, including 20 paired
peripheral blood samples. Lymphocytes from malignant effusions and
peripheral bloods were analyzed for subtype of Memory, Activated T cell
and Treg cells, and expressions of inhibitory molecule using by flow
cytometry. To evaluate the expression of PD-L1, we used the tumor cells
of malignant effusions.Firstly, the percentage of CD8+ T cells in
malignant effusion seems to increase compared to those in peripheral
blood, but the percentage of CD4+ T in malignant effusion were
significantly lower than those in peripheral blood. Interestingly, the
percentage of CD45RO+ (Memory) on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells was significantly
higher in malignant effusion than peripheral blood. And Early activated
molecule (CD69 and CD25) on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells was significantly
higher in malignant effusion than peripheral blood. The percentage of
PD-1 expression on CD8+ T cells was significantly higher in malignant
effusion than peripheral blood (p = 0.017). And the percentage and MFI of
Treg cells (Foxp3+/CD4 T cell) tend to increase in malignant effusion was
comparable with those of peripheral blood but did not show the
statistical significance. Collectively, we found that T cells derived
from malignant effusion demonstrated the exhausted phenotype showing
highly expression of PD-1, compared to those from peripheral blood.
Finally, the PD-L1 expression on tumor cells from malignant effusions was
0.0412.78%. The upregulation of PD-1 on Treg cells and PD-L1 on tumor
cell of malignant effusions could be a potential predictive marker and
therapeutic target for immune checkpoint blockade.

