Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cetuximab inhibits migration, invasion, metastasis and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition but not proliferation via
GEP100-Arf6-AMAP1 pathway in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Recently, irradiation combined with Cetuximab (Cmab) is being
one of the standard therapeutic options against head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC), especially in advanced/recurrent cases. While
this concurrent chemo-radiotherapy is widely accepted and tolerated, Cmab
monotherapy has been reported to be unsatisfactory to treat HNSCC, and
detailed mechanism of Cmab to show such clinical efficacy is
unknown.Methods: To assess the impact of Cmab on proliferation,
migration, and invasion of HNSCC, WST assay, wound healing assay, and
matrigel invasion assay were incorporated in this study. Effects of Cmab
on the grade of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), expression level
of membrane type 1-matrix-metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), and activity of
EGFR-GEP100-Arf6-AMAP1 pathway, were evaluated using the
immunocytochemistry, western blot analysis and Arf6 activation assay,
respectively. Furthermore, In vivo efficacy of Cmab was evaluated in
highly aggressive and metastatic HSC-3-M3 cells using orthotopic
xenograft model in nude mice nu/nu.Results: Inhibition of migration and
invasion were observed in 4 HNSCC cell lines by Cmab application.
However, proliferation potential of HNSCC were not affected by this
chemotherapeutic agent. Increased expression of E-cadherin, with
decreased expression of N-cadherin and MT1-MMP, were observed after Cmab
treatment in vitro to suggest that Cmab may inhibit EMT in HNSCC.
Furthermore, inhibition of Tyr 1086 phosphorylation in EGFR, as well as
the inactivation of Arf6 coupled with suppression of both GEP100 and
AMAP1 expressions were observed by Cmab application. These results
suggested that Cmab might have the potential to suppress the activity of
EGFR-GEP100-Arf6-AMAP1 pathway. Furthermore, less metastasis of the
cancer was observed in the Cmab treatment group compared with control
group in vivo.Conclusions: Our study is the first to provide that Cmab
could affect HNSCC through inhibition of migration and invasion of cancer
cells, regardless of its anti-proliferative action. EMT inhibition after
Cmab application was also clarified in this study. Furthermore, our study
suggested that EGFR-GEP100-Arf6-AMAP1 pathway may have some role in the
invasion and metastasis of HNSCC. Future studies to further assess the
precise mechanism of Cmab against HNSCC are warranted.

