Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phenotypic cell-based screen to identify novel potential
epigenetic anti-cancer drugs from natural compounds


Epigenetic aberrations such as DNA hypermethylation and repressive
chromatin are validated targets for cancer chemotherapy. Since epigenetic
modifications are reversible, the goal of epigenetic therapy is to
reverse the abnormal alternations in cancer cells and induce tumor
suppressor genes reactivation, leading to cancer cell differentiation and
cell death. Thus, epigenetic enzymes are attractive drug targets in the
field of drug discovery. Many known anti-cancer drugs are derived from
natural compounds and there have been reports of natural compounds
modulating epigenetic activity. Therefore, it would be of interest to
screen natural compounds as potential epigenetic drugs. In an effort to
identify novel targets that can reactivate hypermethylated silenced
genes, our lab developed a phenotypic-based system, YB5. YB5 is a colon
cancer cell line generated by stably transfecting SW48 cells with a
vector containing GFP driven by a methylated and silenced CMV promoter.
GFP re-expression can be achieved by known epigenetic drugs that lead to
demethylation or induce active chromatin marks in the CMV promoter. By
screening an NDL-3040 library and grouping the molecules based on
chemical structures, we were able to identify three main drug classes.
The Moulder Center then synthesized 60 new analogs based on class #1's
lead's structure and 15 are positive in the YB5 system. The most potent
analog can induce 10% GFP+ cells upon 500nM treatment. All the positive
hits can also be validated in two other cancer cells (MCF7 and HCT116).
Consistent with GFP reactivation, endogenous hypermethylated genes can be
reactivated upon drug treatment. Also, GFP positive cells show higher
endogenous gene reactivation than unsorted and GFP negative cells. By
performing RNA-seq analysis upon class #1 top lead treatment followed by
connectivity mapping, we identified X as the class #1 drug target. The
on-target effect can be validated by using other selective X inhibitors
as well as a dominant negative X construct. Consistent with drug
inhibition, dominant-negative X can also reactivate drug targeted
hypermethylated genes. Proliferation assays showed differential
sensitivities of a panel of colon cancer cell lines compared to normal
cells. These drugs can also lead to G2/M arrest and GFP positive cells
are more likely to be arrested than GFP negative cells. Besides class #1
drugs, a novel class of LSD1 inhibitors was identified and the most
active drug can induce 15% GFP at 5uM. Consistent with LSD1 inhibition,
many known LSD1 target genes can also be upregulated. Like known LSD1
inhibitors, these compounds significantly inhibited proliferation of AML
cells. We also identified some known natural compounds that have
epigenetic activities, including arsenic trioxide, cardiac glycosides,
and toyocamycin. Thus, many novel epigenetic drug classes derived from
natural compounds were identified and can be developed by targeting
silenced gene expression.

