Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of resistance to the combination of a PI3K- and
Parp-inhibitor using a genomic sequencing approach


The objective of this study is to investigate the genomic and
transcriptonal changes that are associated with resistance to treatment
with the combination of a PI3K-inhibitor (NVP-BKM120) and a
PARP-inhibitor (Olaparib). Previous studies have shown that the
combination of a PI3K-inhibitor and a PARP-inhibitor synergistically
reduced the growth of BRCA-related xenograft tumors derived from patients
with TNBC. However, in clinical practice, primary and secondary
resistance to this combination is observed. We hypothesize that acquired
resistance is the result of a genomic evolution resulting from the
selection pressure exerted by the drug treatment.We used a genetically
engineered mouse model, K14-Cre BRCA1f/fp53f/f, where primary tumors had
been propagated in Cre-negative littermates and treated to point of
resistance with NVP-BKM120 or NVP-BKM120 plus Olaparib. For each of the
three tumors, we analyzed exome sequencing and RNA-seq using Illumina
technology at the stage of sensitivity (C), resistance to PI3K-inhibition
(B) and resistance to the combination (BO); i.e. for each individual
tumor a parental clone and its drug-resistant subclones, obtained in
vivo, were analyzed. We used the Mutect software tool to call somatic
mutations, VarScan2 to call somatic copy number variations, Cuffdiff for
differential expression analysis, and TophatFusion. Data were integrated
to identify genes for functional analyses using MetaCore and MSigDB
software tools.We found that tumors resistant to the combination drug
treatment in general had fewer gross genomic alterations (CNVs) than
parental tumors, indicative of evolution of a less variable subclone.
However, these tumors also displayed a higher number of non-synonymous
mutations than their parental clone. Pathway analysis showed that
somatically mutated genes in PI3K-inhibitor resistant tumors were highly
enriched for antigen processing and presentation, while those of tumors
resistant to the combination treatment were enriched for histone
modification pathways. Notably, the tumors resistant to PI3K-inhibitor
alone were enriched for Insulin-processing pathways. Genomic losses in
PI3K-inhibitor treated tumors enriched for the estrogen receptor pathway
(ESR) in breast cancer and DNA damage pathways.In conclusion, our
experimental design of analyzing isogenic tumors resistant to PI3K- or
combined PI3K- and Parp-inhibitors enabled us to identify genomic
alterations and pathways that explain the evolution to drug resistance.

