Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells from a syngeneic mouse model of
hepatocellular carcinoma demonstrate epithelial-mesenchymal transition,
decreased MHC I expression, and increased CCR7 expression


Metastasis is the leading cause of death in cancer patients, worldwide. A
better understanding of how cancer cells detach from the primary tumor,
escape from immunosurveillance while in circulation, and successfully
colonize distant parts of the body, is needed. Circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) are excellent tools to study this process. Using a syngeneic
hepatocellular carcinoma mouse model, we were able to isolate cancer
cells from the primary tumor and CTCs from the blood and establish novel
primary tumor-derived cell lines and novel CTC lines. Wound healing
assays revealed that CTCs have greater migratory capacity than the cancer
cells from the primary tumors. However, MTT assays revealed that CTCs had
less proliferative capacity than the cancer cells from the primary
tumors. Furthermore, molecular characterization of the cancer cells from
primary tumors and CTCs using Western blotting showed a decreased
expression of E-cadherin and an increased expression of fibronectin by
CTCs, suggesting that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) takes
place in CTCs in comparison to cancer cells from primary tumors. To
address the question of how CTCs may evade immunosurveillance, we
investigated the profile of expression of two cell surface proteins
involved in immune system function: the major histocompatibility complex
class I (MHCI)- required for cytotoxic T cell activation and subsequent
cancer cell killing, and chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7)- exploited by cancer
cells for immune evasion. Our analysis revealed that there is decreased
cell surface expression of MHCI and increased expression of CCR7 in the
CTCs in comparison to the cancer cells from primary tumors. These
findings indicate that although CTCs are not more proliferative, they
have acquired significantly increased migratory capacity than cancer
cells in primary tumors. This may be explained by their demonstration of
EMT. Furthermore, their loss of MHC I expression and their gain of CCR7
expression may help with evasion of killing by cytotoxic T cells and
result in enhanced metastasis.

