Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinations containing the aza-anthracenedione pixantrone show
preclinical activity in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma


Introduction. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the commonest
lymphoma and at least one quarter of patients still present with a
refractory disease or relapse after first line chemotherapy. Pixantrone
is an aza-anthracenedione with reduced cardiotoxicity, which has received
a conditional marketing approval in the E.U. as a monotherapy for the
treatment of adults with multiply relapsed or refractory aggressive
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Here, we evaluated the pre-clinical
activity pixantrone as single agent and in combination with a series of
additional anti-lymphoma drugs in cell lines derived from DLBCL.Methods.
DLBCL cell lines derived from activated B-cell like (ABC) DLBCL (U2932,
TMD8, HBL1, RIVA, OCI-LY-3), and from germinal center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL
(DOHH-2, SU-DHL-4, OCI-LY-19, KARPAS422, OCI-LY-8, OCI-LY-7) were
studied. Pix was used in combination with: bendamustine, ibrutinib,
idelalisib, lenalidomide, rituximab, vorinostat, bortezomib and
etoposide. Due to the mechanism of action, lenalidomide, bortezomib and
ibrutinib were evaluated only in ABC-DLBCL cell lines. Cell lines were
exposed (72 h) to increasing doses of the compounds alone or in
combination, followed by MTT assay. The Chou-Talalay combination index
(CI) was estimated using the Synergy R package: CI 1.1, no
benefit.Results. The median IC50 of pixantrone as single agent was 200 nM
among 11 DLBCL cell lines. GCB-DLBCL presented a trend for a higher
sensitivity to the drug than ABC-DLBCL (P = 0.05). Pixantrone was
evaluated in combination with targeted agents and with other chemotherapy
agents. The combination with the BTK-inhibitor ibrutinib was effective in
all five ABC-DLBCL (median CI = 0.7, range 0.53-1.04): synergism in 4 and
additive effect in 1. The combination with the PI3K-delta inhibitor was
beneficial in 9 out of 11 DLBCL (median CI = 0.7; range 0.1-1.35):
synergism in 8 and additive effect in 1. Benefit was also observed when
pixantrone was combined with lenalidomide in 2/2 ABC-DLBCL (synergism and
additive effect, 1 each), with the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody
rituximab in 2/5 DLBCL (synergism in both) and with the HDAC-inhibitor
vorinostat in 2/4 DLBCL. An additive effect was seen when pixantrone was
combined with etoposide in 2/3 DLBCL, with bendamustine in 2/4 DLBCL and
with bortezomib in 1/2 ABC-DLBCL.Conclusions. Pixantrone was very active
in DLBCL cell lines as single agent and benefit was observed when the
drug was combined with different additional anti-cancer agents. The
combinations with the BTK inhibitor ibrutinib and with the PI3K-delta
inhibitor idelalisib were the most effective and are worth of further
studies at pre-clinical and clinical level.

