Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Powerful target capture/NGS approach reveals extensive genetic
changes including SNVs, CNVs and gross chromosomal rearrangements in
colorectal cancers


Introduction: Accurate and comprehensive molecular analyses of genetic
changes in cancer tissues are critical for cancer management, treatment,
and genetic counseling. Study of the complete molecular profiles in
patient's blood, cacinoma tissue and surrounding pathological normal
tissues will help us understand the etiology of colorectal cancers (CRC)
as either hereditary or sporadic. In addition, this study will also
reveal somatic changes and possible targets for therapy. Multigene target
capture followed by deep next generation sequencing (NGS) provides a
powerful approach to simultaneously detect both single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) and exonic copy number variants (CNVs) in a time and cost
effective fashion.Method: DNA samples were prepared from blood, freshly
frozen normal surrounding and carcinoma or polyp tissues from 20 patients
with CRC and 10 patients with colorectal polyps. A custom probe library
containing 183 cancer related genes was used to capture the target
sequences followed by NGS with deep coverage (average depth per base is
1000X). Both SNVs and CNVs were analyzed based on in-house developed
analytical algorithm and bioinformatics pipeline.Results: This study
revealed extensive genetic changes in colon carcinoma tissues. At least
40% of the colon carcinoma samples harbor loss-of-function pathogenic
germline mutations in cancer related genes. However, loss of function
germline mutations were not found in the polyps. Germline missense
variants of unknown significance were identified in 60% of the polyps.
Multiple deleterious somatic mutations are identified in all carcinoma
tissues but only 1-2 somatic mutations per sample are found in the
polyps. Almost every carcinoma tissue harbor gross chromosomal
rearrangement, which is only found in about 50% of the polyp tissues..
NGS based CNV analysis revealed 2 germline events (FANCD2 E15-16 del;
whole ALK gene dup). Somatic CNV events are more frequently observed in
carcinoma tissues. Gross changes at chromosomal levels were also detected
by using the NGS CNV analytical algorithm. Recurrent somatic pathogenic
variants in genes associated with CRC, such as APC, TP53, and KRAS were
identified while novel likely pathogenic variants in novel genes possibly
linked to CRC were also discovered for further investigation.
Heterogeneity of carcinoma tissues within the same individual was
suggested by comparing allele frequency of different somatic mutations.
Numerous loss of heterozygosity was observed in both carcinoma and polyp
tissues.Conclusion: Target capture/NGS approach allows simultaneous
analyses of SNVs and CNVs with quantitative data to distinguish between
germline and somatic mutations. These analyses reveal abundant and
valuable molecular information for target therapy, patient management,
genetic counseling, and new insights of possible pathogenic mechanism

