Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent breast cancer risk and physical activity


Introduction: Physical activity reduces the risk of breast cancer.
However, the potential role of physical activity in recurrence of breast
cancer is not well established. The aim of our study is to examine the
association between physical activity and risk of recurrent breast
cancer. Methods: Data was obtained from the Global Epidemiological Study
(GES). The GES is an IRB approved multinational biorepository and
database to assess cancer and other disease risk factors and biomarkers.
In-person interviews of all subjects provided demographics,
family-history and other disease related information including age, BMI,
diet and physical activity. For statistical analyses, t-tests were used
for continuous variables and chi-square tests for categorical variables.
The association between recurrent breast cancer and physical activity was
assessed using logistic regression in univariate and multivariate
analyses. Results: From a total of 2435 breast cancer subjects 215 had
recurrent breast cancer. The average age of subjects without recurrence
was 55.62 years and those with breast cancer recurrence was 58.35 years.
In univariate analysis, subjects in the highest tertile of physical
activity were 39% less likely to have recurrent breast cancer compared to
those who reported no physical activity [Odds Ratio: 0.61, 95% Confidence
Interval: 0.40-0.93]. In multivariate analysis, subjects in the highest
tertile of physical activity were 45% less likely to have recurrent
breast cancer compared to those who reported no physical activity [Odds
Ratio: 0.55, 95% Confidence Interval: 0.34-0.89] after adjusting for age,
BMI and cancer-stage. A statistically significant dose-response for
physical-activity and reduced risk of recurrent breast cancer was
observed with a P-value for trend of 0.05. Conclusion: Our study suggests
that physical activity reduces the risk of recurrence of breast cancer.
Further studies with larger sample size are needed to confirm our
findings.

