Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a novel TIM3 binding partner and a key role for TIM3
on macrophages: Identification of specific antibodies capable of
converting immune-suppressive macrophages to immune-enhancing


Our Translational Science Platform uses an unbiased bioinformatics-based
approach to interrogate particular cell types within the tumor
microenvironment (TME). Given the correlation between high levels of
immune-suppressive macrophages within the tumor TME and poor patient
prognosis across a number of solid tumor types we focused initially on
developing novel immunotherapies to modify this cell type. We identified
10 targets as candidates for converting tumor-associated macrophages from
immune-suppressing to immune-enhancing.One of these targets was TIM3. To
date, TIM3 has been pursued mainly as a checkpoint target for T
cell-directed immunotherapies based on its expression on exhausted T
cells. Anti-TIM3 mAbs, generated by multiple groups, induce
responsiveness in T cells and demonstrate anti-tumor benefit in certain
mouse models. However, our macrophage-centric approach has identified a
previously unrecognized protein-protein interaction between TIM3 and one
of our additional macrophage targets. Based on knowledge of this
interaction, we were able to generate and select for panels of mAbs to
TIM3 and to its binding partner capable of converting macrophages from an
M2 to an M1 pro-inflammatory phenotype.In contrast to published anti-TIM3
mAbs, our particular anti-TIM3 mAbs lacked activity in T cell-based
assays, but promoted an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines with a
reduction or no effect in anti-inflammatory cytokines in a macrophage
activity assay. In this assay, monocytes were prepared from human
peripheral blood and cultured in the presence of M-CSF to bias toward an
M2 phenotype. Under sub-optimal stimulation with LPS or CD40L or HMGB1,
treatment of these cells with the anti-TIM3 mAbs led to increases in
pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1 and TNF.The conversion to an M1
macrophage by anti-TIM3 mAbs had downstream consequences on T cells as
demonstrated by mixed lymphocyte reaction experiments. In these studies,
the addition of anti-TIM3 led to a macrophage-dependent increase in IFN
from the T cells. To assess the impact of our anti-TIM3 mAbs in the tumor
setting, tumor histoculture experiments were performed. Tumor tissue
slices from ovarian cancer patients treated with anti-TIM3 showed an
increase in a range of cytokines and in this tumor setting the initial
sub-optimal stimulus was not required.Specific antibodies to TIM3 and its
binding partner that are able to promote a pro-inflammatory macrophage
phenotype have been generated. We are developing these as modulators of
the TME, to be assessed either as single agents or in combination with
other therapies such as checkpoint inhibitors.

