Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microarray analysis of gastrointestinal stromal tumor-originated
spheroids


Background: Although the main cause of gastrointestinal stromal tumor
(GIST) is gain-of-function mutations in the c-kit gene in the
interstitial cells of Cajal, concomitant genetic or epigenetic changes
other than c-kit are thought to occur during tumor progression. Although
sequential therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), imatinib
mesylate, sunitinib malate and regorafenib, is an effective and standard
treatment strategy for recurrent or metastatic GISTs, it is difficult to
cure recurrent GISTs with TKIs alone. It has been reported that viable
cells are often seen in tumors resected in response to imatinib therapy
and they may cause refractory tumors after interruption of imatinib in
responding patients with advanced GISTs. Therefore targeting these
persistent clones, which may have stem cell characteristics, can be a
novel treatment strategy to cure recurrent or metastatic GISTs. In this
study, we generated spheroids from resected GIST and performed microarray
analysis to identify gene sets typically expressed in GIST-originated
spheroid (GISTOS).Methods: According to the previous report of cancer
tissue originated spheroid (CTOS) (Kondo J et al. PNAS 108:6235-40,
2011), GISTOS was prepared from fresh samples of 6 primary gastric GISTs.
Total RNAs were extracted from 6 GISTOS and their original tumors and
utilized for cDNA microarray analysis. None of the patients had received
imatinib therapy before surgery. Gene expression levels were compared
between GISTOSs and their original tumors.Results: Hierarchical
clustering revealed two distinct clusters, and distinguished GISTOS from
original tumors. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed that the
gene sets CISPLATIN_RESISTSNCE, METASTASIS_STROMAs and
TUMOR_INVASIVENESS_2D were upregulated and gene sets CELL_CYCLE_G1_S and
MIR21_TARGETS were downregulated in GISTOSs compared with original
tumors. These gene sets appear to reflect distinctive features of GISTOS
that consists of enriched stem cell populations.Conclusions: We generated
GIST-originated spheroids. Microarray analysis revealed gene sets
up-regulated and down-regulated in GISTOS. These gene sets appear to
reflect distinctive features of GISTOS and may serve as novel molecular
markers of stem cells in GIST.

