Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation characterization of fusion-positive and
fusion-negative rhabdomyosarcoma primary tumors and cell lines


BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma
of childhood and comprises two major subtypes: fusion-positive (FP, most
commonly PAX3-FOXO1 or PAX7-FOXO1) and fusion-negative (FN). Our previous
study demonstrated that FP and FN RMS tumors exhibit distinct DNA
methylation profiles. The current study will explore these issues in a
larger, separate cohort of RMS tumors and compare DNA methylation in RMS
cell lines and primary tumors.METHODS: DNA methylation was examined in 48
RMS tumors (21 FP and 27 FN) as well as 10 RMS cell lines (5 FP and 5 FN)
on the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip platform.RESULTS:
Unsupervised clustering analysis using the most variable probes (top 1%)
in the 48 RMS tumors revealed that patterns of DNA methylation segregated
these tumors into two distinct subgroups; one subgroup contains all 21 FP
cases along with 2 FN cases and a second subgroup contains 25 of the 27
FN cases. A principal component analysis confirmed this close association
of methylation pattern and fusion status, and showed that the two
discordant FN cases map in a region between the FP and FN clusters. The
FP tumors showed substantially lower overall levels of methylation
compared to FN tumors. Application of an 11-gene methylation signature
developed in our earlier study classified these 48 cases into FP and FN
categories with >95% accuracy. In contrast to our previous findings,
there was a significant difference in the distribution of PAX3-FOXO1
binding sites between genes with and without differential methylation.
Though unsupervised clustering analysis indicated that FP tumors and cell
lines cluster as do the FN tumors and cell lines, a principal component
analysis clarified these relationships by showing that the two groups of
cell lines are located at a considerable distance from the two tumor
subtypes. Analysis of the most varied probes in the tumors indicated that
the vast majority of these probes are hypermethylated in all RMS cell
lines. In a complementary analysis with the most variable probes (top 1%)
in the cell lines, most of these probes are hypomethylated in all RMS
tumors, though two smaller groups of probes show differential methylation
between both groups of FP and FN samples.CONCLUSIONS: This study provides
an independent validation that FP and FN RMS tumors possess distinct and
characteristic methylation profiles. The enrichment of PAX3-FOXO1 binding
sites in genes that are differentially methylated between these FP and FN
tumors suggests that the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion protein may contribute to this
methylation pattern. These analyses also indicate that RMS cell lines do
not faithfully recapitulate the DNA methylation patterns that
characterize primary tumors.

