Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor associated macrophages can process antibody-drug conjugates
and contribute to antitumor activity in preclinical xenograft models


The primary mechanism of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) is the targeted
delivery of a cytotoxic payload via cancer antigen mediated
internalization. However, stromal components in the tumor
microenvironment may also play a role in ADC penetration, distribution,
and processing. Here, we study the potential roles of Fc-FcR interaction
between tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and ADCs in the antitumor
activity observed in xenograft models.In the CD30+ L428 Hodgkin lymphoma
(HL) model, the anti-CD30 ADC (cAC10-vcMMAE) and a non-binding control
ADC (h00-vcMMAE) showed similar antitumor activity over a two-week period
post treatment initiation. The antitumor activity was correlated with
payload release, as h00-vcMMAE produced intratumoral MMAE concentration
comparable to cAC10-vcMMAE in this time frame. Histopathology analysis of
L-428 xenografts revealed high abundance of TAMs, leading to the
hypothesis that TAMs can internalize and process ADCs for payload
release. Using immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry, we confirmed that
h00-vcMMAE bound to macrophage cell lines and TAMs. We further examined
the presence of TAMs in additional xenograft models and correlated that
to the antitumor activity of non-binding h00-vcMMAE. High levels of TAMs
were observed in the KM-H2 HL and BR620 breast cancer models that were
sensitive to h00-vcMMAE. In contrast, xenograft models with much fewer
TAMs (DOHH2, SU-DHL8, and Karpas-299) did not respond to h00-vcMMAE
treatment. Interestingly, h00-vcMMAF, releasing a membrane non-permeable
payload, had no activity on the L-428 tumor model. These data suggest
TAM-processed drug can mediate bystander tumor killing when the released
payload is membrane permeable.To evaluate whether Fc-FcR interaction
plays a role in the ADC uptake by TAMs, we mutated the Fc region of
h00-vcMMAE to decrease FcR binding affinity (E233P:L234V:L235, G1V1).
h00G1V1-vcMMAE lost its cytotoxicity activity in FcR+ THP-1 monocytes.
Furthermore, h00G1V1-vcMMAE could no longer mediate tumor regression or
growth delay in three xenograft models that are sensitive to h00-vcMMAE
treatment. These results suggest ADC-FcR interaction is required for ADC
processing by TAMs in these xenografts.These results suggest that TAMs
can contribute to ADC processing through FcR interaction in preclinical
tumor models. Moreover, TAM-processed membrane permeable payload can
mediate bystander tumor cell killing and contribute to ADC activity.
Although this phenomenon may be an additional mechanism of ADCs in vivo,
whether TAMs play a role in patients response to ADCs requires further
correlated studies in clinical trials.

