Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immuno-oncology agent CB-1158 is a potent and selective arginase
inhibitor and causes an immune-mediated anti-tumor response


L-arginine is a critical metabolite for T-cell receptor signaling and
subsequent T-cell proliferation, and depletion of arginine arrests T-cell
growth. In the tumor microenvironment, infiltrating myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs), macrophages, and neutrophils produce arginase,
which depletes local arginine concentrations and dampens T cell-mediated
immune surveillance. Pharmacological inhibition of arginase is expected
to restore arginine levels and allow T-cells to proliferate, thereby
leading to an immune-mediated anti-tumor response. CB-1158 is a potent
inhibitor of human arginase (IC50 = 98 nM). In culture, human
granulocytes release arginase and deplete media arginine to levels that
inhibit T-cell proliferation. In a co-culture system of human
granulocytes and T-cells, CB-1158 potently blocks granulocyte-derived
arginase activity, maintains extracellular arginine levels, and restores
proliferation of T-cells.CB-1158 has high oral bioavailability in rodents
and is very well tolerated. BID oral dosing of CB-1158 leads to
dose-dependent pharmacodynamic increases in plasma and tumor arginine
levels resulting in single agent anti-tumor efficacy in mouse syngeneic
tumor models including Lewis Lung carcinoma (LLC) and Madison 109. The
anti-tumor effects of CB-1158 are consistent with promoting a
proinflammatory tumor microenvironment. Following CB-1158 treatment,
multiple Th1 T-cell, NK-cell, and M1 macrophage-associated chemokines,
cytokines, and activation markers are elevated in the LLC tumor
microenvironment. The anti-tumor efficacy of CB-1158 requires an intact
tumor microenvironment since CB-1158 has no effect on LLC cell growth in
vitro. Furthermore, CB-1158 treatment of immunocompromised C57/SCID mice
bearing LLC tumors has no anti-tumor effect, supporting an
immune-mediated anti-tumor mechanism.Immunosuppression in the tumor
microenvironment can occur via multiple mechanisms, including arginine
depletion, and our data support the combination of checkpoint inhibitors
and arginase inhibition by CB-1158. In mice bearing LLC tumors, CB-1158
in combination with checkpoint inhibitors reduced tumor growth, increased
the number of tumor infiltrating CD8+ T-cells, and increased the level of
Th1/NK/M1-associated chemokines, cytokines, and activation markers in the
tumor microenvironment. In mice bearing 4T1 tumors, a tumor type that is
highly refractory to checkpoint inhibition, the combination of CB-1158
with anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 reduces tumor growth and lung metastases.
These results support the development of CB-1158, a first-in-class
arginase inhibitor, as a novel immuno-oncology agent targeting the
immunosuppressive effects of tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells.

