Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the mechanisms of hepatocyte replacement in breast
cancer liver metastases


The liver is a common site of metastasis in metastatic breast cancer and
is associated with significant mortality. Histopathological examination
of human breast cancer liver metastases (BCLMs) reveals that the majority
of these tumours present with a replacement growth pattern. In this
growth pattern, the breast cancer cells freely invade the liver
parenchyma and replace the resident hepatocytes. In advanced BCLMs,
breast cancer cells can eventually replace a significant volume of the
liver parenchyma which, ultimately, leads to organ failure and death.
However, the mechanism through which breast cancer cells replace the
resident hepatocytes is unknown.Here we set out to establish how this
replacement of hepatocytes by breast cancer cells occurs in BCLMs. To do
so, we established two in vivo models of advanced BCLM: (a) an
ER+PR+HER2- model using the MCF7 cell line, and (b) a triple negative
patient-derived xenograft model using breast cancer cells isolated from a
pleural effusion. We have also established an in vitro co-culture system,
where MCF7 cells are co-cultured with HepG2 cells, which is designed to
mimic the breast cancer cell-hepatocyte interaction observed in vivo.Both
in vivo models exhibit a histology that closely mimics the replacement
growth pattern of human BCLMs, where breast cancer cells replace
hepatocytes at the tumour-liver interface. To address whether hepatocytes
are killed by adjacent breast cancer cells in vivo, we evaluated
hepatocyte death by apoptosis using appropriate markers (cleaved-PARP and
cleaved-caspase-3). Surprisingly, although extensive apoptotic death of
breast cancer cells in the tumour mass could be observed, no evidence for
apoptotic death of hepatocytes could be found. However, we observed
extensive cell-in-cell invasion at the tumour-liver interface, where live
breast cancer cells enter the cytoplasm of adjacent hepatocytes. We also
observe a similar process of cell-in-cell invasion within in vitro
cultures of MCF-7 cells with HepG2 cells.Although cell-in-cell invasion
has been described as a mechanism of non-apoptotic cell death in breast
cancer cells, the role of cell-in-cell invasion between breast cancer
cells and hepatocytes in BCLMs has not been investigated. Our current
studies are focused in two areas: (a) we are using intra-vital microscopy
and time-lapse microscopy to investigate whether cell-in-cell invasion
between breast cancer cells and hepatocytes mediates non-apoptotic death
of hepatocytes both in vivo and in vitro, and (b) we are investigating
the molecular mechanisms that mediate cell-in-cell invasion between
breast cancer cells and hepatocytes.In conclusion, we present preliminary
evidence for a novel mechanism via which breast cancer cells could
replace hepatocytes in BCLMs. Further studies aimed at elucidating the
molecular basis of this mechanism may reveal novel targets for preventing
the replacement of the liver parenchyma by metastatic breast cancer cells.

