Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of MUC13 as non-hypoxic stimuli inducing HIF-1 in pancreatic
cancer under normoxia


Objective: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of deaths
occurring due to cancer, with an overall survival rate of just 5%. MUC13,
a transmembrane mucin, is aberrantly expressed in pancreatic cancer,
while an altered glucose metabolism is known to facilitate cancer cell
survival and proliferation. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1 ) plays an
important role in reprogramming of cancer cell metabolism by activating
the transcription of genes which encode glucose transporters and enzymes
involved in glycolysis. Recent reports suggest that several non-hypoxic
stimuli such as lipopolysaccharides, thrombin, and angiotensin II can
also increase HIF-1 under normoxia. Herein, we investigated the effects
of MUC13 expression on glucose metabolism and elucidated underlying
signaling mechanisms that might be involved in this process.Methods:
MUC13 null pancreatic cancer Panc-1 cells were used for the study.
Glucose and Lactate assay were performed in Panc-1 cells stably
expressing MUC13 (Panc-1-M13) and vector (Panc-1-V). Cell culture media
after 48 hrs was collected to measure the amount of unused glucose and
L-lactate concentration using glucose and Lactate assay kits. Immunoblot
and semi-quantitative PCR analyses were performed to check the expression
of protein and mRNA levels, respectively. Cell proliferation and colony
forming assays were performed to determine the effect of MUC13 on
cellular growth and cell survival.Results: Our results demonstrate that
MUC13 acts as a modulator of the glucose metabolism in pancreatic cancer
cells by regulating the expression and activity of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) and its downstream targets. We observed increased amount
of L-lactate production and glucose consumption in Panc-1-M13 cells as
compared to Panc-1-V cells. This facilitates metabolic alterations and
help tumor cells survive and proliferate under these conditions as
indicated by increased cellular growth pattern in Panc-1-M13 cells. Our
results demonstrate increased expression of the downstream targets of
HIF-1, such as cell regulatory (c-Myc), and cell survival (Bcl-2)
proteins, while decreased the expression of tumor suppressor/cell cycle
inhibitor (p-27) proteins in Panc-1M13 cells. Additionally, an increase
in the expression of a critical downstream target of HIF-1, Glut-1 was
observed in Panc-1-M13 cells.Conclusion: Our studies indicate that MUC13
acts as a key regulator of the metabolic process and facilitates
metabolic alterations in the non-hypoxic environment that help tumor
cells survive and proliferate under these conditions. However, further
studies are required to elucidate detailed molecular mechanisms that are
involved in MUC13 mediated metabolic remodeling in pancreatic cancer
cells.

