Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy and safety of highly selective novel IRAK4 inhibitors for
treatment of ABC-DLBCL


Interleukin-1 receptor associated kinases (IRAKs) are serine/threonine
protein kinases belonging to the tyrosine-like kinase (TLK) family. IRAKs
function as mediators of Toll-like receptor (TLR) and interleukin-1
receptor (IL-1R) signaling pathways and play an important role in innate
immune signaling. TLR/IL-1R stimulation leads to recruitment of MYD88, an
adaptor molecule, to the activated receptor complex, which then complexes
with IRAK4 and activates IRAK1. TRAF6 is then activated by IRAK1 leading
to NFkB activation. Recent studies have reported the occurrence of gain
of function oncogenic mutation (L265P) in MYD88 in 30% of activated B
cell diffuse large B-cell lymphoma(ABC DLBCL) and 90% of Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia (WM) leading to constitutive activation of IRAK4 and
NFkB pathway. Among the DLBCL subtypes (GCB, ABC DLBCL and PMBL), ABC
DLBCL is the most refractory. Inhibition of constitutive IRAK4 signalling
can be used as a therapeutic strategy to treat ABC DLBCLSmall molecule
inhibitors of IRAK4 were synthesized based on hits originating from
Aurigene's compound library. Structure guided drug design approach was
used to further improve the potency. Lead compounds demonstrated moderate
to very high selectivity towardsIRAK4 (S35 score of 0.03) when screened
against a large panel of 329 kinases. Aurigene's lead compounds have
excellent PK profile and good oral bioavailability in mice, leading to
good in-vivo activity in TLR4 induced cytokine release model. Selected
lead compounds were tested in a OCI-Ly3 xenograft model, which has a
MYD88(L265P) mutation leading to constitutive activation of IRAK4
signaling. An advanced lead compound has demonstrated excellent efficacy
in OCI-Ly3 model, with tumor stasis at low doses and tumor regression at
higher doses. The compound is well tolerated and has a good therapeutic
window as determined in a 14 day rodent toxicity study. In summary, a
selective IRAK4 inhibitor has been identified with excellent efficacy and
good safety profile.

