Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ETV6 represses Pax5 in early B-cell development


The goal of this project is to determine the role of ETV6 in early B cell
development and define how germline ETV6 mutations result in
predisposition to leukemia.Methods: B cell fractions- B cell progenitors
from wild type mice were purified using flow cytometry. Gene Expression-
RNA was collected and reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR was
performed to quantitate Pax5, Etv6, Ebf1 and actin transcripts. Chromatin
Immunoprecipitation- Cells were collected; proteins were cross-linked to
DNA with formaldehyde, cell lysates were sonicated and
immunoprecipitation was performed using 5g indicated antibody or
species-matched IgG as a negative control. DNA was recovered and assayed
by quantitative PCR.Results: Recent studies have revealed a role for ETV6
germline mutations (P214L amino acid change) in the predisposition to
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL). These mutations impair the
transcriptional activity of ETV6 in a dominant negative fashion. Here, we
demonstrate that Etv6 expression is inversely correlated to Pax5 and Ebf1
expression during B cell development (r2 = .9993; P = 0.0167). In a
murine lymphoid progenitor line (Ba/F3), ETV6, but not ETV6 P214L
overexpression significantly decreased Pax5 expression (P0.05). In
addition, Pax5 expression was increased by overexpression of EBF1, a
known Pax5 transcriptional activator, in cells expressing the ETV6 P214L
mutant (P0.05). This data suggests that loss of functional ETV6 is
necessary for EBF1 to induce Pax5 expression. To further interrogate the
role of ETV6 in regulating Pax5 transcription we measured the association
of ETV6 with putative ETS factor binding sites (GGAA sequence) within the
Pax5 transcription start site (TSS) using ChIP-PCR. ETV6 is associated
with the proximal GGAA site 72 base pairs upstream of the Pax5 TSS, but
not GGAA sites further from the TSS. In addition, the transcriptional
repressors SIN3A and HDAC3 were detected on the same regions of the Pax5
locus. We next determined the consequences of ETV6 mutation on the
recruitment of ETV6, SIN3A, and HDAC3 to the Pax5 locus by performing
ChIP-PCR in Ba/F3 cells that express a FLAG-tagged WT ETV6 or ETV6 P214L.
We detected association of ETV6, SIN3A and HDAC3 with the proximal GGAA
site upon expression of WT ETV6, but not ETV6 P214L. We conclude that
ETV6, SIN3A and HDAC3 are responsible for the repression of Pax5
transcription. Moreover, mutant ETV6 inhibits the ability of normal ETV6
to bind and recruit SIN3A and HDAC3 to the Pax5 locus. Aberrant
expression of Pax5 leads to myeloid lineage skewing and an increase in
biphenotypic and myeloid leukemias. Patients with ETV6 germline mutations
have a higher percentage of monocytes compared to unaffected family
members, which we hypothesize, is due to aberrant PAX5 expression (P =
0.008).Conclusions: ETV6 regulates Pax5 expression through the
recruitment of SIN3A and HDAC3 to the Pax5 locus. These findings are
significant because Pax5 misregulation results in a B cell development
halt, lineage infidelity and leukemogenesis.

