Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DK049, a novel acid-sensitive prodrug of gemcitabine: design, in
vitro properties and in vivo efficacy


Gemcitabine (Gemzar) is an anticancer nucleoside that is widely used to
treat solid tumors. Unfortunately, at its recommended dose of 1000 mg/m2
approximately 90% are deactivated by cytidine deaminase to the inactive
uridine metabolite and excreted in the urine. A further disadvantage
resulting in chemo-resistance is the low expression level of the human
equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (hENT1) on the cell surface of
cancer cells thus preventing substantial uptake of gemcitabine. In order
to circumvent these disadvantages, we designed an innovative gemcitabine
prodrug DK049 that a.) is capped at the amino group of the cytosine
moiety with acetyl benzoic acid preventing deamination, and b.)
incorporates a proprietary maleimide-bearing LADR linker forming a
stable, but acid-sensitive hydrazone bond. At its 5-OH position a
phosphate group was introduced rendering water-solubility. Following
intravenous administration, DK049 binds rapidly and selectively to
circulating albumin and utilizes the advantages of albumin-mediated tumor
uptake as well as cellular uptake by endocytosis (1).After cleavage of
the acid-sensitive benzoyl hydrazone bond, we could show that the acetyl
benzoic acid is decapped by carboxylesterase 2. In a head-to-head
comparison with gemcitabine (4 240 mg/kg on a weekly basis) in four
subcutaneous human patient-derived tumor xenografts (NSCLC: LXFE397,
LXFE937, ovarian cancer: OVXF899, and pancreatic cancer: Panc11159; 8-10
nude mice per group), DK049 (4 24 mg/kg gemcitabine equivalents or 8 18
mg/kg gemcitabine equivalents over 4 weeks) demonstrated distinctly
superior antitumor efficacy versus gemcitabine (p Gemcitabine (Gemzar) is
an anticancer nucleoside that is widely used to treat solid tumors.
Unfortunately, at its recommended dose of 1000 mg/m2 approximately 90%
are deactivated by cytidine deaminase to the inactive uridine metabolite
and excreted in the urine. A further disadvantage resulting in
chemo-resistance is the low expression level of the human equilibrative
nucleoside transporter 1 (hENT1) on the cell surface of cancer cells thus
preventing substantial uptake of gemcitabine. In order to circumvent
these disadvantages, we designed an innovative gemcitabine prodrug DK049
that a.) is capped at the amino group of the cytosine moiety with acetyl
benzoic acid preventing deamination, and b.) incorporates a proprietary
maleimide-bearing LADR linker forming a stable, but acid-sensitive
hydrazone bond. At its 5-OH position a phosphate group was introduced
rendering water-solubility. Following intravenous administration, DK049
binds rapidly and selectively to circulating albumin and utilizes the
advantages of albumin-mediated tumor uptake as well as cellular uptake by
endocytosis (1).After cleavage of the acid-sensitive benzoyl hydrazone
bond, we could show that the acetyl benzoic acid is decapped by
carboxylesterase 2. In a head-to-head comparison with gemcitabine (4 240
mg/kg on a weekly basis) in four subcutaneous human patient-derived tumor
xenografts (NSCLC: LXFE397, LXFE937, ovarian cancer: OVXF899, and
pancreatic cancer: Panc11159; 8-10 nude mice per group), DK049 (4 24
mg/kg gemcitabine equivalents or 8 18 mg/kg gemcitabine equivalents over
4 weeks) demonstrated distinctly superior antitumor efficacy versus
gemcitabine (p < 0.05). In the LXFE937 and OVXF899 model, DK049 induced
long-term significant regressions for several weeks after end of therapy
without any loss in body weight or bone marrow toxicity. In summary,
these results show a superior long-term antitumor efficacy of DK049
compared to gemcitabine at a significantly reduced dose.(1) Felix Kratz,
Albumin as a drug carrier: design of prodrugs, drug conjugates and
nanoparticles. J Control Release 8;132:171-83, 2008.

