Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective CDK7 inhibitors suppress super enhancer-genes, induce
massive apoptosis in acute myeloid leukemia and demonstrate durable in
vivo efficacy


CDK7 acts bi-functionally as a CDK-activating kinase (CAK) controlling
proliferation and as a transcriptional kinase phosphorylating the CTD-RNA
Pol II, driving efficient transcriptional processes. CDK7 has recently
emerged as an attractive gene control target in cancers addicted to
oncogenic transcription factors, regulated by super-enhancers (SEs),
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2014; Chipumuro et al., 2014; Christensen 2014; Wang
2015). Acute Myeloid Leukemias (AML) harbor a heterogeneous set of
mutations resulting in an altered cell state and aberrant epigenetic and
transcriptional control, yet lack targeted therapeutic options. Employing
our SE-platform technology we reveal mechanistic insights underlying the
vulnerability of AML to gene control modulation via selective CDK7
inhibition.We describe first-in-class CDK7 inhibitors that covalently
target a cysteine outside the kinase domain, resulting in sustained,
highly selective inhibition. Several lead compounds exhibit significant
biochemical potency (Ki = 10-60 nM and kinact = 5-13/h) and exquisite
selectivity when profiled against >400 other kinases. In a cancer cell
line panel, acute leukemias emerged among the most sensitive to CDK7
inhibition. Moreover, AML cell lines undergo rapid and robust apoptosis
within 24 hours. This is preceded by CDK7 target engagement and
concomitant loss of P-CTD-RNAPolII suggesting the primary consequence of
CDK7 inhibition is the impaired transcriptional activity of CDK7. Further
investigation of the transcriptional consequences of CDK7 inhibition
point to a reliance on key disease relevant SE-genes (e.g. MYB, HOX10A
and MYC) that are predominantly reduced.Given the covalent mechanism of
our CDK7 inhibitors and PK profile in vivo, we use short treatments in
vitro with subsequent washout of free drug to model intermittent dosing
regimens in vivo. We demonstrate that short drug exposures maintain a
robust irreversible apoptotic response in leukemia cells. In contrast,
treated non-transformed cells recover from a transient G2/M arrest
followed by re-synthesis of free CDK7 and no apoptosis/cell death. We
have extended these findings to in vivo experiments whereby intermittent
dosing in AML patient derived xenograft models (PDX) maintains efficacy
(reducing human CD45+ leukemia cells to CDK7 acts bi-functionally as a
CDK-activating kinase (CAK) controlling proliferation and as a
transcriptional kinase phosphorylating the CTD-RNA Pol II, driving
efficient transcriptional processes. CDK7 has recently emerged as an
attractive gene control target in cancers addicted to oncogenic
transcription factors, regulated by super-enhancers (SEs), (Kwiatkowski
et al., 2014; Chipumuro et al., 2014; Christensen 2014; Wang 2015). Acute
Myeloid Leukemias (AML) harbor a heterogeneous set of mutations resulting
in an altered cell state and aberrant epigenetic and transcriptional
control, yet lack targeted therapeutic options. Employing our SE-platform
technology we reveal mechanistic insights underlying the vulnerability of
AML to gene control modulation via selective CDK7 inhibition.We describe
first-in-class CDK7 inhibitors that covalently target a cysteine outside
the kinase domain, resulting in sustained, highly selective inhibition.
Several lead compounds exhibit significant biochemical potency (Ki =
10-60 nM and kinact = 5-13/h) and exquisite selectivity when profiled
against >400 other kinases. In a cancer cell line panel, acute leukemias
emerged among the most sensitive to CDK7 inhibition. Moreover, AML cell
lines undergo rapid and robust apoptosis within 24 hours. This is
preceded by CDK7 target engagement and concomitant loss of P-CTD-RNAPolII
suggesting the primary consequence of CDK7 inhibition is the impaired
transcriptional activity of CDK7. Further investigation of the
transcriptional consequences of CDK7 inhibition point to a reliance on
key disease relevant SE-genes (e.g. MYB, HOX10A and MYC) that are
predominantly reduced.Given the covalent mechanism of our CDK7 inhibitors
and PK profile in vivo, we use short treatments in vitro with subsequent
washout of free drug to model intermittent dosing regimens in vivo. We
demonstrate that short drug exposures maintain a robust irreversible
apoptotic response in leukemia cells. In contrast, treated
non-transformed cells recover from a transient G2/M arrest followed by
re-synthesis of free CDK7 and no apoptosis/cell death. We have extended
these findings to in vivo experiments whereby intermittent dosing in AML
patient derived xenograft models (PDX) maintains efficacy (reducing human
CD45+ leukemia cells to <1%) and significant survival advantage. We have
established a PD assay by measuring target engagement of CDK7 both in
mouse xenografts and human blood to support: 1) establishing a
PK-PD-efficacy relationship 2) quantifying target engagement during dose
escalation in a Ph1 clinical trial.In summary, we describe first-in-class
CDK7 inhibitors that are potent and selective and lead to durable,
complete responses in PDX models of AML. These data support the rationale
for advancing one or more members of this class of compounds toward
clinical development.

