Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurins are endocytosed by KRAS-mutant cells via macropinocytosis


Background:BIND-014 is a novel prostate-specific membrane antigen
(PSMA)-targeted Accurin (polymeric nanoparticle) encapsulating docetaxel.
In a Phase 2 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) trial, BIND-014
demonstrated promising anti-tumor activity in patients with tumors
expressing KRAS mutations (mutated Kirsten ras oncogene homolog). KRAS
mutations in NSCLC are generally associated with poor response to
currently available drug therapy regimens, including docetaxel. Mutant
KRAS stimulates an endocytic process known as macropinocytosis, in which
extracellular fluid and its constituents are internalized non-selectively
into cells. We hypothesized that Accurins preferentially accumulate in
KRAS-mutant cells via macropinocytosis, potentially contributing to
anti-tumor activity of BIND-014 in KRAS-mutant cancer.Methods:To
determine whether BIND-014 is internalized in cells with high levels of
macropinocytosis, we treated KRAS-mutant, macropinocytosis-high human
NSCLC A549 cells and human bladder cancer T24 cells with PSMA targeted
Accurins in which docetaxel was replaced by a fluorescent label, and
visualized co-localization with fluorescently labeled markers of
macropinocytosis, dextran and BSA, by confocal microscopy. In addition,
we quantified the levels of labeled Accurin uptake in A549 cells by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and compared them to labeled
Accurin internalization in macropinocytosis-low, KRAS-wild-type BxPC3
cells. We further tested the macropinocytosis-dependence of labeled
Accurin uptake by treating A549 and BxPC3 cells with the macropinocytosis
inhibitor EIPA and measuring changes in Accurin internalization by
FACS.Results:Confocal microscopy analysis of A549 and T24 cells
co-treated with labeled Accurin and dextran or BSA showed substantial
accumulation of Accurin in dextran- and BSA-positive macropinosomes.
Moreover, FACS analysis of A549 cells treated with 0.1 ug and 1.0 ug of
labeled Accurin revealed 60.4% and 81.8% uptake, respectively, that could
be reduced to 3.6% and 3.7% with 50 uM EIPA. By contrast, BxPC3 cells
showed 1.8% and 1.5% uptake of 0.1 ug and 1.0 ug labeled Accurin that was
reduced to 1.3% and 0.9%, respectively, with 50 uM EIPA by FACS
analysis.Conclusions:These data demonstrate that Accurins preferentially
enter human cancer cells that display high levels of macropinocytosis and
co-localize with several markers of macropinosomes. Moreover, Accurin
internalization can be inhibited in macropinocytosis-positive cells with
an established chemical inhibitor of macropinocytosis. BIND-014 may
therefore preferentially accumulate in KRAS-mutant NSCLC tumors, thereby
contributing to the clinical activity seen to date in this tumor type.

