Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling a prototypical type I ovarian carcinoma in the mouse
based on oviductal versus ovarian epithelial transformation: which is
superior


Type I ovarian carcinomas are relatively indolent tumors that are
nonetheless deadly if detected too late. Endometrioid carcinoma (EC) is a
prototypical Type I ovarian cancer subtype. Existing mouse models of the
disease based on transformation of the ovarian surface epithelium (OSE)
take advantage of known EC genetic signatures but fail to capture fully
the clinical disease progression and tumor phenotype. We previously
described a mouse ovarian EC model in which the Apc and Pten tumor
suppressor genes are conditionally deleted in the OSE via bursal
injection of adenovirus expressing Cre recombinase (AdCre). We now report
a new mouse model of EC in which the Ovgp1 (oviductal glycoprotein)
promoter regulates expression of tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase
specifically in the mouse oviductal epithelium (equivalent to human
fallopian tube epithelium [FTE]), and not in the OSE or endometrium.
Ovgp1-iCreERT2;Apcfl/fl;Ptenfl/fl mice treated with tamoxifen (TAM)
develop oviductal tumors over months rather than weeks. The oviductal EC
morphology closely resembles that of human ovarian ECs, with overt gland
formation throughout, whereas ovarian bursal injection of AdCre in
Ovgp1-iCreERT2;Apcfl/fl;Ptenfl/fl mice results in OSE-derived ECs that
are poorly differentiated and include a prominent spindle cell component,
consistent with our prior work. OSE-derived tumors progress rapidly, with
none of the mice surviving beyond 14 weeks post-AdCre injection.
Littermates with FTE-derived tumors survive much longer (>30 weeks post
TAM). The slow progression and late (typically >16 weeks post TAM)
metastasis to ovary and omentum associated with the FTE-derived tumors
are more akin to the relatively indolent behavior characteristic of Type
I ovarian carcinoma in humans. To further evaluate which of the two types
of mouse tumors more closely resemble human ovarian tumors, we profiled
gene expression in 6 FTE- and 5 OSE-derived Apc/Pten-deficient tumors,
and compared the groups to each other and to data from 99 human ovarian
carcinomas we analyzed previously (including 37 endometrioid, 41 serous,
and 13 clear cell, and 8 mucinous carcinomas). Based on gene expression,
the FTE-derived tumors are more correlated to every class of human
ovarian tumors (p Type I ovarian carcinomas are relatively indolent
tumors that are nonetheless deadly if detected too late. Endometrioid
carcinoma (EC) is a prototypical Type I ovarian cancer subtype. Existing
mouse models of the disease based on transformation of the ovarian
surface epithelium (OSE) take advantage of known EC genetic signatures
but fail to capture fully the clinical disease progression and tumor
phenotype. We previously described a mouse ovarian EC model in which the
Apc and Pten tumor suppressor genes are conditionally deleted in the OSE
via bursal injection of adenovirus expressing Cre recombinase (AdCre). We
now report a new mouse model of EC in which the Ovgp1 (oviductal
glycoprotein) promoter regulates expression of tamoxifen-inducible Cre
recombinase specifically in the mouse oviductal epithelium (equivalent to
human fallopian tube epithelium [FTE]), and not in the OSE or
endometrium. Ovgp1-iCreERT2;Apcfl/fl;Ptenfl/fl mice treated with
tamoxifen (TAM) develop oviductal tumors over months rather than weeks.
The oviductal EC morphology closely resembles that of human ovarian ECs,
with overt gland formation throughout, whereas ovarian bursal injection
of AdCre in Ovgp1-iCreERT2;Apcfl/fl;Ptenfl/fl mice results in OSE-derived
ECs that are poorly differentiated and include a prominent spindle cell
component, consistent with our prior work. OSE-derived tumors progress
rapidly, with none of the mice surviving beyond 14 weeks post-AdCre
injection. Littermates with FTE-derived tumors survive much longer (>30
weeks post TAM). The slow progression and late (typically >16 weeks post
TAM) metastasis to ovary and omentum associated with the FTE-derived
tumors are more akin to the relatively indolent behavior characteristic
of Type I ovarian carcinoma in humans. To further evaluate which of the
two types of mouse tumors more closely resemble human ovarian tumors, we
profiled gene expression in 6 FTE- and 5 OSE-derived Apc/Pten-deficient
tumors, and compared the groups to each other and to data from 99 human
ovarian carcinomas we analyzed previously (including 37 endometrioid, 41
serous, and 13 clear cell, and 8 mucinous carcinomas). Based on gene
expression, the FTE-derived tumors are more correlated to every class of
human ovarian tumors (p < 2 X106 in all 4 comparisons), with highest
correlation to human ECs (particularly those with mutant CTNNB1) and
mucinous carcinomas. This new model of EC, based on transformation of
Mullerian epithelium rather than the OSE, will likely prove more suitable
for translational applications, including pre-clinical testing of novel
therapeutics for ovarian EC.

