Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The addition of bevacizumab to chemoimmunotherapy prolongs
progression-free survival in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) through modulation of the microenvironment


Introduction. First-line chemoimmunotherapy (CIT) has significantly
increased the complete remission (CR) rate for patients with CLL;
however, relapse is a common event and strategies aimed at eradicating
disease more effectively are needed. Vascular Epithelial Growth Factor
(VEGF) plays a crucial role in the cross talk between CLL B cells and
their microenvironment. In addition low baseline VEGF levels predict a
better response to CIT. Testing the combination of an anti-VEGF agent
with CIT was therefore assessed by us in upfront CLL patients.Methods.
Here we report the results of a phase II open-label randomized trial
comparing the combination of bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF monoclonal
antibody, with pentostatin, cyclophosphamide and rituximab (PCR-B) to PCR
alone as front-line therapy in previously untreated patients with CLL.
VEGF, b-fibroblast growth factor (FGF), thrombospondin (TSP)-1, chemokine
ligand (CCL)-3 and CCL-4 plasma levels were measured at baseline and at
time of response assessment.Results. Between 01/2009 and 01/2013, 62
patients were accrued in the study, 32 in the arm A (PCR-B) and 30 in arm
B (PCR alone). A higher rate of grade 3-4 cardiovascular toxicity was
observed with the use of PCR-B (34% vs 0%, pIntroduction. First-line
chemoimmunotherapy (CIT) has significantly increased the complete
remission (CR) rate for patients with CLL; however, relapse is a common
event and strategies aimed at eradicating disease more effectively are
needed. Vascular Epithelial Growth Factor (VEGF) plays a crucial role in
the cross talk between CLL B cells and their microenvironment. In
addition low baseline VEGF levels predict a better response to CIT.
Testing the combination of an anti-VEGF agent with CIT was therefore
assessed by us in upfront CLL patients.Methods. Here we report the
results of a phase II open-label randomized trial comparing the
combination of bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody, with
pentostatin, cyclophosphamide and rituximab (PCR-B) to PCR alone as
front-line therapy in previously untreated patients with CLL. VEGF,
b-fibroblast growth factor (FGF), thrombospondin (TSP)-1, chemokine
ligand (CCL)-3 and CCL-4 plasma levels were measured at baseline and at
time of response assessment.Results. Between 01/2009 and 01/2013, 62
patients were accrued in the study, 32 in the arm A (PCR-B) and 30 in arm
B (PCR alone). A higher rate of grade 3-4 cardiovascular toxicity was
observed with the use of PCR-B (34% vs 0%, p<0.001): this included 7
cases of hypertension, 2 cases of congestive heart failure, 1
myocarditis, and 1 case of torsade de point. A higher CR rate (50% vs
33%, p = 0.21) and a significantly longer median progression-free (p =
0.04) and treatment-free (p = 0.05) survival were achieved with the use
of PCR-B. No difference in chemokine kinetics was observed between the 2
arms, except for VEGF, which significantly increased after PCR-B. In the
PCR-B arm, chemokine kinetics for CCL-3 (median drop 5.0 vs. median drop
31.8, respectively; p = 0.02) and CCL-4 (median drop 23.8 vs. median drop
120.9, respectively; p = 0.01) were significantly associated with
achievement of CR. No significant correlations were found between
cytokine plasma levels and responses for patients treated in the PCR only
arm.Conclusions. The addition of bevacizumab to CIT is safe and
effective, although associated with higher cardiovascular toxicity, in
particular hypertension. The addition of bevacizumab produces higher CR
rates, translating into improved progression-free survival, and is
associated with decreased plasma levels of CCL-3 and CCL-4.

