Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic BRAFV600E drives stem cell niche factors-independent
growth and tumorigenic transformation in colon organoids


Herein, we report a model for how BRAF mutations, in contrast to KRAS
mutations, specifically associate with and induce, in mouse colon
organoids without a microenvironment, the phenotype of human sporadic
right-sided colon adenocarcinomas (COAD). The human BRAF mutant COAD are
particularly distinguished by having an increased incidence of promoter
CpG island methylation, termed CpG island methylator phenotype
(CIMP)-High. This latter phenotype contrasts with the majority of the
COAD which are classified in the CIMP-low to intermediate groups and have
mostly KRAS mutations. To understand how these mutations influence tumor
evolution and the methylation landscape, we modeled the early
carcinogenesis of colorectal cancer by inducing BRAFV600E and KRASG12D
mutations individually in 3D organoids prepared from mouse proximal
colon. The induction of BRAFV600E mutation, but not KRASG12D mutation,
showed various features of progressive transformation. In vitro induction
of BRAFV600E drove the organoids to derive cystic changes in morphology
and promoted adoption of a stem cell niche independency characterized by
growth in the absence of added stem cell niche factors including Wnt3a,
R-Spondin, and Noggin. This independency is not due to increased
secretion of niche factors by the Paneth-like cells in BRAFV600E mutant
organoids. In addition, BRAFV600E organoids showed dysplastic changes
such as high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and abnormal budding. The most
exciting finding is that induction of BRAFV600E mutation, but not
KRASG12D mutation, induced complete transformation of the organoids
forming xenograft tumors in NOD/SCID mice. The tumors exhibit
histological characteristics of human mucinous adenocarcinoma, which is
the tumor type highly associated with BRAFV600E mutation in human COAD.
Gene expression analyses revealed up-regulation of intestinal stem cell
signature genes and down-regulation of genes related to intestinal
differentiation in BRAFV600E organoids. In addition, BRAFV600E organoids
showed increased expression levels of Wnt pathway target genes indicating
an enhanced and sustained Wnt-signaling. Analyses of CpG-island
methylation in a panel of genes showed increased CpG-island methylation
only in the BRAFV600E mutant organoids. In conclusion, in mouse colon
organoids, BRAFV600E drives a human right-sided COAD phenotype with
adoption of a stem cell niche independency, activation of the Wnt
pathway, and induction of CpG island methylation.

