Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 inhibition as chemoprevention in a chemically induced mouse
model of HNSCC


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is frequently
fatal due to carcinogen-induced field cancerization, leading to second
primary tumor formation in 4% of patients per year. Effective
chemoprevention could improve survival. Signal transducer and activator
of transcription 3 (STAT3) is an oncogenic transcription factor and
rational therapeutic target in HNSCC. We recently reported that loss of
function of PTPRT (protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type T), a
direct STAT3 phosphatase, by frequent somatic mutation or promoter
methylation leads to hyper-phosphorylation of STAT3 and may predict
sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition using Stattic. In the present study, we
sought to evaluate the contribution of PTPRT to chemical carcinogenesis
and sensitivity to Stattic-mediated HNSCC chemoprevention in the 4-NQO
(4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide) model in vivo using PTPRT wild-type (WT) or
knockout (KO) mice.Methods: PTPRT WT or KO mice received 4-NQO-containing
water (100 g/mL) for 12 weeks. At experiment initiation, a subset of mice
received vehicle (PBS) or 50 mg/kg Stattic by oral gavage Q5D. After 12
weeks of 4-NQO administration, mice were randomized to receive
vehicle/Stattic for 12 additional weeks. Mice were then sacrificed
followed by tongue excision for H&E and IHC analysis. Histologic
assessment of dysplasia was scored from 0 to 6 (normal to invasive
SCC).Results: By week 3, we observed unexpected combined toxicity of
4-NQO and Stattic, with 3 mouse deaths. Combined treatment was suspended
until the end of the 12-week 4-NQO administration period, and no further
toxicity was noted. At the end of the 24-week experiment, we observed a
diverse range of neoplasias in the control group, with 7/13 (53.8%)
exhibiting SCC of which 4 (30.8%) were invasive. Using a rank
transformation statistic, we detected no significant effect of PTPRT
status (P = 0.9985) or interaction between PTPRT status and treatment (P
= 1.0) with respect to pathology scores. Further analysis revealed a
trend toward effective Stattic-mediated chemoprevention (P = 0.0831).
Interestingly, the only two mice with normal-appearing oral epithelia
were both PTPRT KO and treated with Stattic.Conclusions: PTPRT status
does not appear to predict susceptibility to 4-NQO-mediated
carcinogenesis, nor sensitivity to Stattic-mediated chemoprevention in
this mouse model of HNSCC initiation. Nevertheless, we observed a trend
toward effective chemoprevention in Stattic-treated mice supporting a
role for STAT3 in HNSCC carcinogenesis.

