Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of ESCC tumor/normal tissues and patient blood
samples using expression, genotypes and DNA somatic change data


Esophageal cancer is the eighth most common and sixth most frequent fatal
human cancer in the world, and the fourth most common incident cancer in
China. Shanxi Province, a region in north central China, has among the
highest esophageal cancer rates in China, and nearly all of these cases
are esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying esophageal carcinogenesis and its
molecular pathology will facilitate the development of biomarkers for
early detection to reduce ESCC mortality. Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have found many loci associated with the development of ESCC,
however, most of the significant SNPs identified by GWAS are noncoding
variants with unknown functions located in intergenic regions far from
genes and are difficult to study functionally. As an initial effort to
identify causal variants for ESCC, we focused here on loci near genes
with known biological functions. Our analysis consists of three steps. We
identified some functional variants for ESCC in the second and third
steps of the analysis. First, from the GWAS analysis we selected those
loci in or around the genes in three important pathways - inflammation,
immunity, and DNA repair - using information from KEGG, Biocarta, and GO
databases. We selected loci which had their 95% confidence intervals of
the odds ratios not including OR = 1 based on GWAS analysis. Second, we
integrated the expression and genotype data from ESCC somatic and
germline samples and computed eQTLs using the normal tissues for n = 100
cases which had both gene expression data and GWAS genotype data. We
found some interesting results from the second step analysis. The top 20
most significant genes included XPC, TP73, CASP8, DAPK1, IGF1R and LEPR,
which were implicated in different cancers (Cancer Genetics Web:
http://www.cancer-genetics.org). CASP8 was known to be involved in
apoptosis processes. It was significantly associated with early onset of
esophageal adenocarcinoma (Wu et al, Neoplasia. 2011 Apr;13(4):386-92).
It had been shown that IGF1R had a key role in malignant progression of
esophageal cancer (Kalinina et al, Int J Cancer. 2010 Oct
15;127(8):1931-40; Doyle et al, Am J Gastroenterol. 2012
Feb;107(2):196-204). Finally, we further intersected these significant
loci in the eQTL analysis with the loci that had significant association
between genotype and the somatic DNA copy number alterations. One of the
significant genes was ST6GAL1. It had been reported this gene may promote
malignant progression by promoting the TGF-beta induced EMT through
down-regulation of E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion and up-regulation of
integrin-mediated cell migration (J. Lu et al, J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec
12;289(50):34627-41). We also found some novel genes in the analyses and
their relation to ESCC will be investigated in future.

