Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and LPS pathway
biomarkers and gallbladder cancer are modulated by markers of systemic
inflammation


Little is known about gallbladder cancer (GBC) etiology. Gallstones (GS)
are a critical factor in GBC pathogenesis. Bacterial infections, such as
Salmonella Typhi and Helicobacter pylori, also may contribute to the
development of GBC. We previously observed strong associations between
inflammation markers and GBC vs. GS patients and hypothesized that
bacterial infections may explain in part associations between GBC and
inflammation. In the current study of 41 GBC cases and 124 GS patients
from Shanghai, China, we evaluated relationships between GBC and the
bacterial infection-related proteins plasma lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
two LPS-pathway proteins, soluble CD14 (sCD14) and lipid binding protein
(LBP), as measured by ELISA. Further, we explored the extent to which
these associations were mediated through systemic inflammation. Logistic
regression was conducted to assess associations of GBC with plasma LPS,
sCD14, and LBP levels. To evaluate mediation through inflammation, an
inflammation score was calculated by summing the value of 15 previously
measured GBC-associated serum inflammation markers (-coefficient
multiplied by 1 if above the median or 0 if below the median) and
included in the models. sCD14 and LBP levels (above vs. below the median)
were strongly associated with GBC [Odds Ratio (95% Confidence Interval):
2.75 (1.27-6.29) for sCD14 and 2.83 (1.32-6.46) for LBP]. The highest vs.
lowest tertiles of sCD14 and LBP were associated with a five-fold
increased risk of GBC. These associations were attenuated when the
inflammation score was entered into the model. Plasma LPS demonstrated a
borderline association after adjustment for inflammation score [OR (95%
CI): 2.46 (0.96-6.56)]. In contrast, the ORs for inflammation score
remained >20 after adjusting for each bacteria-related marker. These
findings suggest that bacterial infections may contribute to GBC
etiopathogenesis through inflammatory pathways.
LPS, sCD14, and LBP and Gallbladder Cancer Relative to Gallstone Controls

