Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abnormal expression of MUC1 mucin on colon epithelia stimulates
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines promoting colitis-associated
colon cancer in a murine model


MUC1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein aberrantly expressed in human
adenocarcinoma as well as chronic inflammatory conditions. We have
previously demonstrated that the tumor form of MUC1, in association with
p65, upregulates the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the
tumor microenvironment, including IL-6 and TNF-alpha, by modulating their
transcriptional activity in epithelial cancer cells. Here, we explored
the mechanism underlying MUC1/p65-induced transcription of IL-6 and
TNF-alpha in colon cancer cells and its significance for the
microenviroment of colitis that is known to be the precursor to cancer.
We used a mouse model of colitis-associated colon cancer where wild type
(WT) and human MUC1 transgenic (MUC1.Tg) mice are given carcinogen
azoxymethane (AOM), followed by three cycles of 1.2% dextran sodium
sulfate (DSS) in drinking water to induce colitis. MUC1.Tg showed higher
tumor incidence, decreased survival, increased body weight loss and
shorter colon length. These features accelerated the severity of
inflammation-induced colon cancer. Consistent with our previous in vitro
data, expression of NF-kB family members was higher in MUC1.Tg mice
compared to WT. We previously showed that in tumors, MUC1/p65 complex
modulated the expression of histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste
protein-2 (EZH2) and interaction with pro-inflammatory cytokine
promoters. In order to understand the significance of MUC1/p65-modulated
cytokines in progressive colitis that gives rise to colon cancer, we
analyzed infiltration of inflammatory cells into the inflamed colon
tissues. The number of infiltrating macrophages was much higher in
AOM/DSS-treated MUC1.Tg mice compared to WT. ELISA assay and gene
expression analyses demonstrated that the treatment with AOM/DSS in the
presence of human MUC1 on the colonic epithelia resulted in a significant
increase in M1 type macrophage-associated genes, including IL-6,
TNF-alpha and iNOS, whereas M2 type macrophage markers such as Arginase
1, Ym1, and IL-10 were drastically reduced when compared to colon tissues
of treated WT mice. Taken together, our findings reveal a
pro-inflammatory role for MUC1 in colitis-related carcinogenesis. Our
study also provides a mechanism by which MUC1 accelerates tumor
initiation and progression.

