Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoplasmic localization of PU.1 with mutated NPM1 causes myeloid
differentiation arrest


The most frequently mutated gene in de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
is nucleophosmin (NPM1). How mutated NPM1 (mNPM1) confers clonal
advantage is unknown. We hypothesized that mNPM1 interferes with the
function of one or more master transcription factors (TF) essential for
myeloid differentiation. We used mass-spectrometry to comprehensively
analyze the protein interactome of endogenous NPM1 and mNPM1 in AML cell
nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions, and examined the cell fate
implications of observed interactions. NPM1 was found in abundance in
both nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of wtNPM1 AML cells, but only in
the cytoplasm of mNPM1 AML cells. In the nucleus of wtNPM1- and cytoplasm
of mNPM1-AML cells, the NPM1/mNPM1 interactome was enriched for the
master TF driver of monocytic differentiation PU.1 and the RARA
co-factors STAT1 and CNOT1. Accordingly, by both Western blot (WB) of
cell fractions and immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy, PU.1 was localized
in the cytoplasm of mNPM1 AML cells together with mNPM1. Another master
differentiation-driving TF highly expressed in AML cells, CEBPA, was not
in the NPM1 interactome nor localized to cytoplasm. Nuclear export of
NPM1 is dependent on the nuclear export protein XPO1 (CRM1). Selinexor
(KPT-330) is an anti-cancer drug that inhibits protein trafficking to
cytoplasm by covalently binding to the XPO1 cargo binding pocket.
Selinexor 20-50nM relocated both mNPM1 and PU.1 into the nucleus in mNPM1
AML cells, demonstrated by IF and cell fraction WB. Importantly, this
nuclear relocation prompted terminal monocytic differentiation of mNPM1
AML cells. The RARA ligand ATRA at 10nM transferred RARA and STAT1 but
not mNPM1/PU.1 into the nucleus and triggered terminal granulocytic
rather than monocytic differentiation, presumably enabled by high
baseline intra-nuclear CEBPA. mNPM1 AML is distinguished by high HOX gene
expression. To evaluate a potential cause-effect relationship, Hox
expression was examined in Pu.1 knock-out hematopoietic precursors
retrovirally transduced to express Pu.1 fused with the estrogen receptor
(Pu.1-ER). Addition of estrogen to translocate Pu.1-ER into the nucleus
substantially decreased Hox expression accompanied by terminal monocytic
differentiation. Thus, nuclear export of PU.1 and RARA cofactors with
mNPM1 causes the differentiation arrest that defines AML. Low nanomolar
concentrations of selinexor transfer PU.1 to the nucleus and trigger
terminal monocytic differentiation, while low nanomolar concentrations of
ATRA transfer RARA/STAT1 to the nucleus and trigger terminal granulocytic
differentiation. These are p53-independent pathways of cell cycle exit
distinct from p53-dependent apoptosis that mediates chemotherapy effect.
Thus selinexor and/or ATRA differentiation therapy may offer the 50% of
mNPM1 AML patients with chemo-refractory disease a needed novel,
mechanistically rational treatment option.

