Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA damaging agent-induced apoptosis is controled by MCL-1
phosphorylation and degradation mediated by the Noxa/MCL-1/CDK2 complex


DNA damaging agents, such as cisplatin and etoposide, are employed for
the treatment of a wide array of solid tumors, but the prolonged use of
chemotherapeutic drugs is limited by their toxicity and by the
development of resistance. To overcome these major roadblocks to improved
prognosis requires mechanism-based therapeutic strategies that maximize
the antitumor effect of drugs while limiting their toxicities. These
agents exert anticancer effects via multiple mechanisms, yet their most
prominent mode of action involves the generation of DNA lesions followed
by activation of the DNA damage response and induction of the BCL-2
family-dependent mitochondrial apoptosis. However, the signaling pathways
that connect to BCL-2-family-regulated cell death are not entirely
clear.Noxa, a BH3-only pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family protein, causes
apoptosis by specifically interacting with the anti-apoptotic BCL-2
family protein MCL-1 to induce its proteasome-mediated degradation. We
show here that the DNA damaging agents cisplatin and etoposide upregulate
Noxa expression, which is required for the phosphorylation of MCL-1 at
Ser64/Thr70 sites, proteasome-dependent degradation, and as a
consequence, apoptosis. Noxa-induced MCL-1 phosphorylation at these sites
occurs at the mitochondria and is primarily regulated by CDK2. MCL-1 and
CDK2 form a stable complex and Noxa binds to this complex to facilitate
the phosphorylation of MCL-1. When Ser64 and Thr70 of MCL-1 are
substituted with alanine, the mutated MCL-1 is neither phosphorylated nor
ubiquitinated, and becomes more stable than the wild-type protein. As a
consequence, this mutant can inhibit apoptosis induced by Noxa
overexpression or cisplatin treatment. These results indicate that
Noxa-mediated MCL-1 phosphorylation followed by MCL-1 degradation is
critical for apoptosis induced by DNA damaging agents through regulation
of the Noxa/MCL-1/CDK2 complex. Of note, the identified phosphorylation
sites are only observed in human MCL-1; thus, the regulatory mechanism
shown here may be human-specific. It is of interest in the future to
analyze whether CDK2 expression/activity correlates to
cisplatin-resistance in patient samples.

