Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational landscape of uterine and ovarian carcinosarcomas
reveals new recurrently-mutated histone core genes as drivers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition


Objective:Carcinosarcomas (CS) of the uterus and ovary are highly
aggressive neoplasms containing both carcinomatous and sarcomatous
elements. While an increasing body of evidence supports the origin of
both CS elements from a common epithelial cell that undergoes sarcomatous
dedifferentiation, limited information is currently available about the
role of somatic mutations (SNV) and copy number variations (CNV) in these
rare tumors. Accordingly, the objective of our study was to evaluate the
genetic landscape of uterine and ovarian CSs by whole-exome-sequencing
(WES).Methods:We analyzed the mutational landscape of 63 fresh frozen CS
biopsies and 5 primary CS cell lines by WES, most of which were matched
to normal DNA from the same patients. We also performed multi region WES
in separate carcinoma and sarcoma areas to resolve the genetic
architecture and evolutionary histories of CS. Finally, in transfection
experiments we validated somatic histone 2A and 2B mutations as potential
drivers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).Results:Our results
demonstrated the presence of two major genetic types of uterine CSs
[i.e., uterine serous carcinoma-like (USC) profile and endometrioid
carcinoma-like profile (EAC)] and provided evidence that both subtypes,
as well as ovarian CS, arise from sarcomatous transformation of
carcinomas. In addition to recurrent mutations in cancer genes previously
identified in USC and EAC such as TP53, PIK3CA, PPP2R1A, KRAS, PTEN,
CHD4/Mi2b and BCOR, we found an excess of mutations in histones H2A and
H2B, as well as significant amplification of the segment of chromosome 6p
harboring the histone cluster containing these genes. We also found
frequent deletions comprising TP53 and MBD3, (a member with CHD4/Mi2b of
the NuRD-chromatin-modification-complex), and frequent amplification of
chromosome segments containing PIK3CA, CCNE1, TERT and c-MYC.
Amplifications of the histone cluster and TERT were significantly more
frequent in CS than their epithelial counterparts. Stable transgenic
expression H2A and H2B in USC cell lines demonstrated that mutant, but
not wild type H2A and H2B increased expression of markers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), suggesting a role in sarcomatous
transformation. Comparison of the phylogenetic relationships of
carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements of the same tumors demonstrated
separate lineages resulting in these two components.Conclusions:Our
results provide new insight into the origins and development of uterine
and ovarian CS and defined the genetic landscape of this type of
malignant tumor. These findings also suggest new therapeutic targets for
these highly aggressive neoplasms.

