Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RRx-001 is effective in temozolomide-sensitive and resistant GBM


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is one of the most aggressive malignancies
in humans, being highly invasive and drug-resistant, limiting the
effectiveness of surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Concurrent
Temozolomide (TMZ) and radiation is the standard of care for newly
diagnosed GBM patients, however, patients respond poorly and prognosis
remains dismal. TMZ response is limited to patients with hypermethylation
of the methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter. Despite recent
advances in therapeutic strategies, treating GBM is still an unsolved
clinical challenge requiring the investigation of novel approaches with
better responses over approved therapies. RRx-001 is a novel ROS-mediated
systemically non-toxic chemo-sensitizing epigenetic agent with vascular
normalizing properties under investigation in Phase II clinical trials in
brain metastases and GBM.We assessed whether RRx-001 is an effective
approach for treating GBM by testing its effects alone and in combination
with TMZ both in vitro as well as in GBM mouse models. RRx-001 induced
cytotoxicity in human TMZ-sensitive as well as resistant patient-derived
GBM cell lines. In addition, its effect in TMZ-sensitive GBM cells was
greater than the one induced by TMZ alone.We then asked whether the in
vitro effects of RRx-001 translated to therapeutic efficacy in vivo. To
this end, we injected mice intracranially with a TMZ-resistant murine
mesenchymal GBM cells, and treated tumor-bearing mice with RRx-001 alone
and in combination with TMZ. RRx-001 treatment alone modestly prolonged
survival compared to control cohorts, whereas the combination of RRx-001
and TMZ substantially prolonged survival compared to controls and either
treatment alone. Moreover, histological evaluation of GBM tumors revealed
that combination of RRx-001 and TMZ induced vessel hyperdilation and
apoptosis compared to RRx-001 alone. Thus, in vivo RRx-001 combined to
TMZ may also indirectly regulate tumor growth by modifying the tumor
stroma.These data suggest that TMZ may still affect the microenvironment
in TMZ-resistant tumors and that RRx-001 enhances these effects by both
directly and indirectly restricting GBM growth, making it a promising
therapeutic agent alone and in combination with TMZ.

