Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling adaptation to FLT3 inhibition in FLT3/ITD leukemia
results in a reactivation of ERK signaling that can be abrogated with MEK
inhibition


The use of FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for the treatment of
FLT3 mutant acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has been explored as a promising
strategy for over a decade. However, FLT3 TKIs have thus far shown
limited clinical benefit in patients with FLT3/ITD AML. We hypothesized
that FLT3/ITD leukemia cells exhibit mechanisms of intrinsic signaling
adaptation to FLT3 TKI treatment that are associated with an incomplete
biologic response. If true, combined targeted therapeutic approaches that
overcome the adaptive resistance to FLT3 inhibition could be used to
maximize the efficacy of anti-leukemia treatment for those expressing
this mutation.To evaluate this hypothesis, the FLT3/ITD AML cell lines
Molm14 and MV4;11 were treated with FLT3 TKIs for up to 48 hours at
concentrations sufficient for maximal FLT3 inhibition and downstream
signaling was analyzed by immunoblotting. We identified a rebound in ERK
phosphorylation discernible by six hours and continuing for the duration
of treatment, despite continued drug presence. This rebound resulted in
near baseline levels of phosphorylated ERK (pERK) and was coupled to a
rebound in phosphorylation of elements both upstream and downstream of
ERK as well as in the expression levels of ERK target genes, suggesting a
global reactivation of the signaling cascade. Rebound was sensitive to a
reduction in serum, suggesting a growth factor-dependent mechanism.To
explore the consequences of this adaptation, the impact of combinatory
targeting of ERK activity using selective small molecule inhibitors of
MEK was evaluated. When Molm14 and MV4;11 cells were treated with
inhibitors of both FLT3 and MEK in combination, little to no pERK rebound
was observed. Additionally, the anti-leukemia effects were more
pronounced for the combination compared to either drug alone, both in
vitro and in vivo. In vitro, the addition of a MEK inhibitor (PD0325901
or trametinib) to FLT3 TKI (sorafenib) treatment synergistically
increased cell death and decreased cell viability. This effect was most
pronounced at mid-range sorafenib combined with low dose MEK inhibitor.
In vivo, the addition of low-dose PD0325901 to sorafenib treatment
resulted in a significant reduction of both peripheral blood and bone
marrow blasts in a transplant model (p The use of FLT3 tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) for the treatment of FLT3 mutant acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) has been explored as a promising strategy for over a decade.
However, FLT3 TKIs have thus far shown limited clinical benefit in
patients with FLT3/ITD AML. We hypothesized that FLT3/ITD leukemia cells
exhibit mechanisms of intrinsic signaling adaptation to FLT3 TKI
treatment that are associated with an incomplete biologic response. If
true, combined targeted therapeutic approaches that overcome the adaptive
resistance to FLT3 inhibition could be used to maximize the efficacy of
anti-leukemia treatment for those expressing this mutation.To evaluate
this hypothesis, the FLT3/ITD AML cell lines Molm14 and MV4;11 were
treated with FLT3 TKIs for up to 48 hours at concentrations sufficient
for maximal FLT3 inhibition and downstream signaling was analyzed by
immunoblotting. We identified a rebound in ERK phosphorylation
discernible by six hours and continuing for the duration of treatment,
despite continued drug presence. This rebound resulted in near baseline
levels of phosphorylated ERK (pERK) and was coupled to a rebound in
phosphorylation of elements both upstream and downstream of ERK as well
as in the expression levels of ERK target genes, suggesting a global
reactivation of the signaling cascade. Rebound was sensitive to a
reduction in serum, suggesting a growth factor-dependent mechanism.To
explore the consequences of this adaptation, the impact of combinatory
targeting of ERK activity using selective small molecule inhibitors of
MEK was evaluated. When Molm14 and MV4;11 cells were treated with
inhibitors of both FLT3 and MEK in combination, little to no pERK rebound
was observed. Additionally, the anti-leukemia effects were more
pronounced for the combination compared to either drug alone, both in
vitro and in vivo. In vitro, the addition of a MEK inhibitor (PD0325901
or trametinib) to FLT3 TKI (sorafenib) treatment synergistically
increased cell death and decreased cell viability. This effect was most
pronounced at mid-range sorafenib combined with low dose MEK inhibitor.
In vivo, the addition of low-dose PD0325901 to sorafenib treatment
resulted in a significant reduction of both peripheral blood and bone
marrow blasts in a transplant model (p < 0.05).Together, these studies
reveal that FLT3/ITD leukemia cells demonstrate an adaptive feedback
mechanism capable of reactivating ERK signaling in response to FLT3
inhibition. This adaptation limits the efficacy of FLT3 TKI treatment and
can be abrogated by the addition of a MEK inhibitor. Our data suggest
that the addition of low-dose MEK inhibitor to FLT3 TKI treatment as a
means to overcome signaling adaptation may improve outcomes for patients
with FLT3/ITD AML.

