Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a comprehensive and highly sensitive
next-generation sequencing assay for detection of copy number variations


Background: As our knowledge of how DNA alterations can drive cancer
progression increases, assays that can simultaneously detect multiple
types of variants in a simple and cost-effective manner are becoming
increasingly crucial. This holds true of copy number variations (CNVs),
where evaluation of this type of variant is an important and necessary
feature of any solid tumor profiling assay. Conventional methods for
detecting CNVs such as immunohistochemistry (IHC), fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), and quantitative PCR (qPCR) are limited to
detecting only one gene amplification at a time. This can be a
significant drawback with FFPE samples, where the DNA is of low abundance
and often heavily degraded, while the number of gene amplifications known
to be important in cancer continues to grow. Additionally, different
tumor types may express amplifications at different rates and expression
may be heterogeneous within the tumor, potentially with irregular
staining patterns - all of which illustrate the need for new approaches
to CNV detection.Methods: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) offers the
ability to assess variants in multiple genes using one sample. To that
end, Illumina is developing a comprehensive, hybrid capture-based NGS
assay targeting 170 key cancer genes for sequencing on the NextSeq1
platform. The assay consists of a DNA workflow for the identification of
single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), small insertions and deletions
(indels), as well as an RNA workflow for the identification of splice
variants and gene fusions. In addition, using the DNA workflow, a novel
analysis pipeline, and CNV caller, CNVs from 57 different genes can be
simultaneously assessed all by sequencing of a single sample.Results:
Here we present data on both cell lines and FFPE samples of SNVs and
indels down to 5% allele fraction and CNVs down to 2-fold amplification,
all from 40 ng of DNA. To demonstrate the accuracy and precision of our
CNV detection method, we tested 7 samples for CNVs using orthogonal CNV
detection methods. The Illumina NGS assay detected ERBB2 amplifications
in 4 out of 7 samples. Of the 4 Illumina NGS positive samples, 3 samples
were positive by FISH and all 4 were positive by droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR) and the Illumina TruSight Tumor 15 panel. The 3 samples that were
negative for ERBB2 amplifications by the Illumina NGS assay were also
negative by both FISH and ddPCR. Within these samples we also found a
previously unknown FGFR1 amplification.Conclusions: The novel Illumina
NGS library preparation method is an innovative and useful tool to find
multiple CNVs, along with other variant types, within a single sample.
The assay can detect multiple CNVs within a single FFPE sample and
identify previously uncharacterized CNVs that could be important in
finding the correct treatment for a cancer patient.

