Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possibility of prostate cancer prevention based on cancer stem
cell theory


Cancer stem cells are considered to be one of the causes of cancer. In
recent years, stemness (stem like) of gene expression patterns in the
development process of cancer has been observed. Stemness and pathology
of cancer are closely related. Elucidation of the stemness regulation of
cancer is an important key to the development of new cancer prevention
methods. However, as far as we know, there exist no cancer prevention
studies focusing on cancer stem cells. In this study, we have
investigated the possibility of prostate cancer prevention with a focus
on cancer stem cells. We utilized prostate cancer cell lines PC3, DU145
(androgen-independent) and LNCaP (androgen-dependent) cells. Then, using
spheroid formed cells, mRNA expression levels of cancer stem cells
markers were estimated by RT-real time-PCR. Cancer cells have several
malignant phenotypes under hypoxia, and we investigated for the cancer
stem cells induced malignant alteration under hypoxia. In addition, under
hypoxia, we investigated cell viability effect under tocotrienol-rich
fraction (TRF) from annatto. TRF almost consists of delta- tocotrienol
(-T3) that has the strongest anti-cancer activity. We observed spheroid
formation capacity and compared the spheroid sizes and mRNA levels of
DU145, PC3 and LNCaP cells. Size of DU145 spheroid is smaller in
comparison to spheroids of PC3 and LNCaP. mRNA expression levels of
cancer stem cells marker were elevated in PC3 and LNCaP cells. This means
that PC3 and LNCaP cells have higher concentration of cancer stem cells.
Furthermore, stemness decreases with increase of passage number, the
number of cultures. We confirmed the presence of stemness in the
formation capacity of spheroid until passage 4. Under hypoxia, cell
viability of cancer stem cells was elevated compared to normal cultured
prostate cancer cells. In addition, under hypoxia and TRF treatment, cell
viability of cancer stem cells decreased with increase in TRF
concentration compared to control (0 g/ml). Our results suggest that TRF
suppress cell viability of prostate cancer stem cells under hypoxic
states and is effective in prostate cancer prevention.

