Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ribosomal protein, Rpl22 in regulation of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Inactivation of ribosomal proteins (RP) is known to cause diseases called
ribosomopathies, which are often associated with abnormal hematopoiesis
and an increased risk for development of leukemia. Our laboratory has
recently reported an important link between inactivation of one such
ribosomal protein, Rpl22, and poor survival in T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) patients. Preliminary bioinformatic analysis shows that
RPL22 is lost in 10% of pediatric T-ALL patients, who exhibit a more
aggressive disease course. Deletion of the RPL22 locus is also enriched
in the early T-cell precursor (ETP-ALL) subset of T-ALL patients, which
exhibit a more aggressive disease course. Thus, RPL22 loss appears to be
a marker for poor outcome in pediatric T-ALL patients. While RP
inactivation has previously been linked to increased cancer risk, the
mechanistic basis for this linkage remained unclear. We have recently
demonstrated that inactivation of Rpl22 promotes leukemic transformation
by activating NF-B and inducing the stem cell gene, LIN28B. Nevertheless,
the molecular link between Rpl22 inactivation and the induction of NF-B
activity remained unclear. We have now determined that inactivation of
Rpl22 activates NF-B signaling by exacerbating ER stress responses.
Indeed, Rpl22 loss results in hyperactivation of the PERK-EIF2-ATF4
stress pathway, which is known to activate NF-B. We have demonstrated
that knockdown of PERK using shRNA abrogates the activation of NF-B in
Rpl22 mutant cells and returns Lin28B expression levels to baseline. This
reduction in Lin28B eliminates the predisposition to transformation
exhibited by Rpl22 mutant cells, as evidenced by decreased formation of
colonies in soft agar. Taken together, these data suggest that RPL22
inactivation may serve as a negative prognostic indicator in T-ALL and
that pharmacologic targeting of ER stress pathways may represent a novel
therapeutic alternative in this molecularly-defined subclass of T-ALL.

