Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-pathogenic bacteria change host DNA methylation in vivo


Introduction: More than a thousand species of bacteria live in a normal
person's gastrointestinal tract. Epigenetic effects on the colon directly
caused by the commensal bacteria remain elusive. In the current study, we
explore the bacterial effects on DNA methylation of the host colon.
Methods: Eight non-pathogenic bacterial species were introduced to the
gut of germ-free (GF) mice to make specific-pathogen free (SPF) mice. Our
study consisted of the following groups (n = 6 for each): wildtype (WT)
GF, WT SPF, IL-10 knockout (KO) GF, IL-10 KO SPF, and IL-10 KO GF or SPF
treated with azoxymethane (AOM). We analyzed DNA methylation in genomic
DNA extracted from the proximal colon using Digital Restriction Enzyme
Analysis of Methylation (DREAM) and compared methylation levels at CpG
sites among different groups. Results: 1) Principal component analysis
(PCA) performed on methylomes of all the samples separated the mouse
samples based on presence or absence of bacteria, IL-10 KO status or AOM
treatment into 6 distinct groups. 2) We analyzed CpG sites differentially
methylated between GF and SPF mice at pIntroduction: More than a thousand
species of bacteria live in a normal person's gastrointestinal tract.
Epigenetic effects on the colon directly caused by the commensal bacteria
remain elusive. In the current study, we explore the bacterial effects on
DNA methylation of the host colon. Methods: Eight non-pathogenic
bacterial species were introduced to the gut of germ-free (GF) mice to
make specific-pathogen free (SPF) mice. Our study consisted of the
following groups (n = 6 for each): wildtype (WT) GF, WT SPF, IL-10
knockout (KO) GF, IL-10 KO SPF, and IL-10 KO GF or SPF treated with
azoxymethane (AOM). We analyzed DNA methylation in genomic DNA extracted
from the proximal colon using Digital Restriction Enzyme Analysis of
Methylation (DREAM) and compared methylation levels at CpG sites among
different groups. Results: 1) Principal component analysis (PCA)
performed on methylomes of all the samples separated the mouse samples
based on presence or absence of bacteria, IL-10 KO status or AOM
treatment into 6 distinct groups. 2) We analyzed CpG sites differentially
methylated between GF and SPF mice at p<0.05 significance level. In WT
mice, there were 1871 CpG sites (11% out of 17475 analyzed sites), in
IL10 KO mice, there were 5986 CpG sites (33% out of 18254 analyzed sites)
and in IL10 KO AOM-treated mice there were 6755 CpG sites (31% out of
21697 analyzed sites) differentially methylated. 3) There were 756 common
CpG sites differentially methylated in all SPF vs GF comparisons.
Interestingly, these sites were enriched 2.6-fold for aging-related CpG
sites. 4) WT SPF mice showed increased methylation at CpG sites
hypomethylated in WT GF mice and, conversely, decreased methylation at
CpG sites hypermethylated in WT GF mice. This pattern of DNA methylation
change was also observed by comparing GF with SPF in IL-10 KO mice with
or without AOM treatment. 5) Both in GF and SPF mice the DNA methylation
changes were more pronounced in IL10 KO while AOM had little additional
effect. 6) IL10 KO resulted in genome-wide increase of methylation.
However, the introduction of bacteria in SPF mice resulted in the
methylation change mainly at CpG islands. Conclusions: Non-pathogenic
bacteria introduced in the colon cause methylation gains at CpG sites
with low DNA methylation and methylation losses at sites with high DNA
methylation in a pattern similar to the changes observed in aging and
cancer.

