Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VB7-756: a Her2-specific diabody armed with deBouganin, a plant
toxin with a distinct MOA


VB7-756 is Targeted Protein Therapeutic (TPT) comprised of a de-immunized
form of bouganin (deBouganin), a potent, plant-derived, type I
ribosome-inactivating protein (RIP), genetically linked to the C6.5
anti-Her2 diabody via a furin protease sensitive linker. To engineer the
optimal diabody TPT format, several constructs were generated to assess
the best diabody-deBouganin orientation. All constructs were expressed as
a soluble protein in E. coli supernatant and compared with respect to
expression level, stability and potency. The optimal configuration
consisted of deBouganin genetically linked to the N-terminus of the VH-VL
diabody via a furin protease-sensitive linker and was termed VB7-756.
VB7-756 potency was analyzed against a panel of breast cancer cell lines
with disparate levels of Her-2 expression and compared to that of
Trastuzumab chemically linked to either DM1 (T-DM1) or MMAE (T-MMAE).
Overall, VB7-756 was more potent than T-DM1 and T-MMAE with high Her-2
expressing tumor cell lines. In contrast to T-DM1, VB7-756 potency was
unaffected by the Her2-Her3 dimerization mediated by heregulin. As
opposed to T-DM1 and T-MMAE, which showed only minimal cytoxicity,
VB7-756 was highly potent in vitro against tumor cells with cancer stem
cell properties. To further differentiate the RIP mechanism of action of
deBouganin from tubulin inhibitor reagents, tumor cells that escaped
T-DM1 and T-MMAE treatment were incubated in the presence of VB7-756.
Results revealed that, VB7-756 was cytotoxic against cancer cells
surviving T-DM1 or T-MMAE treatment suggesting that deBouganin can
overcome mechanisms of resistance developed by small molecule agents.
Moreover, VB7-756 was also cytotoxic against tumor initiating cancer
cells evading T-DM1 or T-MMAE toxicity by preventing tumorosphere
formation. Overall these results demonstrate that deBouganin's distinct
MOA could overcome mechanisms of resistance affecting the efficacy of
small molecule drugs.

