Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nischarin disruption promotes breast tumor development in mouse
models


Nischarin is a novel tumor suppressor that was first discovered and
characterized in our laboratory. The accumulating evidence suggests that
Nischarin is a critical regulator of cell migration and breast tumor
growth, metastasis and invasion. However, little is known about the exact
function of Nischarin in in vivo physiological conditions, probably due
to lack of any transgenic Nischarin animals. We recently generated
Nischarin knockout mouse. This Nischarin knockout mouse has a dramatic
unusual phenotype of mammary development and overall growth defect.
Nischarin knockout mice do not spontaneously develop breast tumors. To
determine the importance of Nischarin in regulation of breast cancer
development, we bred Nischarin knockout virgin mice with PyMT (polyoma
middle T antigen) and Neu background mice and the progeny produced tumors
exclusively in the mammary gland. We found Nischarin knockout virgins
with PyMT accelerated breast cancer onset and progression, which further
suggests Nischarin inhibits tumor growth. Mammary epithelial cells (MECs)
are surrounded by basement membrane, which mainly consists of
extracellular matrix. We noted that the basement membrane of Nischarin
knockout virgins contain much more collagen and fibronectin than those of
wild type virgins. In addition, we observed that Nischarin disruption
significantly changed extracellular acidification rates (ECAR) in mouse
primary breast tumour cells. We suspected that this changed acidic
microenvironment might facilitate breast tumor progression. Recent
studies indicated that clinical anti-diabetic drug Metformin, an AMPK
activator, inhibits breast cancer cell growth. Our data show that
Het-PyMT and Null-PyMT primary cells were much more sensitive for
metformin treatment. Thus we examined the importance of AMPK signaling in
our mouse models. Interestingly, both tumor tissues and primary cells
derived from Null-PyMT breast tumors had lower AMPK activity. Together,
our data strongly support that Nischarin disruption promotes breast tumor
development and AMPK signaling is important for Nischarin-mediated
suppression of breast tumor.

