Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy as a mediator of increased mammary cancer risk in
socially isolated mice


Social isolation in mice is a model of post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) which affects 12-20% of newly diagnosed breast cancer patients.
Since social isolation increases the risk of breast and other cancers and
increases overall and cancer-specific mortality, it is critical to
determine the biological pathways that mediate the effects of social
isolation on cancer to identify targets to prevent its adverse effects.
Among the potential mechanisms is autophagy, which we have found
previously to be induced in the mammary glands of socially isolated mice.
Others have reported upregulation of p53 and Hk2 in socially isolated
animals. Both are genes that induce autophagy. In our study, social
isolation increased nuclear p53 levels, expression of the p53-regulated
autophagy genes Dram1 and Mdm2 in the mammary glands of mice. Further,
social isolation led to an increase in body weight, particularly when
mice were fed a high fat diet, but the ability of social isolation to
induce autophagy was independent of high fat diet. Here we investigated
the effect of social isolation on mammary tumorigenesis in heterozygous
Atg7 knockout mice. Social isolation was implemented by housing mice
singly and feeding them a high fat diet from weaning onwards. Socially
isolated wildtype C57BL6 mice exhibited upregulation of Atg7 and LC3II
and downregulation of p62, indicative of increased autophagy that allows
cancer cells to survive. Atg7+/- mice, in contrast, exhibited
significantly lower LC3II and higher p62 levels compared with
group-housed wildtype mice. We also found that socially isolated wildtype
mice were at a significantly increased risk of developing estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) mammary cancer induced by treating mice with 15
mg medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) and three doses of 1 mg
7,12-dimethylbetz(a)anthracene (DMBA) (given on weeks 7, 8 and 9). No
increase in mammary tumorigenesis was seen in socially isolated Atg7+/-
mice, compared with group-housed Atg7+/- mice. Our results confirm that
social isolation induces autophagy and show that increased autophagy in
socially isolated mice was causally linked to increased breast cancer
risk. Since activation of survival autophagy is known to impair response
to cancer treatments, including to chemotherapy and endocrine therapy, it
is imperative to determine if cancer patients suffering from PTSD exhibit
increased autophagy. Autophagy inhibitors, such as chloroquine, are
currently being investigated in the clinic as a 2nd line therapy for
metastatic cancer, and therefore available also to be used in cancer
patients experiencing PTSD-like symptoms.

