Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor-beta and mutant p53 signaling crosstalk as a
novel molecular target to overcome therapeutic resistance in high-grade
serous ovarian cancer


The high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC), the most aggressive
ovarian cancer subtype, constitutes 90% of serous carcinomas and it
accounts for two-thirds of ovarian cancer deaths. It is a poorly
understood disease with high therapeutic resistance and extremely poor
prognosis. The current study is an attempt to analyze molecular
mechanisms underlying HGSOC and to identify new therapeutic targets. The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) analyses of ovarian carcinoma demonstrated
that p53 mutations are near universal (90%) in HGSOC and forkhead box M1
protein (FOXM1) network is significantly altered in 87% of HGSOC leading
to transcriptional upregulation of proliferation-related target genes.
Moreover, Mutant p53 and FOXM1 have important roles in resistance to
chemotherapy. In the present study, we have used various experimental
procedures such as RNAi technology, quantitative real-time PCR,
immunoblot analysis, proximity ligation assay (PLA) (to determine
protein-protein interaction in situ) and assays for cell cycle, apoptosis
and proliferation to analyze signaling crosstalk in OVCAR3 (HGSOC) cells.
Our experiments have identified estrogen receptor-beta (ER-beta) as a
novel member of the mutant p53-FOXM1 axis. We show that not only mut-p53
and ER-beta physically interact, but also they mutually regulate each
other's expression at the gene transcriptional level leading to changes
in expression of downstream signaling targets such as FOXM1. Importantly,
the effect of knocking down ER-beta on transcription of FOXM1 was similar
to that of knocking down endogenous mut-p53, suggesting that both mutant
p53 and ER-beta are transcriptional activators of FOXM1. Knocking down
ER-beta results in decreased mut-p53 transcript levels suggesting
transcription of mut-p53 is activated by ER-beta in OVCAR cells. On the
other hand, mut-p53 represses transcription of ER-beta gene. Thus, our
experiments have revealed a feedback loop between mut-p53 and ERbeta at
the transcriptional level.. We show that when ER-beta was knocked down,
FOXM1 levels were decreased and apoptosis was increased. Of note,
knocking down ER-beta decreased resistance to cisplatin and carboplatin,
major therapeutic agents currently in use for ovarian cancer. Our data
provides new insight into the mechanisms underlying HGSOC by illustrating
how signaling crosstalk between ER-beta and mut-p53 leads to increased
expression of pro-proliferative and pro-tumorigenic downstream targets
such as FOXM1, overexpression of which has been associated with
resistance to therapeutic agents.in HGSOC patients. Our study will be the
first, to the best of our knowledge, to investigate whether the crosstalk
between ER-beta and mut-p53 play an important role in the onset and
progression of HGSOC. Thus, we have identified mutant p53-ER beta
signaling axis as a novel therapeutic target in HGSOC.

