Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting TPX2 arrested cell cycle progression, raised
multinuclearity, ploidy, and suppresses tumorigenicity in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains one of the most
difficult cancers to treat, with chemotherapies being relatively
ineffective. Therefore, a better knowledge of molecular
hepatocarcinogenesis will provide the opportunity for designed targeted
therapy. TPX2 (targeting protein for Xklp2) are overexpressed as a
consequence of oncogenic alterations, and they are likely to alter the
proper regulation of chromosome segregation in cancer cells. Attacking
the machinery that is responsible for mitotic genes involved chromosome
instability in cancer cell is one of the most successful strategies of
clinical therapy. For this reason, we consider that the targeting TPX2 of
investigation in chromosome segregation and its consequential events
could provide the novel therapeutic strategies for cancer.Methods: In
human tissue approving, IHC stain addressed the molecular significant of
TPX2 in HCC tissue microarray. RNAi was used to knockdown TPX2 protein
expression. Clonogenic assay, immunostaining, double thymidine block,
image-cytometry analysis, and xenografts mouse model were analyzed its
role in tumor cell growth, multinuclearity, ploidy, cell cycle
progression and tumorigenicity. RT-PCR, Western blotting were used to
analyze anti-cancer mechanism in TPX2 targeting.Results: In this study,
TPX2 protein up-expression was present in 16 (42%) of 38 primary HCCs,
and associated with high stage, distant metastatic HCCs and poor
prognosis (lower 5-year survival). Knockdown of TPX2 inhibited cancer
cells growth and result in down-regulation of cyclin A, cyclin E and CDK2
proteins. Targeting TPX2 caused in tested liver cancer cell lines a
rising impaired chromosomal instability resulting in multinuclearity and
increased poly-ploidy content fraction cells. An image-cytometry analysis
revealed a cell cycle progression arrest after TPX2 inhibition.
Correlation between down-regulation protein level of genes related to
chromosomal segregation such as securin, seprase, Aurora A, Aurora B,
cyclin B1 and cyclin B2 and cell ploidy increasing, indicating mitotic
phase progression failure and loss the balance of genomic instability. In
vitro tumor spheroids assay and in vivo xenografts mouse model showed a
therapeutic opportunity in our findings.Conclusion: Our findings suggest
that targeting TPX2 deregulates chromosome segregation genes, thereby
arrested cell cycle progression, raised multinuclearity, ploidy, and
suppresses tumorigenicity in liver cancer cells and suggesting TPX2 as a
potential therapeutic target for HCC.Grants support: This work was
supported by the grants from Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan
(MOST103-2320-B-075B-001-MY3 to Hung-Wei Pan), Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital Research Program, Taiwan (VGHKS103-G01-4, VGHKS104-G01-1 to
Hung-Wei Pan, VGHKS103-040 to Chao-Wen Hsu)

