Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of stromal Lkb1 loss induced tumorigenesis in mouse
models of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome


Germline mutations in tumor suppressor kinase Lkb1 predispose to
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), with highly penetrant gastrointestinal
polyposis and increased cancer risk. PJS polyps display abnormal growth
of both stromal and epithelial cells. We have identified clonally
expanding fibroblasts as the drivers of tumorigenesis in PJS mouse models
by using Fsp1-Cre and Twist2-Cre mice to restrict Lkb1 deletion to
stromal cells (unpublished), highlighting the importance of
stromal-epithelial signaling in PJS tumorigenesis.Here, we address the
molecular mechanisms of the pathogenesis linked to stromal Lkb1 loss in
PJS mouse models. Lkb1 is involved in tissue size control by inhibiting
of mTORC1 pathway via AMPK (Shaw et al, Cancer Cell 2004) and by
regulating Hippo pathway (Mohseni et al, Nat Cell Biol 2014). First, we
investigated the involvement of Lkb1-AMPK-mTORC1 pathway in polyposis. We
conditionally deleted both catalytic AMPK subunits (1 and 2) in mice
using Fsp1-Cre. Surprisingly, Fsp1-Cre-AMPK mice did not develop any
tumors by 17 months of age indicating that AMPK is not the critical
mediator of Lkb1 tumor suppression in PJS. We next studied the Hippo
pathway in polyps of PJS mouse models. Levels of Yap and Taz, the main
downstream effectors of Hippo, were elevated in polyps as shown by
Western blotting. Immunohistochemical staining revealed profound nuclear
Yap/Taz localization indicating transcriptional activity in the stromal
compartment throughout the polyps. In contrast, nuclear Yap/Taz staining
in epithelial cells was only noted in a restricted polyp base stem cell
zone. In addition, we performed RNA-seq analysis of the of
Fsp1-Cre;Lkb1flox mouse polyps and noted shared gene expression changes
with PJS patient polyps. RNA-seq also revealed significant enrichment of
Yap signature, which was validated by qPCR. Finally, we used small
intestinal epithelial organoid culture to study the potential of Yap/Taz
induced secreted factors to stimulate growth of epithelial cells. We
observed that Wnt5a and Epiregulin enhanced epithelial organoid growth,
indicating them as candidates mediating the stromal-epithelial signaling
and promoting tumorigenesis in PJS polyps.In conclusion, we show that
stromal Lkb1 mutations lead to phenotypes identical to germline Lkb1
heterozygosity in mice and propose increased stromal Yap/Taz activity as
a potential mechanism to drive PJS tumorigenes.

