Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term BRAF(V600E) inhibition results in a spontaneous
KRAS(G12D) mutation and increased epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in papillary thyroid cancer cells (PTC)


Objective:Activating mutations in BRAF(V600E) are commonly observed in
PTC and result in a functional dependence upon the constitutively active
MAPK pathway. While targeted inhibitors are initially effective,
inevitably cells develop alternative mechanisms of pathway activation.
Mechanisms of primary resistance have been described in thyroid cancer
cell lines, however acquired resistance has not. Our study investigates
adaptive mechanisms of BRAF(V600E) inhibitor resistance and accompanying
metastatic phenotypes in PTC cells following long-term vemurafenib
exposure.Materials & Methods:KTC1 sub-cell lines (PTC cells, BRAFV600E)
were developed following treatment with either 0.25 or 1.0 M of
vemurafenib, a BRAF V600E inhibitor, for >20 passages. Western blot and
qRT-PCR were used to assess EMT marker expression and pathway activation.
2D and 3D invasion assays, immunofluorescence microscopy, and direct cell
count growth assays were used to assess inhibitor resistance and
metastatic phenotypes. Sequenom was used to detect acquired
mutations.Results:A vemurafenib resistant (VR) subline of KTC1 cells was
derived following long-term treatment with the drug. Resistance coincided
with spontaneous acquisition of a KRAS(G12D) activating mutation. Our
data show KRAS(G12D) driven vemurafenib-resistance significantly enhanced
expression of distinct EMT markers and translated into increased growth,
migration, and invasion, when compared to the control sub-lines. This
gain in metastatic phenotype coincided with increase activation of both
the AKT and ERK pathways.Conclusion:Our results suggest an acquired KRAS
mutation confers BRAF V600E inhibitor resistance and a more aggressive
metastatic phenotype in vitro. Our hope is that further study of the
mechanisms of resistance will add to potential markers for early
detection of BRAF inhibitor resistance, leading to improved patient
outcomes.

