Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of epigenetic regulation mediated by HDACs 4, 5
using PET/CT/MRI with 18F-TFAHA in a rat model of human glioma


Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the pathogenesis of cancer
through modulation of the expression of various genes involved in
cellular proliferation, migration, angiogenesis and apoptosis. HDAC class
IIa enzymes interact with tumor suppressor proteins including HIF-1a,
GATA-1, and PLZF-RARa. Given the importance of HDACs class IIa in
epigenetic regulation of cancer development, progression, and
maintenance, there is a pressing need for non-invasive imaging approaches
for monitoring the expression-activity of HDACs in vivo. To address this
need, our laboratory has developed
6-(tri-fluoroacetamido)-1-hexanoicanilide (18F-TFAHA) for imaging HDAC
class IIa enzymes. Previous studies show that 18F-TFAHA is enzymatically
cleaved specifically by HDAC class IIa, predominantly by HDACs 4 and 5.
To quantitatively visualize the expression-activity of HDACs 4 and 5 in
brain gliomas, immunocompromised rats (NTac:NIH-Foxn1rnu, Taconic
Biosciences, NY) were implanted intracerebrally (i.c.) with U87-tdRluc
cells (4105 cells in 20 uL), that have been lentivirally-transfected to
express GFP-luciferase and tdTomato fluorescent protein fusion reporter
genes. Bioluminescence images (BLI) of GBMs were obtained after
administration of luciferin (10 l/g i.p.) using an InVivo Xtreme system
(Carestream, Toronto, Canada) at 7 and 14 days post U87-tdRluc cell
implantation. Gross tumor morphology and progression was evaluated with
T2 MRI on day 14 after tumor implantation using a CliniScan 7T MRI system
(Bruker, UK). Following 15-20 days, the rats were administered with
18F-TFAHA (500 Ci/animal, i.v.) and imaged using microPET R4 and Inveon
CT (Siemens, TN). After PET/CT imaging, the animals were sacrificed and
their brains extracted for immunohistochemical (IHC) and quantitative
autoradiographic (QAR) studies (Typhoon 7000, General Electric, CT). The
18F-TFAHA accumulation in regions of interest (ROI) at 20-30 minutes post
i.v. administration and was quantified using Logan graphical analysis,
which demonstrated a significant increase in 18F-TFAHA accumulation in
tumors versus surrounding normal cortex and white matter (p Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the pathogenesis of cancer through
modulation of the expression of various genes involved in cellular
proliferation, migration, angiogenesis and apoptosis. HDAC class IIa
enzymes interact with tumor suppressor proteins including HIF-1a, GATA-1,
and PLZF-RARa. Given the importance of HDACs class IIa in epigenetic
regulation of cancer development, progression, and maintenance, there is
a pressing need for non-invasive imaging approaches for monitoring the
expression-activity of HDACs in vivo. To address this need, our
laboratory has developed 6-(tri-fluoroacetamido)-1-hexanoicanilide
(18F-TFAHA) for imaging HDAC class IIa enzymes. Previous studies show
that 18F-TFAHA is enzymatically cleaved specifically by HDAC class IIa,
predominantly by HDACs 4 and 5. To quantitatively visualize the
expression-activity of HDACs 4 and 5 in brain gliomas, immunocompromised
rats (NTac:NIH-Foxn1rnu, Taconic Biosciences, NY) were implanted
intracerebrally (i.c.) with U87-tdRluc cells (4105 cells in 20 uL), that
have been lentivirally-transfected to express GFP-luciferase and tdTomato
fluorescent protein fusion reporter genes. Bioluminescence images (BLI)
of GBMs were obtained after administration of luciferin (10 l/g i.p.)
using an InVivo Xtreme system (Carestream, Toronto, Canada) at 7 and 14
days post U87-tdRluc cell implantation. Gross tumor morphology and
progression was evaluated with T2 MRI on day 14 after tumor implantation
using a CliniScan 7T MRI system (Bruker, UK). Following 15-20 days, the
rats were administered with 18F-TFAHA (500 Ci/animal, i.v.) and imaged
using microPET R4 and Inveon CT (Siemens, TN). After PET/CT imaging, the
animals were sacrificed and their brains extracted for
immunohistochemical (IHC) and quantitative autoradiographic (QAR) studies
(Typhoon 7000, General Electric, CT). The 18F-TFAHA accumulation in
regions of interest (ROI) at 20-30 minutes post i.v. administration and
was quantified using Logan graphical analysis, which demonstrated a
significant increase in 18F-TFAHA accumulation in tumors versus
surrounding normal cortex and white matter (p <0.05), outside the
structures with normally-increased HDAC IIa activity (e.g., hippocampus,
amygdala, periaqueductal gray, n. accumbens). PET/CT/MR imaging results
were validated by IHC of brain tissue sections that demonstrated a
significant hypoacetylation of histones H2A, H2B, and H4 in tumor tissue
with increased 18F-TFAHA accumulation. The ongoing studies in brain
tumor-bearing rats undergoing treatment with HDAC inhibitor vorinostat
are aimed to assess the feasibility of PET/CT/MRI with 18F-TFAHA for
pharmacodynamic monitoring therapies with HDAC class IIa inhibitors.
Ultimately, we aim to translate 18F-TFAHA PET/CT/MR imaging into the
clinic.Support: NIH RO1 DA030333-06, NCI CCGS Core Grant CA 016672, NIH
RC2 DA028912-01, NIH P30 CA022453

