Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy targeting folate receptor induces autophagy in
ovarian cancer


Cancer cells are highly dependent on folate metabolism mediated by the
folate receptor (FRa). Gene encoding FRa (FOLR1) is overexpressed in
endometrial and ovarian cancers. We aim to investigate the functional
mechanisms of blocking FRa with MORAb-003 antibody, a humanized
monoclonal antibody directly against FRa. We first analyzed clinical data
from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for correlation between copy numbers
of FOLR1 gene and disease-free survival in patients with high-grade
serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSC). Next, we determined the
surfaceexpression of FRa on HGSC cells using flow cytometry (FACS). We
then used xenograft mouse models to test tumor inhibition by MORAb-003
antibody-induced FRa blockade. We performed reverse-phase protein array
(RPPA) analysis in FRa-positive and FRa-negative HGSC tumors to compare
their responses to MORAb-003 treatment. To recapitulate the in vivo
environment, we cultured FRa-positive and -negative epithelial ovarian
cancer cells in three-dimensional (3D) condition and targeted the
specific factors identified by RPPA using shRNAs knockdown. MORAb-003
monotherapy significantly reduced tumor weights and numbers of tumor
nodules in both FRa-positive IGROV1 and SKOV3 models; combination of
MORAb-003 and docetaxel significantly reduced both tumor weights and
numbers of tumor nodules compared to docetaxel monotherapy. As expected,
we did not observe these effects in the A2780 model, which has low FRa
expression. Immunohistochemistry using PCNA and TUNEL staining in
resulting tumors revealed that MORAb-003 reduced proliferation, but had
no significant effect on apoptosis. Systematic analysis from RPPA
identified a number of autophagy factors and cell-death initiators as
being significantly upregulated by MORAb-003 treatment in FRa-positive
tumors including Beclin-1 and PEA-15 (a factor involved in activation of
autophagic cell death). cDNA microarrays further showed that MORAb-003
treatment up-regulated the expression of BECN1, ATG8, ATG3 and LC3B in
FRa-positive tumors. Using FACS analysis with acridine orange (AO)
staining, we observed significantly more AO positive population in 3D
cultured SKOV3 cells treated with MORAb-003 alone (16.9%) or
MORAb-003+docetaxel (21.2%) than in cells treated with control IgG
(5.24%). Such differences were not observed in A2780 cells. We also
observed significant increase of autophagy flux in SKOV3 cells but not in
A2780 cells. We also found that blocking autophagy with
hydroxychloroquine or bafilomycin A1, or knockdown Beclin-1 or PEA-15
with shRNAs reversed the growth inhibition induced by MORAB-003 in 3D
cultured SKOV3 cells. We reported autophagy-associated cell death is a
previously unrecognized mechanism for targeting of FRa in addition to the
known mechanisms including antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Our
studies also suggested that Beclin-1 and PEA-15 could be further explored
as prognostic markers for FRa-targeted therapy.

