Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-GPC3 TRAB, a first-in-class T cell-redirecting bispecific
antibody targeting glypican-3 with potent in vitro and in vivo antitumor
efficacy against solid tumors


We present efficacy data for the T cell-redirecting antibody (TRAB) with
highly potent anti-tumor efficacy. Anti-Glypican-3 (GPC3) TRAB is a
humanized IgG4 bispecific antibody that simultaneously binds to GPC3 on
the cancer cell surface and to CD3 on the T cell surface. Anti-GPC3 TRAB
utilizes T cells as effectors to induce strong TRAB dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (TDCC) in the presence of GPC3-expressing cells. Treatment
with anti-GPC3 TRAB first activates T cells by increasing the expression
of CD25 and CD69 and also upregulating cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL 10,
IFN, and TNF, and then it enhances the proliferation of T cells.
Anti-GPC3 TRAB showed antitumor activity against xenograft tumors derived
from various cancer types MKN-74 (human gastric adenocarcinoma), PC-10
(human lung squamous cell carcinoma), TOV-21G (human ovarian clear cell
carcinoma), and KYSE70 (human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma) in a
NOD-SCID mouse model injected with human T cells. Although recent
immunotherapy, as represented by immune check point inhibitors PD-1,
PD-L1, and CTLA-4 antibodies, showed promising efficacy in human, not
every patient can benefit from this immunotherapy, because the
significant efficacy shown in patients by a blockade of immune
checkpoints is closely related to the tumor microenvironment. The immune
check point inhibitors show high efficacy against inflamed tumors,
because these have been sufficiently infiltrated by cytotoxic T cells
that recognize cancer-specific antigens. However, they do not have
efficacy against non inflamed tumors. In an immunocompetent mouse model
using human CD3 transgenic mice, neither the inhibitors that block immune
checkpoints (such as PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4) nor a conventional ADCC
antibody recognizing GPC3 could show significant efficacy against a
poorly immunogenic LLC1/hGPC3 tumor. However, anti-GPC3 TRAB showed
efficacy against this poorly immunogenic tumor by utilizing any kind of T
cell as effectors irrespective of TCR specificity, including not only
CD8-positive but also CD4-positive T cells.The studies we present show
that anti-GPC3 TRAB is a promising drug with high efficacy utilizing all
kinds of T cells as effectors. The compound is expected to have efficacy
even in patients with poorly immunogenic tumors, in which an immune
checkpoint blockade fails to show efficacy.

