Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved killing of tumor cells by a novel flexible antibody-based
modular T cell retargeting system


In recent years, bispecific antibodies (bsabs) and chimeric antigen
receptors (CARs) emerged as promising candidates for an antigen-specific
cancer immunotherapy. Bsabs and CARs redirect T cells in an
antigen-specific manner towards tumor cells and unleash their enormous
cytotoxic potential to attack the tumor. Nevertheless, several challenges
have to be solved to pave the way for a more widespread application of
both strategies. Both approaches are monotherapies bearing the inherent
risk for development of antigen-loss tumor variants under treatment. In
addition, due to their single antigen specificity each given bsab or CAR
is only curative for a restricted number of tumor indications and
long-lasting and demanding research is necessary to bring a new bsab- or
CAR-based drug to patients in need. Moreover, current CAR T cell
approaches do not allow for any control of the magnitude and duration of
T cell reactivity, thus bearing the risk for overshooting anti-tumor
reactions leading to severe side effects and ongoing destruction of
healthy tissue carrying the target antigen after tumor clearance. To
overcome these limitations, we recently introduced a novel flexible
antibody-based modular platform (UniTARG) that can be rapidly and easily
adapted for redirection of T cells to any TAA in both a bsAb- or
CAR-setting. The UniTARG technology consists of a universal effector arm
and individual targeting modules (TMs). The effector arm is either a
universal CAR (UniCAR), which has specificity for a short peptide motif
of 10 amino acids derived from a human nuclear protein, or a bsAb
(UniMAB) with specificity for human CD3 on T cells and the respective
peptide epitope. The antigen-specificity of the system is provided by TMs
comprising a binding domain e.g., a tumor-antigen specific scFv, fused to
the nuclear antigen motif recognized by the UniCAR/UniMAB binding domain.
Here we provide first in vitro and in vivo prove of concept for these new
approaches. Redirection of T cells armed with the universal effector
modules was effective at picomolar concentrations of targeting modules
directed against various antigens. The modular composition of both
platforms prompted us to explore, if T cell retargeting against several
antigens simultaneously might be feasible. Using either two
single-specific TMs or single bi-specific TMs significantly enhanced
specific lysis of tumor cells in vitro and durable responses in vivo were
observed. Furthermore, our results proof that TMs against new targets can
be developed in a couple of weeks and all TMs tested so far engaged
effector module armed T cells with similar potencies. Taken together, the
UniTARG platform technology represents a promising tool in the field of
both bsAbs and CARs with the advantage of simultaneous or consecutive
dual or even multispecific T cell retargeting. Furthermore the platform
approach allows a rapid development of new therapeutic options against
additional targets.

