Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting colon cancer stem cells: Novel marmelin analog THB
suppresses DCLK1 and Notch Signaling


Background: Despite therapeutic advances, colon cancer remains the second
leading cause of death in the United States. Previously, we have reported
that the identification of a novel compound, HDNC or Marmelin from Aegle
marmelos with potent anti-colon cancer activity. We have now developed a
novel marmelin analogue THB and made it water soluble THB using
-cyclodextrin (THBCD). The current study is designed to determine whether
THB affects stem cells and to identify a mechanism.Method: Colon cancer
cell lines HCT116 and SW480 and normal colon epithelial cells were used
in the study. Cell growth was measured by hexoseaminidase and
clonogenicity assays. Apoptosis was determined by measuring caspase 3/7
activities. Colosphere formation assay and FACS sorting were used for
stem cells. For in vivo effects, we have performed HCT116 cells induced
tumor xenografts. Immunohistochemistry was determined for stem cell
markers and Notch signaling proteins.Results: THB treatment induced a
significant dose-dependent inhibition of proliferation and colony
formation of the two colon cancer cell lines, but not that of the normal
cells. To demonstrate THB effects on stem cells, we performed colosphere
assays. THB treatment significantly reduced the number and size of
colospheres, suggesting effects on stem cells. In addition, colon stem
cell marker proteins DCLK1, LGR5, and CD44 were also decreased. Further
proof was obtained by flow cytometry analyses, where THB reduced the
number of DCLK1+ cells. We next determined whether THB affects the Notch
signaling pathway, a pathway that is important in maintaining CSC
population. Notch receptor and its ligands are up-regulated in human
colon cancer tissues. THB treatment significantly downregulated the
expression of Notch1, its ligand Jagged1 and downstream target protein
Hes1. Notch activation requires cleavage by the -secretase complex. THB
treatment inhibits the expression of -secretase complex proteins
Presenilin1, Nicastrin, APH1 and PEN2. Moreover, ectopic expression of
the Notch Intracellular domain (NICD) rescued the cells from THB mediated
growth suppression. These data demonstrate that THB mediated effects of
colon cancer stem cells is in part through downregulating Notch1
activation. To determine the effect of THB on tumor growth in vivo, mice
carrying HCT116 tumor xenografts were administered the compound
intraperitoneally (5mg/kg bw) every day for 21 days. THB treatment
significantly suppressed tumor xenograft growth, with notably lower tumor
volume and weight. Western blot and immunohistochemistry analyses
demonstrated significant inhibition of CSC marker proteins DCLK1, LGR5
and CD44 and also the Notch signaling proteins in the THB-treated
xenograft tissues.Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that THB
treatment suppresses colon cancer growth that targets stem cells by
inhibiting Notch1 signaling pathway.

