Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted proteomic analysis for personalized treatment of muscle
invasive bladder cancer


Background: Standard treatment for muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC)
includes chemotherapy with either gemcitabine-cisplatin (GC) or
methotrexate, vinblastine, adriamycin and cisplatin (MVAC). These
regimens have similar clinical complete response rates of approximately
30%. While no targeted treatment has been approved for bladder cancer,
clinical trials have identified biochemical markers that predict the
chemoresponsiveness of MIBC tumors to specific chemotherapeutic agents.
For example, patients with high hENT1 and low RRM1 expression responded
better to GC-based chemotherapy than their counterparts, and HER2
overexpression predicted resistance to cisplatin-based therapy. To
quantify targets that are known indicators of tumor behavior, we used
targeted proteomic analysis to assess 30 different protein biomarkers in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) MIBC tumor tissue.Methods: Twelve
FFPE MIBC tissue blocks were obtained and a pathologist marked a minimum
8mm2 of tumor area from 1 or 2 slides. Following laser microdissection of
the marked areas, proteins were extracted using the Liquid-Tissue process
and subjected to selected reaction monitoring mass spectrometry to
quantify the amounts of 30 different targeted proteins in each patient
sample.Results: Of the 12 patient samples, 7 (58%) expressed high levels
of hENT1 and 11 (92%) expressed low levels of RRM1, indicating that
gemcitabine-based therapy would be an appropriate choice. A single
patient expressed high levels of RRM1, an indication for non-gemcitabine
based therapy. All 12 patients expressed TUBB3, a marker of resistance to
taxane (vinblastine) and 10 patients (83%) lacked expression of FR-alpha,
a marker of sensitivity to methotrexate. The majority of patients
expressed a marker of sensitivity to anthracycline (TOPO2A) and did not
express a resistance biomarker for platinum therapy (ERCC1).Of 3 patients
whose tumors expressed HER2, 2 had overexpression (>750 amol/ug) and
would thus be eligible for HER2 basket trials. Further,
multiplex-targeted proteomics discovered patients expressing FGFR1 (17%),
cMET (33%), Axl (17%) and IDO1 (25%), which would make them eligible for
clinical trials of targeted or immunotherapies.Conclusion: MIBC is
heterogeneous and expresses a wide range of proteins. Yet, it continues
to be treated with only 2 chemotherapeutic regimens. Multiplexed
proteomics is currently being used in clinical practice to inform
personalized patient care decisions with identification and the relative
quantities of actionable proteins known to predict tumor behavior.

