Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adhesive signature technology for tumor initiating cell
purification in cancer research


In spite of major therapeutic advances, cancer relapse and low rates of
patient response persist. This failure is due in part to a small
subpopulation of tumor initiating cells (TICs) with stem cell like
properties that are responsible for the growth of the tumor and the
progression of metastasis. Currently, no efficient and reliable methods
to isolate TICs for study exist. Our lab has developed a methodology to
isolate cells based on their unique adhesion binding strength to a
matrix. The novel technology (micro-Stem cell High- Efficiency Adhesion
based Recovery [SHEAR]) consists of a microfluidic device that applies
varying degrees of detachment shear forces on cells. Using this device,
human pluripotent stem cells and their progeny have been isolated with
high reproducibility, yield (>97%), purity (95-99%), and survival (>95%)
rates (Singh et al, Nature Methods 2013). The process is fast (10 min),
label free, and scalable.The objective of this research is to isolate the
rare TICs from the general cancer cell population by exploiting
differences in adhesion strength. To study these differences, we measured
the adhesion strength (adhesive signature) of a panel of breast cancer
cell lines to fibronectin using a hydrodynamic assay. Based on this
screen, we selected the MDA-MB- 231, MDA-MB-453, and MCF7 cell lines for
purification of TICs using the uSHEAR technology. Briefly, microfluidic
channels were sterilized and coated with fibronectin. MDA-MB- 231,
MDA-MB-453 or MCF7 breast cancer cells were enzymatically disassociated,
pipetted into the inlet reservoir, and cultured in the device for 24h
before detachment experiments. Cells were exposed to different shear
forces to selectively detach cell sub-populations. Recovered
cell/colonies were counted, seeded into a mammosphere formation assay
(MFA), and analyzed after 10 daysThe ability to form mammospheres is
characteristic of TICs. After uSHEAR mediated separation of breast cancer
cells into three fractions, the strongest adhering fraction consistently
produced larger and more mammospheres. Furthermore, as the selection
adhesive force for the adhered fraction was increased, greater increases
in mammosphere number and size were observed. After 10 days, the
mammospheres were disassociated and the number of cells quantified. A
5-15 fold increase in the final number of cells was observed in the
strongly adherent fractions of cells, compared to 0.8-1.7 fold increase
in the unsorted controls. Our results show that cancer cells with a
higher mammosphere formation potential, a hallmark of characteristic
TICs, have a higher adhesion strength. Furthermore, these cells can be
enriched via adhesion based separation giving rise to more and larger
mammospheres than their less adherent counterparts. Our results suggest
that TICs could be separated based on adhesive forces. Future studies are
aimed at characterizing the isolated cells as TICs and testing the
isolation strategy in primary tumors.

