Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin B6 biomarkers and colorectal cancer: Modifications by time


Background: Pyridoxal 5-phospate (PLP) is the most commonly used marker
of circulating vitamin B6 status. In prospective case-control studies,
individuals with higher plasma concentrations of PLP had a 30-50%
decreased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). This may partly be explained
by decreased PLP due to inflammatory activity in persons at an increased
risk of CRC. We aimed to investigate different markers of vitamin B6 in
relation to CRC risk in a population with a very long follow-up time
between screening and diagnosis.Methods: This was a prospective
case-control study of 613 incident CRC cases and 1190 matched controls
nested within the population-based Northern Sweden Health and Disease
Study. PLP, pyridoxal (PL), pyridoxic acid (PA), 3-hydoxykynurenine (HK)
and xanthurenic acid (XA) were measured in plasma by LC-MS/MS. Besides
PLP, we investigated the recently introduced metabolite ratios PAr
(PA/(PLP+PL)) and HK:XA as markers of vitamin B6 status in relation to
CRC risk.Results: PAr, a marker of vitamin B6 catabolism during
inflammation, was linearly associated with CRC risk, with a 50% higher
risk in the highest vs. lowest quartile. In the group with a follow up
time between screening and diagnosis over 10.5 years no association was
observed, while in the groups with a follow up time between 5.8-10.5
years and below 5.8 years risk was approximately twofold in most
quartiles vs the lowest quartile. A 50% risk decrease was observed in the
in the third vs the lowest quartile of plasma PLP and a similar risk
increase was observed in the highest vs the lowest quartile of the
functional vitamin B6 marker HK:XA.Conclusions: PAr may influence later
stages of tumor development, but possibly not early tumorigenesis. Poor
functional vitamin B6 status and inflammatory activity might influence
both the risk of CRC and plasma concentrations of PLP. Our results
underscore the need to use several biomarkers for vitamin B6 status
together with the already well established plasma PLP. This may be
generalizable not only to CRC but also other diseases with an
inflammatory aspect.

