Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allelic imbalance analysis of uterine carcinosarcoma: An inquiry
into the dual nature of the neoplasm


Uterine carcinosarcoma (UCS), also known as Malignant Mixed Mullerian
Tumor, is a neoplasm of the female genital tract that shows histological
features of both carcinoma and sarcoma. Some studies have indicated that
UCS arises from sarcomatous differentiation of high-grade carcinoma while
others have confirmed a bi-clonal nature of the tumor. Given these
differences, further investigation in the origin of this tumor with newer
approaches and technologies is warranted. In this study we determined the
allelic imbalance (AI) profiles of the two components of UCS and compared
the AI events that were shared by, or differed between, them. Samples
were obtained from 10 patients diagnosed with UCS and were preserved in
formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) blocks. The two components
(carcinoma & sarcoma) were identified and micro-dissected, and
whole-genome DNA micro-arrays were applied to the isolated DNA. We then
applied a sensitive computational method that combines haplotype
information with SNP array data to identify somatic segmental copy number
variations and copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (cnLOH). After we
obtained the AI events we filtered small events (Uterine carcinosarcoma
(UCS), also known as Malignant Mixed Mullerian Tumor, is a neoplasm of
the female genital tract that shows histological features of both
carcinoma and sarcoma. Some studies have indicated that UCS arises from
sarcomatous differentiation of high-grade carcinoma while others have
confirmed a bi-clonal nature of the tumor. Given these differences,
further investigation in the origin of this tumor with newer approaches
and technologies is warranted. In this study we determined the allelic
imbalance (AI) profiles of the two components of UCS and compared the AI
events that were shared by, or differed between, them. Samples were
obtained from 10 patients diagnosed with UCS and were preserved in
formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) blocks. The two components
(carcinoma & sarcoma) were identified and micro-dissected, and
whole-genome DNA micro-arrays were applied to the isolated DNA. We then
applied a sensitive computational method that combines haplotype
information with SNP array data to identify somatic segmental copy number
variations and copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (cnLOH). After we
obtained the AI events we filtered small events (<2 MB) to rule out
germline duplications. We then obtained events that are common to both
components by using a criterion of 80% reciprocal overlap. All such
events were classified as a gain, loss or cnLOH. We found that, on an
average, 80% of the events found in the carcinoma component are common
with the sarcoma component. Conversely, only 64% of events seen in the
sarcoma component are found in the carcinoma. This may be in part due to
the fact that the sarcoma component usually showed greater number of
events and most of these events were larger than the corresponding
carcinoma component. Also the sarcoma component showed an increased
degree of allelic imbalance than the counterpart. We then looked into
particular regions of known tumor suppressor and oncogenes and identified
loss in the TP53 gene region (60% of tumors), gains in PIK3CA and PTEN
gene regions (40% of tumors), among other events. Our analysis showed
that the sarcomatous component shared major portions of the AI profile
with the carcinomatous component, but also showed additional events and a
greater degree of AI. One explanation for this observation can be that
the sarcomatous component retains the AI profile of the carcinomatous
component and also gathers additional imbalance. This suggests
directionality to the development of UCS: that it arises by sarcomatous
differentiation of already existing carcinoma of the uterus. We are
pursuing additional assessments of point mutations and expression
profiles to complement our existing analyses.

