Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of CDK4 sensitizes multidrug resistant ovarian cancer
cells to paclitaxel by increasing apoptosis


Purpose: Overexpression of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4 has been shown
in a variety of cancers and contributes to tumor cell growth and
proliferation. However, the effect of inhibition of CDK4 in ovarian
cancer is unknown. Here we investigated the therapeutic effect of CDK4
inhibitor, palbociclib, in combination with paclitaxel in ovarian cancer
cells. Experimental Design: Cell viability was determined by MTT assay
after incubating with different dosages of palbociclib and/or paclitaxel.
Western blot, immunofluorescence, and Calcein AM assays were conducted to
determine the potential effects and mechanisms of palbociclib in
combination with paclitaxel. CDK4 siRNA was used to validate the outcome
of targeting CDK4 in ovarian cancer cells. Immunohistochemistry was
performed to evaluate the clinical relevance of CDK4 expression in an
ovarian cancer tissue microarray. Results: The combination of palbociclib
and paclitaxel significantly enhanced drug sensitivity in both Rb
positive (Rb+) and Rb negative (Rb-) ovarian cancer cells. Palbociclib
suppressed the phosphorylation of pRb (Ser 807-811, Ser 795, and Ser 780)
in multidrug resistant SKOV3TR (Rb+) cells. When combined with
paclitaxel, palbociclib induced significant apoptosis in both SKOV3TR
(Rb+) and OVCAR8TR (Rb-) cells. Palbociclib also inhibited the activity
of P-glycoprotein (Pgp). Additionally, transfection of CDK4 siRNA showed
effective knockdown of CDK4 expression and sensitized multidrug resistant
SKOV3TR and OVCAR8TR cells to paclitaxel. Furthermore, primary ovarian
cancer patients with high expression of CDK4 tended to have unfavorable
clinical outcomes. Conclusions: Inhibition of CDK4 either by palbociclib
or by specific siRNA can increase the in vitro paclitaxel sensitivity in
either Rb+ or Rb- multidrug resistant ovarian cancer cells through
increased apoptosis. Therefore, CDK4 may be a promising target in the
treatment of ovarian cancer.

