Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the treatment-induced developmental reprogramming
process that facilitates progression of prostate cancer


Metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) develops resistance to hormone therapies
through androgen receptor (AR) dependent and independent mechanisms.
Previously we described a remarkable and reversible adaptive cellular
plasticity that permits adherent AR+ PCa cells (LNCaP, VCaP, LAPC4 and
CWR22rv1) to efficiently reprogram to non-adherent AR-/lo cells by
exposure to an androgen-free, custom-formulated stem cell medium (STM).
STM-reprogrammed cells grew as rosettes/spheroids on conventional tissue
culture treated dishes, were resistant to enzalutamide compared to
parental cells and had high tumor forming efficiency when xenografted
into castrated and intact male mice. Reprogrammed cells overexpressed
genes associated with the stem cell state, expressed cell surface
antigens characteristic of neural crest stem cells (NRCAM, HNK-1, CD271
and CD29) and showed increased in vitro invasive behaviour through a
matrix-coated membrane and increased invasion in vivo into zebrafish
following yolk-sac xenografting. When re-exposed to serum-containing
mediums, reprogrammed cells could be re-differentiated back to AR+
prostate-like cancer cells or to other differentiated cell lineages
derived from neural/neural crest stem cells (neural-, oligodendrocyte-,
glia- or osteoblast-like). Gene expression profiling data from
reprogrammed cells was analyzed to identify activation of key signalling
pathways associated with this transition and outcomes were confirmed by
qPCR (for mRNAs) and Western blotting (for protein levels). Inhibitors of
Bmi1 (PTC-209), PI-3-kinase (LY294002), Akt (MK2206) or NF-B (Copper-DDC)
were employed to determine whether they interfered with acquired
non-adherent (spheroidal) colony formation in the LNCaP model system
exposed to STM. Results indicated that key molecules in the non-classical
NF-B pathway (RelB and p100) were upregulated in the transition to AR-/lo
stem-like cells and that Bmi1 and phospho-Akt proteins were also
consistently overexpressed in all cell models in response to
reprogramming. Inhibitors of Bmi1, PI-3-kinase, and Akt significantly
suppressed the ability of LNCaP cells to form non-adherent spheroids in
the STM, while an inhibitor of NF-B was able to reduce the number and
size of spheroids. The results support the idea that this adaptive and
reversible tumor cell plasticity that generates resistance to androgen
deprivation is targetable by agents directed at key genes associated with
the developmental reprogramming process described previously.

