Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic apoptosis induced by combined PI3 kinase and bcl-xl
inhibition in genotypic subsets of prostate cancer is attenuated by a
feedback signaling loop via the alpha-5 integrin


Background: Integrin-mediated cellular adhesion to extracellular matrix
components is a crucial regulator of tumor cell survival and
chemoresistance. The integrin alpha 5 (ITGA5) plays a vital role in the
migration and adhesion of prostate cancer (PCa) cells to fibronectin
secreted by bone-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (Joshi, 2015),
architects of a metastatic niche (Shiozawa, 2011). Hypothesis: The
mechanism(s) whereby ITGA5 regulates the survival and chemoresistance in
PCa may define novel therapeutic approaches. Methods and Results: To
assess the pro-survival function of ITGA5 in PCa, we found that ITGA5
shRNA reduced bcl-2 and bcl-xl expression, and induced apoptosis in PC-3
cells. In these PTEN-mutant (mt) AR-negative(-) cells, pharmacological
inhibition of the PI3K signaling pathway (BKM120) in combination with
ITGA5 knockdown synergistically induced apoptosis as assessed by
induction of cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP. Similarly, BKM120 in
combination with pharmacological inhibition of bcl-2/bcl-xL (ABT263) also
induced apoptosis in synergistic fashion in PC-3 cells. Synergistic
apoptosis with PI3-kinase inhibitors (BKM120, pictilisib) and ABT-263 was
restricted to PTEN-mt PC-3 and LNCaP cells and was not observed in
PTEN-wt, AR- DU145 cells. The pan-Akt-inhibitor GDC-0068 in combination
with ABT263 induced apoptosis specifically in PTEN-mt AR+ LNCaP and C4-2B
cells. By contrast, there was diminished evidence of synergy of
PI3-Kinase inhibitors and bcl-2 specific inhibition with ABT199 pointing
toward the requirement of bcl-xl inhibition. However, resistance to
longer-term therapy with PI3K and bcl-xl/bcl-2 inhibition was observed in
PC-3 but not LNCaP cells. Although single-agent PI3K inhibitor therapy
downregulates ITGA5 expression in PC-3 cells, by contrast bcl-2/bcl-xl
inhibitor therapy, alone or in combination with PI3K inhibitor therapy,
strongly upregulates ITGA5 expression together with Akt activation
suggesting that ITGA5 represents a pathway of resistance to combinatorial
therapy through feedback loop signals generated with bcl-xl inhibition.
In support of this hypothesis, ITGA5 knockdown together with BKM120 and
ABT263 combinatorial therapy blocked the upregulation of ITGA5 and
associated Akt activation, further reduced bcl-xl expression, and
enhanced apoptosis in PC-3 cells. In PTEN-wild type AR-positive VCAP
cells, evidence for synergistic apoptosis with PI3K and bcl-2/bcl-xl
inhibition was also obtained suggesting that the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion may
phenocopy the pro-survival pathways of PTEN-deficient cells. Conclusions:
These data point toward a personalized pharmacological strategy combining
PI3-kinase or Akt inhibition with bcl-2/bcl-xL inhibition in genotypic
subsets of prostate cancer and identify a potential resistance pathway
mediated by ITGA5-mediated signaling.

