Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Axon guidance neuropilin and plexin A2 genes are involved in
ERG-associated prostate cancer


Background: Bone metastases are frequent and severe complications of
prostate cancer (PCa), the most common malignancy that affects men in
Western countries. Recurrent gene fusions, involving the ERG gene and the
androgen-regulated promoter of the TMPRSS2 gene, occur in over 50% of
PCa. The abnormal over-expression of the ERG transcription factor
disturbs prostate cell transcriptome. We previously identified a series
of genes directly and positively regulated by the ERG-fusion in vitro and
in vivo. Among them can be found Plexin A2 (PLXNA2), which is a
semaphorin receptor family member involved in axon guidance and in many
pathophysiological processes, including cancer and bone disorders. We
showed that PLXNA2 is involved in TMPRSS2:ERG-mediated enhancements of
PC3c cell migration and invasion. These results prompted us to look for
genes functionally related to PLXNA2 and involved in ERG-associated
PCa.Methods: Using a PCa cell line (PC3c) stably over-expressing the
TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, we first used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis in silico
studies to analyze transcriptomic results and identify axon guidance
genes associated with ERG-fusion expression in PCa. Their expression was
validated in stable clones by RT-PCR and Immunofluorescence. Secondly,
using RNAs of a human PCa sample cohort, we performed qRT-PCR to detect
and correlate candidate genes to fusion expression. Finally, to validate
the relevance of the identified genes, using immunohistochemistry
experiments, we studied the expression of these genes in tissue samples,
including primary tumors and lymph nodes or bone metastases.Results:
Using transcriptomic analyzes and expression validation, we identified
neuropilin (NRP1 and NRP2) genes, plexin and semaphorin genes deregulated
by the ERG fusion expression in stable clones. In human samples, PLXNA2,
NRP1 and NRP2 expression were strongly associated to PCa, and
particularly to metastastic PCa. We established a significant correlation
between both PLXNA2 and NRP1 gene expression and the presence of
TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. At protein level, NRP1 and NRP2 were highly detected
in human lymph nodes and bone metastasis samples. Since neuropilin
proteins are known to interact with plexin to act as coreceptors for
semaphorin ligands, protein colocalization in stable clones suggested a
functional association of PLXNA2 and NRPs in tumor cells.Conclusion:
Taken together, our results reveal that TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene
expression is able to deregulate axon guidance genes such as NRP1 and
PLXNA2 in PCa. Therefore, since the interaction between plexins and their
NRP1 and 2 coreceptors often determines the functional specificity of
their semaphorin ligand effects, we hypothesize that the ERG fusion
expression imbalances the plexin/neuropilin/semaphorin signaling to
contribute to PCa progression. These results reinforce the recent
interest in targeting neuropilins for cancer therapy.

