Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce apoptosis in multiple tumor
types through induction of ATF3


Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are approved for the treatment of
cutaneous T-Cell lymphoma (CTCL) and Multiple Myeloma. In colon cancer
cells HDACi-induced apoptosis is linked to induction of a specific
transcriptional response involving upregulation of the immediate-early
(IE) response genes FOS, JUN, EGR1, EGR3 and ATF3. To determine if this
transcriptional response underpins HDACi-induced apoptosis across
multiple tumour types, including CTCL and MM, 50 cell lines derived from
common solid and haematological cancers were screened for sensitivity to
HDACi-induced apoptosis, and response correlated with IE gene induction.
HDACi treatment robustly induced IE gene mRNA and protein expression in
multiple tumour lines. IE gene induction was sustained over 24 hours and
dependent on the Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors and was also observed in
vivo in CTCL patients treated with the HDACi panobinostat. The magnitude
of induction of FOS, JUN and ATF3 expression correlated significantly
with HDACi-induced apoptosis. The induction of ATF3 was critical for
HDACi induced apoptosis as ATF3 downregulation markedly attenuated
HDACi-induced apoptosis in multiple tumour lines, and ATF3 knockout MEFs
were refractory to HDACi-induced apoptosis. To identify downstream
targets of ATF3, the magnitude of ATF3 induction following HDACi
treatment was correlated with altered expression of pro and
anti-apoptotic genes involved in the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. The
magnitude of ATF3 induction correlated inversely with repression of the
anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-XL, and ATF3 knockdown attenuated HDACi-mediated
Bcl-XL repression. Notably, combinatorial treatment of refractory cell
lines with an HDACi and a Bcl-XL inhibitor significantly enhanced
HDACi-induced apoptosis. This study demonstrates that IE gene induction
is a universal feature of HDACi-induced apoptosis, and that ATF3 as a key
driver of HDACi-induced apoptosis through repression of Bcl-XL. These
findings establish a method for rapid assessment of HDACi response, and
identify a combination strategy for enhancing the activity of these
compounds.

