Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral administration of Withaferin-A effectively suppresses
prostate carcinogenesis in PTEN-Knockout mice


Androgen ablation therapy alone or in combination with radiation therapy
is the mainstay for prostate cancer (CaP), which is initially effective
in de-bulking the tumor volume, however, eventually these patients will
progress to a castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), which requires
more aggressive chemotherapies. Treating CRPC with second generation
androgen -ablation based therapies like enzalutamide and abiraterone
exhibit only a short window of therapeutic benefit resulting in
chemoresistance. Hence, there is an immediate need for identification of
novel targets to eradicate CRPC effectively. We and others have reported
targeting AKT activation could efficiently suppress the growth of CRPC
cells; in fact a number of clinical trials have shown some promise that
AKT could be an attractive target for CRPC. In fact, clinical studies
from our lab have suggested that AKT activation predominantly occurs in
Gleason stage specific manner suggesting identification of novel drugs to
inhibit AKT activation is imperative. Our earlier finding suggests that
Withaferin-A (WA), an herbal molecule effectively inhibits the growth of
CRPC cells by downregulating AKT activation and its downstream
pro-survival events. Present study investigated whether oral
administration of WA may inhibit tumor development in Pten conditional
knockout mice [(Pten-loxp/loxp:PB-Cre4+) (Pten-KO)] which will be a
unique and appropriate preclinical model to study the AKT driven prostate
tumor. Oral administration of WA for 45 weeks effectively prevented the
tumor growth without any significant signs of toxicity to organs in
Pten-KO mice. Vehicle and WA (5mg/kg body weight) were orally given up to
45 weeks. Gross pathological studies suggested a significant inhibition
of growth and micro metastasis in WA-treated mice as compared to the
vehicle treated mice. On microscopic examination of the prostatic tissue,
we found that the WA-treated tumors showed more necrosis than the control
group and some of the tumors were more differentiated than the controls
in the same group. All the organs were completely submitted for
histological evaluation. None of the WA-treated mice organs showed any
metastatic lesion on the other hand, we found discrete metastasis to
lungs in the control tumors. Our ongoing immunohistochemistry analysis
may corroborate our in vitro findings that down regulation of AKT and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers such as -catenin,
snail, and vimentin in WA treated tumors as compared to the control mice.
Overall, these results provide important scientific evidence in support
of AKT signaling as a target to inhibit CRPC as well as metastatic CRPC.

