Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel molecular inversion probe (MIP) system for the streamlined
identification of germline and somatic sequence variants in cancer


Characterization of the somatic sequence variations that accrue in cells
is critical for understanding the pronounced cellular and clinical
heterogeneity observed in cancer. The ability to efficiently detect
variations in tumors can help to identify biomarkers which may be
relevant to clinical trials, support more accurate prognosis, and help
guide more effective choices of therapy. Next-generation sequencing (NGS)
has become a valuable tool for discovering somatic mutations in cancers.
Here we present an alternative approach to current methodologies for
addressing these needs.HEAT-Seq (High Efficiency Amplification of Targets
for Sequencing) is a targeted NGS method based on optimized, multiplexed
molecular inversion probes (MIPs). This is a convenient, sensitive and
cost-effective target enrichment technology for SNP discovery and SNP
validation in cancer-related genes. HEAT-Seq probes target both DNA
strands and were designed to facilitate bioinformatic error correction.
Molecule identifiers (UIDs) incorporated into the probes tag PCR
duplicates and support ultra-sensitive detection of low frequency
variants, reduction of false positives, and accurate assessment of
molecular complexity free of amplification bias. Sensitivities for allele
detection have been measured to below 1%.The HEAT-Seq workflow from input
DNA to sequence-ready sample can be completed in 8 hours without any
requirement for a separate library preparation step, which saves both
time and cost. Additionally, the capture, amplification and sample clean
up steps are performed in a single reaction tube. This eliminates the
need to transfer samples to subsequent reaction tubes, preserves sample
identity, prevents cross contamination, limits sample loss, and makes the
HEAT-Seq protocol easy to automate. A comparison of current PCR-based
targeted sequencing with the new HEAT-Seq technology indicates
significant advantages for HEAT-Seq in the accurate quantification of low
frequency cancer variants.In summary, HEAT-Seq technology offers a rapid,
convenient, automatable option to identify genomic DNA variants and
enable advances in cancer research.

