Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bigelovin inhibits colorectal cancer by suppressing the growth and
inducing apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers with high
incidence and mortality worldwide. In 2014, CRC was the second commonest
cancer and second leading cause of cancer deaths in Hong Kong. National
Cancer Institute estimates that 132,700 people will be diagnosed with CRC
and 49,700 people will die from the disease in 2015 worldwide. Despite
effectiveness of the chemotherapeutics, severe side effects often affect
patients normal life. Traditional Chinese medicines can be a good source
of anti-tumor agent with better safety profile. Here, we reported a
sesquiterpene lactone (bigelovin) isolated from Inula helianthus-
aquatica, which was shown to induce anti-angiogenesis1 and apoptosis2 in
vitro. Although previous studies reported its apoptotic effects on
various cell lines, there were no detailed mechanistic or animal studies
on its effect on colon cancer cells. To further explore its effect on
CRC, we used both in vitro and in vivo assays. The effects of bigelovin
in vitro were determined by Annexin V/PI double staining, cell cycle
assay and western blotting. Bigelovin was shown to have better
selectivity in colon cancer cells than primary normal colon cells.
Besides, CRC cells treated with bigelovin resulted in decrease in cell
proliferation and increase in apoptosis in both time- and dose-dependent
manner. Western blot results also showed caspase activation and protein
changes of key molecules (p-H2A.X-DNA damage marker, Cyclin B1-cell
cycle, etc). Furthermore, bigelovin (20 mg/kg) significantly reduced the
growth of CRC cells-driven tumors in vivo without severe side effects
comparing to FOLFOX (containing folinic acid, 5-fluorouracil and
oxaliplatin) treatment. Taken together, these results suggested that
bigelovin can be a promising therapeutic candidate for colorectal
cancer.References:1. Yue, G.G.L., et al. Anti-angiogenesis and
immunomodulatory activities of an anti-tumor sesquiterpene bigelovin
isolated from Inula helianthus-aquatica. Eur J Med Chem, 2013, 59:
243-52.2. Zhang, H.H., et al. Bigelovin inhibits STAT3 signaling by
inactivating JAK2 and induces apoptosis in human cancer cells. Acta
Pharmacol Sin, 2015, 36(4): 507-16.

