Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel G-quadruplex formed in the PDGFR- promoter that is
selectively targeted by a small molecule to repress transcription


Abnormal expression of PDGFR- protein contributes to several
malignancies. PDGFR- has become increasingly attractive therapeutic
target in the treatments of certain cancers. A G-quadruplex-forming
nuclease hypersensitive element (NHE) in the human PDGFR- promoter has
been found to form multiple G-quadruplexes from the overlapping
sequences. This G-quadruplex-forming NHE has been shown to regulate
approximately 60% of basal promoter activity. Targeting transcriptional
control of PDGFR- provides an attractive target for developing inhibitors
for the PDGFR- signaling pathway, in addition to molecular targeting of
the PDGFR- protein or its cognate ligand. We have previously determined
the most stable G-quadruplex formed in the PDGFR- NHE. Interestingly, the
3-end G-quadruplex formed in the PDGFR- promoter NHE appears to be
selectively targeted by an ellipticine analog GSA1129, which has been
shown to repress PDGFR- activity in cancer cell lines, and GSA1129
appears to shift the dynamic equilibrium in the full-length sequence to
favor this structure. Therefore, characterization of the 3-end
G-quadruplex structure is important for understanding its function and
for rational design of small molecules targeting this element. The 3-end
PDGFR- G-quadruplex appears to adopt an unusual parallel G-quadruplex
structure containing an imperfect GGGA tetrad at the 3-end, as shown by
DMS footprinting and CD spectroscopy. We further investigated the
stability and structure of the 3-end G-quadruplex and its interactions
with GSA1129 by mutational analysis combined with NMR spectroscopy. The
3-end G-quadruplex can be stabilized by an A-to-G mutation at position
18. However, the truncated wild-type and mutated 18-mer (Pu18) sequences
appear to form predominantly dimer structure as shown by NMR. Using a
19-mer sequence Pu19 with the A-to-G mutation (Pu19A18G), a stable
monomeric G-quadruplex can be formed in potassium solution, adopting a
parallel-stranded structure as shown by NMR. In the wild-type 3-end NHE
sequences, the formation of a monomeric G-quadruplex in potassium can
only be observed in a 20-mer Pu20 sequence with additional 3 G20; the
assignment of Pu20 G-quadruplex using site-specific 15N-G-labeled DNA
sequences indicated a novel parallel-stranded G-quadruplex structure
using G20 instead of A18 in the 3-end-tetrad. The Pu20 G-quadruplex
appears to have high thermo-stability as shown by CD studies; however,
its specific formation can only be achieved at low potassium salt.
GSA1129 can bind Pu20 and increase the 3-end G-quadruplex stability by
nearly 20 degrees. This study highlighted the dynamic nature of the 3-end
PDGFR- G-quadruplex and the importance of identifying the proper sequence
for the biologically relevant G-quadruplex structure formation.
Significantly, the dynamic nature of the 3-end G-quadruplex may make it
an attractive target for drug regulation.

