Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insertional mutagenesis to identify molecular mechanisms of breast
cancer dormancy and metastasis


The PiggyBac transposon insertional mutagenesis system (PBTS) is a
powerful genomic screen previously demonstrated to identify
cancer-causing genes and which we have adapted to identify genes
regulating breast cancer cell dormancy and metastases. Transposition
takes places through a cut and paste mechanism catalyzed by the PiggyBac
transposase, which excises and re-integrates the transposon into TTAA
chromosomal sites. We have adapted the PBTS system using the well
characterized D2.0R in vitro and in vivo models of breast cancer cell
dormancy. D2.0R cells grow as primary tumors in the mammary fat pad,
disseminate to the lungs, but remain dormant. The PBTS system induces
random genome-wide gene activations or inactivations that we expect will
induce dormant cells to proliferate and form metastases in vivo.
Identification of these genes is performed using high throughput
sequencing and existing computational algorithms. Candidate dormancy and
metastasis genes will be functionally validated for their roles in
dormancy and metastases. We have validated the performance of the PBTS in
our model system. D2.0R cells were transfected with 20 copies of the
PiggyBac transposon ATP-1. Single clones were obtained from the pooled
population and expanded under selection. Pooled D2.0R cells and D2.0R
single clones were subsequently transduced with lenti-hyPBase transposase
and double-selected for the stable integration of the ATP-1 transposon
and the lenti-hyPBase transposase. gDNA was extracted from these cells,
sheared and amplified by splinkerette-PCR and sequenced using an Illumina
platform. Our data show that there is a significantly higher variability
in the integration sites of the ATP-1 transposon in D2.0R cells stably
expressing hy-PBase as compared with non-hy-PBase expressing D2.0R cells
carrying the ATP-1 transposons. This demonstrates that cells from each
clone acquire new insertions sites upon ATP-1 re-mobilization due to
hyPBase transposase activity. Likewise, we found a significantly higher
variability in the ATP-1 insertions in cells from the pooled cultures
than in the cells from individual cellular clones. We also observed that
reads from both the 5 and 3 ends of the ATP-1 insertion sites of the
transposon cluster together, showing a good correlation between reads
from both ends. A complimentary approach will be performed by introducing
the PBTS system into the poorly metastatic MMTV-Myc transgenic mammary
cancer model to identify genes and pathways that induce metastases. Since
Myc is overexpressed in 30% of human breast cancers, this is a relevant
model to employ. These results demonstrate that our experimental
protocols are able to induce transposon mobilization which should
identify genes that regulate tumor dormancy and metastases. Identifying
genes that promote dormancy and metastases will lead to novel strategies
that could prevent disease recurrence or treat metastatic breast cancer.

