Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic, pharmacodynamic action of MELK kinase inhibitor
OTS167 in cancer cells


Cancer is the second most common cause of death in US in 2015 and has
been the leading cause of death in Japan since 1981. Despite of improved
therapeutic strategies in cancer, only limited treatment options can
still be available to a subset of patients. Many efforts have been made
to develop molecular targeted drugs, but the success rate did not reach
to patients expectation. Unlike the conventional chemotherapy, the use of
maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and the measurement of bulk tumor volume are
not always appropriate for the clinical evaluation of molecular targeted
drugs. To optimize and personalize the dosing for targeted agents,
detailed molecular pathway and biomarkers that are affected by the drug
should be elucidated. OTS167 was developed as a novel and potent MELK
kinase inhibitor that we previously reported. The expression of MELK is
elevated in various human cancers both in solid and hematological tumor
and MELK is known to be associated with cancer progression and poor
prognosis. Because MELK is indicated its critical roles in cancer stem
cell proliferation as well, targeting MELK is an attractive and promising
therapeutic strategy for cancer patient.Here, we report the molecular
mechanism of action of OTS167 in preclinical model. OTS167 suppressed
MELK activity and promoted MELK protein degradation by inhibition of
autophosphorylation. OTS167-treated cells showed drastic morphological
transformation with the induction of p53 and p21 expression. We also
investigated the expression of stem cell markers to elucidate whether
OTS167 suppresses cancer stem-like properties through inhibition of MELK.
Furthermore, we evaluated antitumor activity of OTS167 using human
xenograft model and molecular changes in tumor tissue. The expression of
MELK and downstream molecules were decreased in OTS167-treated xenograft
tumor tissues by IHC. The change of expression and pharmacological effect
were well correlated. Our data provide the evidence for the concept that
OTS167 suppresses tumor growth through the inhibition of MELK signaling
pathway and suggest the possibility of biomarkers for the assessment of
clinical efficacy.

