Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calponin-3, acidic (CNN3) mediates EMT-related genes in human
colorectal cancer metastasis


(a) An introductory sentence indicating the purposes of the study Distant
metastasis is the major cause of cancer-related death in colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients. Although the Calponin family has emerged as a
distinguishing feature in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
human cancer, the role of CNN3 member in the metastatic CRC has not been
investigated.(b) A brief description of pertinent experimental
procedures. Three pairs of primary CRC and corresponding matched
metastasis cell lines were analyzed for gene expression by microarray and
western blotting. CNN3 was transduced to CRC cell line with lower CNN3
expression level (SW-480), and CNN3 with higher CNN3 expression CRC cell
lines (SW-620, HCT-116) was suppressed by lentiviral-induced shRNA.
Functional analysis of CNN3 overexpression and suppression was
investigated in these CRC cell lines for proliferation and invasion.
Expression of several potential CNN3 target genes (ERK1/2) and EMT
markers (E-cadherin and vimentin) in primary CRC and matching metastasis
CRC cell lines was validated.(c) A summary of the new, unpublished data.
Global CNN3 expression levels were significantly higher in metastasis
cell lines compared with the matched primary cell lines in both mRNA (FC
= 2.3, p = 0.017) and protein levels. CRC cell lines with suppressed CNN3
showed decreased cell proliferation and reduced invasive behavior in CRC
cell lines. Suppression of CNN3 in CRC cell lines with higher CNN3
expression resulted in increased E-cadherin and decreased vimentin.
pERK1/2 were decreased in accordance with suppression of CNN3 in both
SW-620 and HCT-116. Overexpression of CNN3 in CRC cell lines caused
reduced E-cadherin in SW-480 and HT-29.(d) A statement of the conclusions
CNN3 is involved in mediating EMT and metastatic behavior in the colon.
Its expression is accordantly related to EMT markers, and CNN3 may serve
as a possible diagnostic marker and therapeutic target for patients with
CRC.

