Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome and targeted deep sequencing identify genome-wide
allelic loss and frequent SETDB1 mutations in malignant pleural
mesotheliomas


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare malignancy with a highly
unfavorable prognosis. A strong link has been established between
increased risk for MPM and exposure to asbestos or erionite. As asbestos
had widely been used in different industries, the incidence of MPM in the
United States is expected to steadily rise and peak with about 70,000 new
MPM cases over the next 20 years. Median survival has ranged from 10-17
months. But the underlying genetic mechanism is not fully understood.
Moreover, genetic alterations and causes for multiple primary cancer
development including MPM are unknown.We used whole exome sequencing to
identify somatic mutations in a patient with MPM and two additional
primary cancers who had no evidence of venous, arterial, lymphovascular,
or perineural invasion indicating dissemination of a primary lung cancer
to the pleura. The development of multiple primary malignancies including
a rare MPM led us to search for underlying genetic alterations.
Interestingly, most mutations identified in the MPM patient were highly
enriched for the mutant allele, suggesting a homozygous alteration or
deletion of wild-type allele when minimal contamination of normal pleura
in the MPM is taken into consideration. We found that most variants
identified showed a high frequency of mutant alleles, except variants on
chromosomes 7, 16 and 20. Analysis of tumor allelic ratio to normal using
all variants in exome sequencing revealed that this mesothelioma showed
genome-wide allelic loss or loss of heterozygosity (LOH), which appears
to be distinct from other cancers that have many genetic alterations with
focal allelic loss. To the best of our knowledge, this type of extensive
genome-wide allelic loss has not been described in MPM.Whole exome
sequencing analysis revealed the MPM had R282W, a key TP53 mutation, and
genome-wide allelic loss or loss of heterozygosity, a distinct genomic
alteration not previously described in MPM. We identified frequent
inactivating SETDB1 mutations in this patient and in 77 additional MPM
patients (mutation frequency: 9%, 7/78) by targeted deep sequencing.In
summary, we identified genome-wide allelic loss in a patient who had MPM
and two additional primary cancers, results which suggest that careful
analysis in exome sequencing is needed to detect genome-wide deletion in
MPM samples with or without multiple primary cancers. The high frequency
of mutations in SETDB1 that we found suggests that this and other
histone-related genes are important in MPM.

