Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous isolation of genomic DNA and total RNA using the
Qiagen AllPrep method


Introduction: The purification of genomic DNA (gDNA) and total RNA (RNA)
from various specimen types using a single sample is currently in high
demand in genomic settings due to the limitation of available biological
material. There is an increased need for simultaneous isolation of
nucleic acids in cancer genetics for use in downstream applications such
as genotyping, microarrays or next generation sequencing. The Qiagen
AllPrep technique provides a comprehensive solution for extraction of
gDNA and RNA from a single specimen. In this study, we tested the AllPrep
kits for concurrent isolation of gDNA and RNA from five different sample
types.Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA and RNA were extracted
simultaneously according to Qiagen AllPrep manufacturer's instructions
from five specimen types: bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMC),
cryopreserved cultured cell lines, whole blood, fresh frozen and FFPE
samples. Quantity and quality of both nucleic acids were assessed by the
NanoDrop 2000 and Qubit fluorometer 2.0. Purified gDNA from BMMC, fresh
frozen, whole blood and FFPE samples was further evaluated by library
preparation, targeted hybridization capture and sequencing on an Illumina
NextSeq500. FastQ files were submitted to a Clinical Genome Analytics
(CGA) pipeline for quality metrics analysis.Results: The AllPrep
technique resulted in effective isolation of high quality gDNA and RNA
(Table1). All set wet lab and sequencing QC metrics were met for each
sample type.Conclusion: We have successfully verified the AllPrep method
can be used for simultaneous extraction of both gDNA and RNA using the
same input material without compromising the yield or purity of both
final products. This simple procedure based on spin column technology not
only gave the advantage of generating high quality results using limited
specimen resources, but also decreased the hands on time by 3.5 hours and
cost when compared to extraction done with two separate kits.
Represents average QC results and SD for each specimen type. **n = 8 for
sequencing metrics

