Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a multigenic bioluminescence imaging system to
detect prostate cancer cells and assess their response to therapy


BACKGROUNDCurrently, liquid biposies for imaging single cancer cell to
provide personalised medicine is gaining importance. In the last years,
molecular imaging techniques using transcriptional amplification systems
have been developed but a system enabling both PCa cell detection and
treatment response assessment is lacking. PCA3 RNA is a unique PCa
biomarker that has been widely studied for PCa screening and detection
while the PSA gene is another biomarker of high clinical significance as
it gives an account of response to androgen deprivation treatments (ADT).
In this study, we have developed and studied an imaging system based on
the combined transcriptional activities of the PCA3 and PSA gene
promoters for single PCa cell detection and ADT response assessment from
patients body fluids.METHODSAdenoviruses (Ad) were constructed utilizing
the ability of site-specific recombination of the Cre-Lox system. The
PCA3 and PSA promoters were integrated into a single Ad backbone with one
promoter driving the expression of CRE recombinase and the other driving
the Two Step Transcriptional Amplification system and the Firefly
luciferase gene (fl) to generate a new system that we named the
Multigenic Integrative Transcriptional Amplification System (MP-ITSTA).
PCa cells specificity and ADT response was tested by transient infection.
To detect cells in body fluid, 22Rv1-GFP cells were spiked in urine or
blood of healthy control, infected with MP-ITSTA after purification and
single cell imaging was done using the LV200 bioluminescence
microscope.RESULTSWe show that the PCA3-TSTA driven fl expression is
specific to PCa cells (22Rv1, LAPC4, PC3, DU145) giving 8.5-108.4 fold
higher expression when compared to SW780 bladder cancer cells. Contrary
to PCA3-TSTA, the PSA-TSTA activity is regulated by androgen treatment
but is not prostate cancer-specific as it is active in AR responsive
breast cancer cells (CAMA-1 and ZR-75). We show that MP-ITSTA reporter
expression is dependent on the combined activation of two promoters (PCA3
and PSA promoter) in a DHT dependent manner. MP-ITSTA could therefore
also give an account of responsiveness to bicalutamide or enzalutamide
treatments PCa cells. The signal obtained by MP-ITSTA system is 2.3 and
1.6 times higher than PCA3-TSTA in 22Rv1 and LAPC4, respectively proving
that MP-ITSTA has the ability to enhance the reporter gene expression
from a weak but PCa specific PCA3 promoter. Finally, MP-ITSTA could
specifically target spiked 22Rv1-mcherry cells isolated from urine while
no signal was found in non-spiked samples.CONCLUSIONSMP-ITSTA therefore
represents a prostate cancer specific and non-invasive tool to target
with high accuracy PCa cells and to detect their response to ADT cell per
cell from body fluids.

