Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced expression of microRNA-200 family associated with
aggressiveness and poorer patient outcome of clear cell renal cell
carcinomas


[Introduction] The aim of this study was to clarify the significance of
alterations of microRNA (miRNA) expression during renal
carcinogenesis.[Materials and methods] Expression profiles of miRNA were
examined using the SurePrint G3 miRNA Expression microarray in paired
samples of cancerous tissue (T) and non-cancerous renal cortex tissue (N)
from 95 patients with clear cell renal cell carcinomas (RCCs). The
expression levels of miRNA and mRNA were quantified by reverse
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) using TaqMan system. The MetaCore pathway
analysis by GeneGo was performed using miRNAs of which expression levels
were significantly altered during renal carcinogenesis.[Results] The
expression levels of 39 and 169 miRNAs were increased (T/N> = 2) and
reduced (T/N[Introduction] The aim of this study was to clarify the
significance of alterations of microRNA (miRNA) expression during renal
carcinogenesis.[Materials and methods] Expression profiles of miRNA were
examined using the SurePrint G3 miRNA Expression microarray in paired
samples of cancerous tissue (T) and non-cancerous renal cortex tissue (N)
from 95 patients with clear cell renal cell carcinomas (RCCs). The
expression levels of miRNA and mRNA were quantified by reverse
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) using TaqMan system. The MetaCore pathway
analysis by GeneGo was performed using miRNAs of which expression levels
were significantly altered during renal carcinogenesis.[Results] The
expression levels of 39 and 169 miRNAs were increased (T/N> = 2) and
reduced (T/N<0.5) in T samples relative to the corresponding N samples,
respectively. MetaCore pathway analysis revealed that such expression
alterations of the 208 miRNAs were significantly accumulated in four
pathways, which included Development microRNA-dependent inhibition of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway (P = 8.6951015). The
expression levels of any of 5 EMT-related miRNAs, i.e. miR-200a,
miR-200c, miR-141, miR-429 and miR-200b, called as miR-200 family, were
reduced in 93 (98%) of the examined 95 RCCs. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis
verified that the expression levels of miR-200 family were significantly
reduced in T samples relative to the corresponding N samples.
Additionally, the mRNA expression levels of the ZEB1 and ZEB2 genes,
which were downstream targets of miR-200 family, were significantly
increased, and their target CDH1 gene expression was further decrease in
T samples. The expression levels of miR-200 family in T samples were
significantly correlated with clinicopathological parameters reflecting
tumor aggressiveness, such as invasive macroscopic configuration, higher
histological grade, vascular involvement, renal vein tumor thrombus,
invasive growth pattern, tumor necrosis, distant metastasis and higher
histological TNM stage. Moreover, the expression levels of miR-200 family
were significantly correlated with both of cancer-free and overall
survival rates of patients with clear cell RCCs.[Conclusions] These data
suggested that reduced expression of miR-200 family may participate in
the malignant progression resulting in poorer patient outcome of clear
cell RCCs, via regulation of the EMT pathway.

