Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of the treatment response to eribulin chemotherapy in
breast cancer using tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)


Background: Eribulin mesylate (eribulin) is currently indicated for
treatment of locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer (MBC). It is a
cytotoxic agent with unique mechanisms that suppress
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer cells. On the other
hand, Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), which are considered
indicators of immune response monitoring, have been reported as
prognostic factors and predictors of therapeutic efficacy. We thought
that eribulin, which has an EMT-inhibiting mechanism, may produce an
antitumor effect by improving the immune microenvironment, and in this
study investigated the effects of breast cancer eribulin chemotherapy on
the immune microenvironment with TILs as a marker.Materials and Methods:
TILs was evaluated in 52 patients with MBC who underwent chemotherapy
with eribulin. The correlation between TILs evaluated according to the
standard method, and prognosis, including the efficacy of eribulin
chemotherapy, was investigated retrospectively. TILs were defined as the
infiltrating lymphocytes within tumor stroma and were expressed in
proportion to the field investigated. The area of in situ carcinoma and
crush artifacts were not included. Proportional scores were defined as 3,
2, 1, and 0 if the area of stroma with lymphoplasmacytic infiltration
around invasive tumor cell nests was > 50%, > 10 - 50%, 10%, and absent,
respectively. TILs were considered positive when scores were 2, and
negative when scores were 1 and 0.Results: Of the 52 MBC patients, 29
(55.8%) were in the high TILs group and 23 (44.2%) were in the low TILs
group. The high TILs group included significantly more triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) (p = 0.008) than the low TILs group. In an analysis
of outcomes, TNBC patients in the high TILs group had significantly
longer disease-free survival than TNBC patients in the low TILs group (p
= 0.033, log-rank), but no significant differences were seen in all
breast cancer patients (p = 0.489, log-rank) or in non-TNBC patients (p =
0.878, log-rank). In a univariate analysis of recurrence in TNBC
patients, being in the high TILs group was a factor for a good outcome (p
= 0.047, HR = 0.260). In a multivariate analysis, being in the high TILs
group was again an independent factor for a good outcome (p = 0.031, HR =
0.063).Conclusions: The results of this study suggest that TILs may be
useful as a predictive marker of the therapeutic effect of eribulin
chemotherapy in TNBC.

