Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Continuous androgen receptor stimulation in thyroid cancer cells
induces irreversible senescence


Cancer of the thyroid gland accounts for 3.8% of all cancer cases in the
United States as indicated by the SEER report by the NCI. The incidence
of thyroid cancer has increased three-fold over the last thirty years and
the American Cancer Society estimates that there will be approximately
62,450 new cases and 1,950 deaths due to the disease in the country in
2015. Papillary Thyroid Cancer (PTC) is the most common endocrine
malignancy with a three-fold higher incidence in women than in men.
However, PTC exhibits increased aggressiveness with poor prognosis in men
diagnosed with the disease. These incongruent observations led us to
explore the role of androgen and androgen receptor in this disease. We
found an approximately 70% decrease in median AR expression (pCancer of
the thyroid gland accounts for 3.8% of all cancer cases in the United
States as indicated by the SEER report by the NCI. The incidence of
thyroid cancer has increased three-fold over the last thirty years and
the American Cancer Society estimates that there will be approximately
62,450 new cases and 1,950 deaths due to the disease in the country in
2015. Papillary Thyroid Cancer (PTC) is the most common endocrine
malignancy with a three-fold higher incidence in women than in men.
However, PTC exhibits increased aggressiveness with poor prognosis in men
diagnosed with the disease. These incongruent observations led us to
explore the role of androgen and androgen receptor in this disease. We
found an approximately 70% decrease in median AR expression (p<0.0001) in
24 PTC patient tissue samples, compared to matched, normal thyroid
tissue. Preliminary data from our lab indicate that androgen receptor
(AR) acts as a negative regulator of growth as evidenced by a
statistically significant 48% decrease in proliferation over 72 hours
upon 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) addition to 8505c anaplastic/PTC cells
stably transfected with AR (clone 84E7). Transcriptional profiling using
RNAseq and gene ontology analysis, on 48 hour DHT treated 84E7 cells
revealed significant changes in gene expression associated with
proliferation (474 genes, p = 2.4E-24) and cell cycle progression (129
genes, p = 6.54E-6). Continuous AR activation (3 to 6 days) resulted in
G1 growth arrest, not accompanied by cell death, but rather a flattened,
vacuolized cell morphology, indicative of senescence. This was
substantiated by an increase in SA-Gal positivity from background 2.47%
to approximately 65.5%, which was attenuated by the AR antagonist,
flutamide. Three to six day DHT exposure resulted in increased total RNA
and protein content measured using Acridine Orange and Sulforhodamine B,
respectively. Senescent 84E7 cells failed to resume growth when
transferred into DHT-free medium for 3 days, suggesting a permanent
growth arrest. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), implicated in Rb-mediated
senescence, were found to be doubled by day 6 of AR activation, compared
to control cells. Additionally, using flow cytometry, we found increased
p21, p27, cyclin D1, FOXO1, and phosphorylation of FOXO1 by days 3-6,
suggesting that AR-dependent senescence is mediated via p21 and p27 by
FOXO1/3 proteins. Furthermore, cytokine profiling of the
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) would aid in defining
the pro-tumorigenic or tumor-suppressive potential of androgen-induced
senescent thyroid cancer cells. Our study elucidates the induction of
senescence as a novel function of AR activation in thyrocytes and may
indicate a protective role of AR activation in the decreased incidence of
thyroid cancer in men.

