Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-suppressive microRNAs (miR-26a/b, miR-29a/b/c and miR-218)
concertedly regulate metastasis-promoting LOXL2 in prostate cancer


BACKGROUNDS:Most patients with prostate cancer (PCa) initially respond to
androgen-deprivation therapy, but eventually becomes hormone-insensitive
and progress to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). CRPC is
difficult to treat, and most clinical trials for advanced PCa have shown
limited benefits, with disease progression and metastasis to the skeleton
or other sites. Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms of CRPC
and the metastatic pathways underlying PCa using genomic approaches would
help to prevent and improve therapies for the disease. Our previous
studies showed that three tumor-suppressive microRNAs (miRNAs),
miR-26a/b, miR-29a/b/c and miR-218, significantly inhibited cancer cell
migration and invasion. Therefore, we hypothesized that these
miRNAs-regulated target genes deeply contributed to cancer
metastasis.METHODS:Genome-wide gene expression analysis and in silico
analysis were applied to investigate molecular targets regulated by
miR-26a/b, miR-29a/b/c and miR-218 in PCa cells. A luciferase reporter
assay was carried out to determine whether 3 UTR of target genes have
actual biding sites for these miRNAs. To investigate the functional role
of target genes in PCa cells, loss-of-function studies by using siRNAs of
targets genes were performed.RESULTS:Our in silico analysis and
luciferase reporter assays showed that lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2) was
directly regulated by tumor-suppressive miR-26a/b, miR-29a/b/c and
miR-218 in PCa cells. Overexpression of LOXL2 was observed in PCa
clinical specimens by immunohistochemical staining. Moreover,
downregulating the LOXL2 gene significantly inhibited cell migration and
invasion in PCa cells. The function of the LOXL2 is covalent crosslinking
of collagen and/or elastin in the ECM. Aberrant expression of LOXL2 has
been reported in several diseases, including cancers.CONCLUSIONS:Our
present data showed that the gene promoting metastasis, LOXL2, was
epigenetically regulated by tumor-suppressive microRNAs, miR-26a/b,
miR-29a/b/c and miR-218 providing important insights into the molecular
mechanisms of PCa metastasis. Elucidation of tumor-suppressive miRNAs
regulated molecular pathways and targets could provide new information on
potential therapeutic strategies in PCa.

