Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of soluble FLT3 ligand as a marker of bone marrow
stress and recovery


Depletion of bone marrow (BM)-resident myeloid progenitor cells is a
consequence of various anti-cancer treatments, including bispecific
T-cell engager (BiTE) antibodies targeting myeloid cell antigens.
Currently, aspirates are required to determine the extent of myeloid cell
depletion in the BM. This procedure is painful and potentially invasive
for patients. As a surrogate marker for BM myeloid cell depletion, we
evaluated soluble FLT3 ligand (FLT3L) in non-human primates treated with
myeloid cell-depleting BiTE antibodies. While FLT3L is not detectable in
serum during steady-state hematopoiesis, it is detectable in response to
hematopoietic deficiency. The goal of this study was to evaluate the
relationship of serum FLT3L with depletion and recovery of BM myeloid
cells in non-human primates treated with BiTE antibodies against
CD33.Serum FLT3L levels were determined using an anti-human FLT3L ELISA
kit. Validation studies demonstrated that both the capture and detection
antibodies recognized cynomolgus FLT3L. Serum FLT3L concentrations were
determined using a standard curve with rhesus FLT3L (99.6% identical to
cynomolgus FLT3L). Serum samples were taken from cynomolgus monkeys
before, during and after treatment with anti-CD33 BiTE antibodies and
compared with the number of BM-residenttarget cells.In the first study,
cynomolgus monkeys were dosed once with different dose levels of
anti-CD33 BiTE antibody ranging from 1- 15 g/kg. BM-resident myeloid
cells were transiently reduced in some, but not all, cohorts. Soluble
FLT3L was detected only when there was a reduction in BM myeloid cells.
When FLT3L was detectable, the serum concentration correlated with the
extent of target cell reduction and FLT3L levels decreased as the myeloid
cells recovered.In the second study, cynomolgus monkeys were dosed three
times with anti-CD33 BiTE antibody. In these studies target cell
reduction was greater and persisted longer compared to the single dose
studies. Similarly, the magnitude and duration of increased FLT3L in the
multidose studies was also greater. Within the multi-dose study, FLT3L
levels continued to increase as more BM-resident myeloid cells were
depleted, suggesting that it was possible to detect cumulative stress to
the BM.In summary, serum FLT3L levels are correlated with the extent and
duration of myeloid cell depletion in the BM suggesting that serum FLT3L
levels reflect depletion and subsequent myeloid cell replenishment. All
studies to date have involved treatment with myeloid antigen-specific
BiTE antibodies; future studies will evaluate FLT3L levels following
treatment with anti-lymphoid or solid tumor antigen-specific BiTE
antibodies to determine if FLT3L increases are associated with myeloid
cell depletion or indicative of general BM stress or inflammation. The
potential benefit of this marker is that it could allow for repeat
non-invasive BM monitoring in patients on myelosuppressive therapies.

