Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRL-3/PTP4A3 phosphatase promotes uveal melanoma cell migration
through the regulation of integrin 1 in focal adhesion


Using transcriptomic analysis, we found that Phosphatase of Regenerating
Liver-3 (PRL-3) overexpression is highly correlated with metastatic
tumors and predicts poor prognosis in patients with uveal melanoma. PRL-3
is a dual specific phosphatase with a carboxy-terminal farnesylation
motif, allowing anchorage to the plasma membrane. PRL-3 overexpression in
ocular melanoma cell line-1 (OCM1) significantly increases cell migration
in vitro and invasiveness in vivo, suggesting a direct role of PRL-3 in
metastasis (Laurent et al, Cancer Res 2011; 71:666). Despite its role in
the metastatic process of various cancers, its mechanism of action and
its intracellular substrates remain largely unknown. It has been shown
that the anchorage of PRL-3 to the plasma membrane plays an important
role in the metastatic process, suggesting that the phosphatase regulates
transmembrane substrates. Among potential targets involved in
extracellular matrix adhesion, we focused on integrin 1 which we found
overexpressed in the transcriptomic analysis of our uveal melanoma
cohort.We showed that FTI-277, a farnesyltransferase inhibitor that
prevents PRL-3 anchorage to the plasma membrane, abolishes PRL-3-induced
OCM1 cell migration on collagen I in vitro, specifically enhances the
spreading of OCM1 cells overexpressing PRL-3, and allows the formation of
large focal adhesions involving integrin 1. Knockdown of integrin 1 in
OCM1-PRL3 cells partially restores the spreading and migration.
Furthermore, in focal adhesions, we observed that PRL-3 specifically
regulates the aggregation of integrin 1 but does not affect integrin 3.
Our results suggest the involvement of integrin 1 in PRL-3-mediated cell
migration. To go further, we are currently investigating the
phosphorylation status of specific integrin 1 residues, known to be
involved in cell adhesion. The present study highlights the importance of
PRL-3 membrane localization in uveal melanoma cell migration, by
regulating adhesion to the extracellular matrix through integrin 1.

