Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis from a phase II
single-agent gedatolisib study in patients with endometrial cancer


Genetic alterations in the PI3K pathway are abundant in endometrial
cancer. Hence it is hypothesized that PI3K/mTOR inhibitors will have
utility for treatment of endometrial cancer. Gedatolisib, also known as
PF-384, is a potent and selective dual PI3K-mTOR inhibitor with broad
anti-tumor activity in preclinical studies. Gedatolisib delivered weekly
intravenously was investigated in a Phase II single-agent study of
advanced endometrial cancer. The cumulative clinical benefit rate from 38
response evaluable patients was 39.5%, comparable to historical rates
with mTOR inhibitors. A retrospective NGS analysis of archival biopsies
from patients in the study was conducted using the Foundation Medicine
Inc (FMI) Foundation One Test to explore potential predictive biomarkers
for clinical benefit. Of the 26 patient samples submitted for analysis,
data was obtained from 19 samples of which 17 had evaluable response
data. Of these 17 samples, 6 were from patients who exhibited progressive
disease (PD), 6 were from patients with stable disease (SD) and 5 were
from patients that showed a partial response (PR) to treatment. In
general, the best responders had a low mutation load while the worst
responders had a higher mutation load. Whether large mutation burden was
due to mismatch-repair defects determined by MSI status of the tumors is
currently under investigation. PTEN alterations were found in tumors from
patients that exhibited PD and SD, but not PR. Multiple genetic
alterations in ARID1A were observed in 3 of 6 tumors from patients with
PD. While PIK3CA alterations were frequently present, 2 of 5 patients
with PR and 1 with SD exhibited an activating PIK3CA mutation at H1047R.
Among 175 genes that were observed to be mutated in the analysis of 17
independent tumor samples, the top ranking genes associated with a
reduction in tumor size (% change from baseline by RECIST 1.0; Wilcoxon
rank sum test) were MAP3K1 (p = 0.027) and CTNNB1 (p = 0.050). Activating
mutations in -catenin were observed in tumor from 3 of 5 patients with PR
and were not present in tumor from patients with PD or SD. Tumor from a
patient who exhibited an outlier clinical response (stayed on study after
2 years on treatment) had an activating mutation in Akt at E17K and also
a novel mutation in mTOR at F2184L. Computational modeling analysis
revealed that the mutation did not have a significant impact on kinase
structure or ligand binding. KRAS mutations did not appear to correlate
with clinical response. This study highlights both the wealth of
information provided by NGS analysis, but also the complexity of NGS data
analysis and interpretation.

