Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cadherin engagement induces a dramatic increase in tyr-705
phosphorylation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription-3
(Stat3) but not the dominant-negative isoform Stat3


The purpose of this study was to examine the role of Stat3 and Stat3 in
survival and apoptosis of normal and tumor cells.The Stat3 transcription
factor is activated by cytokine receptors of the IL6 family, and receptor
and non-receptor tyrosine kinases, plays an etiological role in
neoplasia. Stat3 activation entails phosphorylation at tyr-705, Stat3
dimerization through a reciprocal, SH2 domain-phosphotyrosine
interaction, and nuclear translocation. This triggers transcription of
genes involved primarily in cellular survival such as survivin, MCl1 and
Bcl-xL, as well as cell division such as myc. We previously demonstrated
that engagement of E- or N-cadherin or cadherin-11 induces a dramatic
increase in total protein levels and activity of the small GTPases, Rac
and Cdc42, through inhibition of proteasomal degradation. Activated Rac
leads to a surge in secretion of cytokines of the IL6 family through the
transcription factor NFB and Jak kinases, and this in turn, activates
Stat3 in an autocrine manner. Stat3 inhibition in confluent,
non-transformed cells induces apoptosis, pointing to a key survival role
for Stat3.Full-length Stat3 (termed Stat3) is composed of an SH2 domain,
tyr-705 and a COOH terminus encoding the transcription activation domain
(TAD). Stat3 is a naturally-occurring splice variant which is lacking
TAD. Therefore, Stat3 dimerizes with Stat3 but is defective in
transcriptional activation, resulting in inhibition of Stat3 function.
Since tyr-705 is present in both isoforms, we examined the
phosphorylation pattern of Stat3 vs Stat3. Our results demonstrate that
cadherin engagement brought about through confluence of non-transformed
mouse fibroblasts results in phosphorylation of Stat3-tyr705, despite the
fact that the sequence around tyr-705 is the same in both isoforms.The
Large Tumor antigen of Simian virus 40 oncogene (TAg) interacts with the
p53 and pRb tumor-suppressors, and this leads to activation of the E2F
family of transcription factors, targeting cell division genes. At the
same time E2F is a potent apoptosis inducer, hence the high demand of
transformed cells for antiapoptotic signals, such as Stat3.
Interestingly, our data demonstrated that SVLT expression results in
phosphorylation of Stat3. Therefore, this feedback loop that reduces the
activity of Stat3, triggers apoptosis of transformed cells selectively,
because of their high E2F levels. As a result, certain tumor cells which
may naturally express high Stat3 levels would be very sensitive to
pharmacological Stat3 inhibition, a finding which could have significant
therapeutic implications.

