Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin induces mitochondrial damage and hippocampal
neurotoxicity: a potential mechanism for chemotherapy-related cognitive
impairment


Advances in cancer treatment, chemotherapy in particular, have
substantially increased the number of long-term cancer survivors.
However, these drugs often have neurotoxic effects that impair cognitive
function, thereby diminishing the quality of life of millions of cancer
survivors. Chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment (CRCI, chemo-brain)
is commonly reported following the administration of chemotherapeutic
agents and comprises a wide variety of neurological problems. Cisplatin
is used to treat breast cancer and advanced ovarian cancer among other
malignancies. Notably, more than 30% of advanced ovarian cancer patients
develop CRCI during and after cisplatin-based chemotherapy. A plausible
explanation for CRCI is that cisplatin might impair the structure and
functions of neurons in brain regions involved in learning and memory,
such as the hippocampus. We have recently identified mitochondrial
dysfunction and increased oxidative stress as a mechanism through which
cisplatin causes hippocampal cell death, and severe dendritic damage in
surviving neurons. The aims of this study were to examine the effect of
the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in mitigating cisplatin-induced
hippocampal damage and assesse the effect of cisplatin on cognitive
performance in a rat model.At a high dose, cisplatin (1M) induced 35%
increase in caspase-9 activation in primary rat hippocampal neurons,
whereas at a substantially lower dose, cisplatin (0.1M) induced
non-reversible damage to dendritic spines and branches. Both doses
produced severe mitochondrial respiratory deficits and significant ROS
production. Delayed treatment with NAC partially mitigated neuronal
apoptosis and ameliorated cisplatin induced dendritic spine loss. When
administered to adult Sprague Dawley rats, cisplatin (3 mg/kg)
administered for two consecutive days caused 40% reduction in the number
of dendritic spines in CA1 and CA3 hippocampal neurons.Lastly, cognitive
testing of rats treated with a chronic cisplatin regimen, revealed
significant deficits in hippocampus-dependent tasks. Rats were given
weekly cisplatin (5mg/kg, i.p.) or saline injections for 4 weeks and then
trained in Context-Object Discrimination, 6 weeks later (n = 7,8).
Cisplatin-treated rats were impaired in discriminating between the
out-of-context and in-context object.Mitochondrial dysfunction provokes
free radical production, with resulting loss of dendritic spines. When
administered to rats, cisplatin causes hippocampal neuronal and
mitochondrial damage, as well as cognitive deficits, supporting that role
of mitochondrial toxicity in the mechanisms of cisplatin-induced CRCI.
Importantly the data demonstrates that these processes can be potentially
mitigated with administration of the clinically available antioxidant,
NAC. The effect of NAC in ameliorating cisplatin induced CRCI in rats is
being evaluated.

