Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell cycle-related kinase (CCRK) self-regulatory circuitry in
NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis


Background and aim: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the
hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome including obesity and
diabetes which elevate the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Accumulating evidence has unmasked the molecular linkage between androgen
receptor (AR) signaling and gender disparity in NAFLD and HCC incidence.
Our previous genome-wide location and functional analysis has pinpointed
cell cycle-related kinase (CCRK) as a critical mediator of AR oncogenic
activity in hepatitis B virus-associated HCC through glycogen synthase
kinase-3 (GSK-3)/-catenin signaling (1-3). Here we investigated whether
CCRK plays an oncogenic role in NAFLD-related HCC.Methods: We
investigated the functional role of CCRK in a high-fat high carbohydrate
diet-induced obesity model exposed to low-dose diethylnitrosamine using
lentiviral-mediated gene knockdown, followed by measurement of
glucose/lipid metabolism via intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test and
triglyceride/non-esterified fatty acids levels, and HCC incidence. Gene
regulation was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation, site-directed
mutagenesis, luciferase reporter, co-immunoprecipitation and expression
analyses.Results: Lentiviral-mediated Ccrk silencing in male mice
significantly reduced obesity-promoted tumor multiplicity and size by
>70%. The reduced tumorigenicity was also associated with significant
restoration of circulating metabolic profiles and reduction in
hepatocellular lipid level. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that the
pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) triggered signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling to
up-regulate CCRK expression in an AR-dependent manner. Simultaneously,
the phosphorylation of STAT3 by CCRK facilitated the co-occupancy of CCRK
promoter by STAT3-AR complex and its subsequent transcriptional
activation, thus forming a self-reinforcing circuitry. In addition, both
in vitro and in vivo data suggested that CCRK phosphorylated GSK-3 to
activate not only -catenin but also mechanistic target of rapamycin
complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling pathways that are crucial for cell survival,
proliferation and lipogenesis. Furthermore, transgenic over-expression of
CCRK in mouse liver led to concordant activation of STAT3, -catenin and
mTORC1 signaling pathways.Conclusion: Our findings highlight the critical
role of CCRK in a self-reinforcing circuitry that regulates
NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis and offer novel therapeutic
strategies to combat this dreadful disease in an era of global
obesity.Acknowledgement: This project was supported by the Collaborative
Research Fund C4017-14G and General Research Fund 14102914.References:1.
Feng H., et al. (2011). J Clin Invest 121, 3159-3175.2. Yu Z., et al.
(2014). Gut 63, 1793-1804.3. Feng H., et al. (2015). J Hepatol 62,
1100-1111.

