Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) represents a novel
therapeutic strategy for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treatment


Background and objectives: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the primary
liver malignancy with an extremely low survival rate. HCC progression is
frequently associated with accelerated glucose consumption that confers
growth advantage to tumor cell through two essential metabolic pathways -
glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). Glycolysis utilizes
glucose for ATP production, while the PPP converts glycolytic
intermediates to generate NADPH, the cellular antioxidant, and
ribose-5-phophate, the nucleotide precursor. Although glycolysis has been
extensively studied in HCC, how PPP supports HCC growth remains largely
unknown. Our study aims at delineating the clinical significance,
regulation and functions of PPP in HCC development and explore the
therapeutic potential of PPP inhibitors for HCC therapy.Methods: The
expression and abundance of the the PPP genes were examined in 16 pairs
of human HCC tumors and adjacent non-tumors by transcriptome sequencing.
Level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and glucose uptake were measured
by CM-H2DCFDA and 2-NBDG stainings, respectively. Metabolomics study was
performed with CE-TOF-MS analysis. Metabolic flux analysis was conducted
using UPLC-MS/MS.Results: Transcriptome sequencing data showed that
enzymes in the PPP were frequently upregulated in HCC. Transketolase
(TKT), the gene encodes the reversible enzyme connecting PPP and
glycolysis, is the most abundant and most overexpressed PPP gene in HCC.
Overexpression of TKT was confirmed in an expanded sample cohort at the
mRNA and protein level. Meanwhile, TKT overexpression was significantly
correlated with venous invasion, microsatellite formation, tumor size and
absence of tumor encapsulation. Notably, TKT expression was controlled by
NRF2/KEAP1/BACH1 pathway, which is a major transcription regulator for
redox homeostasis. CHIP assay revealed that NRF2 and BACH1 competitively
bound to the same antioxidant responsive elements (ARE) in TKT.
Functionally, knockdown of TKT in HCC cells retarded cell growth,
attenuated glucose uptake and NADPH production, increased intracellular
ROS, and induced oxidative stress-associated cell cycle delay. In line
with these findings, knockdown of TKT greatly suppressed tumor growth in
vivo. Metabolomics and metabolic flux analysis revealed that loss of TKT
disrupted the PPP and subsequently reduced NADPH production.
Intriguingly, genetic knockdown and pharmacological inhibition of TKT
enhanced the efficacy of Sorafenib, the only FDA-approved drug for HCC
treatment, both in vitro and in vivo.Conclusion: Our study suggested the
clinical significance of TKT in HCC and illustrated the anti-oxidative
role of TKT in HCC progression. We also proposed that disrupting the
metabolic machinery by TKT inhibition might be a novel therapeutic
strategy for HCC treatment.

