Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elephant TP53 (ep53) retrogene protein expression enhances
cellular apoptosis in response to DNA damage


We previously reported that compared with other mammalian species,
elephants have a lower than expected rate of cancer (Abegglen JAMA 2015).
While exploring cancer resistance in elephants, we discovered that
elephants have 20 copies of TP53 (1 ancestral gene with introns and 19
retrogenes) compared to humans with 1 copy. TP53 amplification was
associated with increased p53-mediated apoptosis induced by DNA damage in
elephant cells compared to human cells. As a follow up to this study, we
further explored the function of these elephant TP53 retrogenes by
expressing their protein (ep53) in cells with 2 functional TP53 alleles.
NIH/3T3 cells were transfected with a mammalian expression construct
encoding TP53 retrogene 9 fused to an epitope tag (myc). Western blot
analysis probing for myc confirmed expression of retrogene 9. To measure
the functional consequence of expression, we compared apoptosis of cells
transfected with empty vector to cells transfected with myc-tagged
retrogene 9 after doxorubicin treatment. Apoptosis was measured with a
triplex assay that assesses viability, cytotoxicity and apoptosis (Apo
Tox-Glo, Promega). We observed a significant increase in apoptosis of
NIH/3T3 cells expressing retrogene 9 compared to empty vector transfected
control cells (10M doxorubicin, PWe previously reported that compared
with other mammalian species, elephants have a lower than expected rate
of cancer (Abegglen JAMA 2015). While exploring cancer resistance in
elephants, we discovered that elephants have 20 copies of TP53 (1
ancestral gene with introns and 19 retrogenes) compared to humans with 1
copy. TP53 amplification was associated with increased p53-mediated
apoptosis induced by DNA damage in elephant cells compared to human
cells. As a follow up to this study, we further explored the function of
these elephant TP53 retrogenes by expressing their protein (ep53) in
cells with 2 functional TP53 alleles. NIH/3T3 cells were transfected with
a mammalian expression construct encoding TP53 retrogene 9 fused to an
epitope tag (myc). Western blot analysis probing for myc confirmed
expression of retrogene 9. To measure the functional consequence of
expression, we compared apoptosis of cells transfected with empty vector
to cells transfected with myc-tagged retrogene 9 after doxorubicin
treatment. Apoptosis was measured with a triplex assay that assesses
viability, cytotoxicity and apoptosis (Apo Tox-Glo, Promega). We observed
a significant increase in apoptosis of NIH/3T3 cells expressing retrogene
9 compared to empty vector transfected control cells (10M doxorubicin,
P<0.001). These results suggest that ep53 is a functional protein
contributing to cancer resistance in elephants, and that elephant
retrogenes can function in cells from other species to enhance their
apoptotic response to DNA damage. These findings may hold significance
for human cancer prevention and treatment.

