Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating novel targeted therapies for double hit diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DH-DLBCL)


Background: Molecular studies divide DLBCL into three subtypes with
distinct pathogenesis and clinical outcomes: activated B-cell (ABC),
germinal center B-cell (GCB) and primary mediastinal lymphoma (PML).
Florescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies identified another
subgroup of DLBCL, classified as DH-DLBCL, with a poor clinical outcome
harboring concurrent gene rearrangements of the c-MYC, BCL2 and/or BCL6
proto-oncogenes, resulting in the over-expression of c-Myc, Bcl2 and Bcl6
proteins. Previously, our retrospective review from single institution
series revealed that 30 out of 611 DLBCL patients had aberrations in
c-MYC and BCL2 or BCL6 by FISH. These patients exhibited inferior
response rates (RR) to rituximab-based chemotherapy, and a shorter
progression-free survival (PFS)/overall survival (OS), suggesting that
newer therapies are in dire need. DH-DLBCL is characterized by
de-regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle progression, resulting in rapid
cellular proliferation and resistance to apoptotic stimuli. In ABC-DLBCL,
anti-apoptotic factor MCL-1 is implicated in poor prognosis leading to
resistance to standard chemotherapy. C-MYC transcriptionally upregulates
Mcl1. Translocation of c-MYC in DH-DLBCL may contribute to the aggressive
phenotype and chemotherapy resistance via the MCL-1 pathway. We
hypothesize that dual inhibition of both anti-apoptotic proteins BCL2 and
MCL1 is an effective strategy in inducing lymphoma cell death in
DH-DLBCL.Materials & Methods: At the pre-clinical level, we studied 3
novel therapeutic agents targeting BCL2 (ABT-199), c-MYC (JQ-1), and
various cell cycle regulatory proteins (p21) and other BCL2 family
members affecting ABT-199 activity (irreversible proteasome inhibitor
carfilzomib(CFZ)) using DH lymphoma (DHL) cell lines (Val, DOHH-2,
ROS-50). DHL cell lines were exposed to ABT-199 (0-10 uM), JQ-1 (0-100
uM) and carfilzomib (CFZ) (0-50 nM) at 24, 48 and 72 hours. Changes in
cell viability were evaluated using Presto Blue assay. Subsequently, DHL
cells were exposed to doublet combinations of ABT-199, JQ-1 and CFZ for
48 hours. Coefficient of synergy was calculated using CalcuSyn.Results:
In vitro, ABT199, JQ-1, and CFZ induced cell death in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Significant synergistic activity was observed by
combining ABT199 with CFZ and to a lesser degree with JQ-1.Conclusion:
ABT199 exhibited strong synergistic activity with CFZ. Dual targeting of
BCL2 and c-MYC pathways results in synergistic activity in DHL cell
lines. Of interest, this pharmacological interaction could be related to
the effects of proteasome inhibition on MCL1 and p21 levels in lymphoma
cells, further enhancing the activity of ABT199. Using combination
therapy to inhibit c-MYC and the proteasome and in turn decreasing MCL1
will render ABT-199 more effective and be a more potent combination in
causing apoptosis and lymphoma cell death. Further pre-clinical work is
ongoing.

