Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of CT120 gene as a new target of c-myc in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)


HNSCC is the sixth most common form of cancer and represents the third
common cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Therefore, there is a
need to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis
of HNSCC.The c-myc protein belongs to the myc family of transcription
factors and plays a fundamental role in cell cycle progression, apoptosis
and cellular transformation. In the human genome, the MYC gene is located
on chromosome 8 and its protein product regulates expression of 15% of
all genes through binding to the Enhancer box (E-box) sequences. An E-box
is a DNA sequence found in the promoter regions of eukaryotic genes that
acts as a protein binding site to regulate gene expression. The CANNTG
consensus sequence of the E-box is known as the canonical E-boxes. There
are several other non-canonical E-box motifs such as the GATGTG, CATGCG,
CACGCG, CACGAG, CGCGAG and CAACGTG sequences.Amplification of the MYC
gene is observed in many different types of cancers including HNSCC.
CT120 is a novel gene which encodes a human trans-membrane plasma
protein. It has been shown that up-regulation of CT120 is associated with
lung and head and neck carcinogenesis. In this study we investigated the
promoter region of the CT120 gene and identified 6 E-boxes. To test
whether c-myc binds to these E-boxes we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. We demonstrated that c-myc binds
strongly to the E-boxes 2, 3 and 4. It is well known that the expression
rates of the genes are under the control of epigenetic modifications.
Methylation of the CpG islands which are found in the promoter regions is
one of the most studied epigenetic modifications. We identified two
putative CpG islands in the promoter of the CT120 gene. To investigate
the possible epigenetic regulation of CT120 and the effect of the
promoter methylation to the binding of c-myc, we also investigated the
methylation levels of the two islands in the CT120 promoter by MS-PCR. We
observed a slight decrease (3.1%) in the methylation level of the first
CpG-rich region. In 56% (28/50) of the tumor tissues methylation was
decreased compared to the non-cancerous tissues. However, there was no
statistically significant correlation between the promoter methylation
and CT120 mRNA level. Depending on these data we investigated the
expression levels of the c-myc and CT120 in the 50 HNSCC and normal
tissue samples by qRT-PCR and observed a direct correlation between the
overexpression of the c-myc and CT120 genes. Overexpression of CT120 and
c-myc were observed in 29 (58%) and 34 (68%) of the tumors, respectively,
compared to non-cancerous tissues. A total of 24 (48%) patients out of 50
showed a concurrent pattern of either up- or down regulation.Our results
indicate that the CT120 gene is a target of c-myc and that both proteins
may participate in the progression of HNSCC.

