Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel and selective inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1
and 2 synergize with DNA methyltransferase inhibitor azacitidine in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML)


AML is a heterogeneous group of hematopoietic stem cell disorders
characterized by defects in myeloid differentiation and increased
proliferation of neoplastic hematopoietic precursor cells. Outcomes for
patients with AML remain generally poor, highlighting the need for novel
treatment options. Aberrant epigenetic regulation plays an important role
in the pathogenesis of AML, and the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
VIDAZA (azacitidine) is approved by European Medicines Agency for the
treatment of elderly patients with AML. Numerous clinical studies are
ongoing to investigate the benefit of combining azacitidine with other
investigational agents in AML.HDAC inhibitors are promising agents for
the treatment of AML. Combination studies with HDAC inhibitors plus DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors have suggested beneficial clinical activity
in AML. However, the toxicity profiles of non-selective HDAC inhibitors
in the combination settings limit the clinical benefit. In this work, we
describe the preclinical development of highly selective HDAC inhibitors,
which are hypothesized to have improved safety profiles than
non-selective HDAC inhibitors, for combination therapy in AML. We
demonstrate that selective HDAC1/2 inhibitors are highly effective and
efficacious both as single agents and in combination with azacitidine in
preclinical models of AML, including established AML cell lines, bone
marrow samples freshly derived from AML patients and in vivo xenograft
models of human AML. At the molecular level, gene expression profiling,
DNA methylation mapping and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis were
performed on AML cells treated with either an HDAC1/2 inhibitor,
azacitidine, or the drug combination. Molecular signatures and genes
involved in myeloid cell differentiation, apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
were identified as potential mediators of the combinatorial effects of
HDAC1/2 inhibition with azacitidine. Together, these findings support the
clinical evaluation of selective HDAC1/2 inhibitors in combination with
azacitidine in AML patients.

