Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pseudo-cis and pseudo-trans amide conformations lead to potent
targeted antifolates that are selectively transported by FR over RFC


Drugs usually bind to different targets in different conformations. As
antitumor agents, antifolates first need to be selectively transported by
tumor cells via the reduced folate carrier (RFC), the proton-coupled
folate transporter (PCFT) or folate receptors (FRs). The second step is
the binding of antifolates with the intracellular targets. We are
systematically developing novel folate analogs with selective membrane
transport for FRs and PCFT over the ubiquitously expressed RFC. These
6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolates are principally
inhibitors of de novo purine biosynthesis at the steps catalyzed by
glycinamide ribonucleotide formyl transferase (GARFTase) and
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (AICA) ribonucleotide formyltransferase
(AICARFTase). We previously demonstrated that classical antifolates bind
to FR and GARFTase in different conformations. An amide in the bridge
region of classical antifolates has two interchangeable lowest energy
conformers, pseudo-cis and pseudo-trans. We reported that a novel
antifolate (AGF238) with an amide in the bridge region binds to FR in a
pseudo-trans conformation and binds to GARFTase in a pseudo-cis
conformation. As part of our continued efforts to pursue targeted
antifolates as antitumor agents, we designed an expand series of
amide-bridged classical antifolates with different energy barriers
between the pseudo-cis and pseudo-trans conformers. Among these, AGF266
was exclusively transported by Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
engineered to express human FR (IC50 = 0.42 nM) or FR (IC50 = 0.88 nM)
over CHO expressing human RFC (IC50 > 1000 nM). AGF266 was also found to
exhibit highly potent antitumor activity (IC50 = 0.79 nM in KB human
tumor cells). AGF266 inhibited GARFTase as its principal cellular target,
based on patterns of protection from growth inhibition by adenosine and
AICA. Our in vitro findings of antitumor activity associated with FR
selectivity suggest that further preclinical evaluation of AGF266 as a
potential antitumor agent is warranted.

