Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro vascularized model for tumor growth and progression


Introduction: Tumor metastasis is the primary reason for mortality of
cancer patients. The ability to model the microenvironment of the primary
tumor and the secondary and tertiary sites is critical for advancing the
treatment options for the invasive cancers. There is currently no 3D
tumor model that mimics the in vivo vascular geometry and the
microenvironment for monitoring progression of tumors. In this study, we
report on the development of a 3D tumor model comprising of vascular
cells in communication with tumor cells leading to invasion and
metastasis at secondary and tertiary sites.Materials and Methods:
Vascularized tumor networks comprising primary, secondary and tertiary
tumor sites were developed using in vivo images and fabricated using soft
lithography. Human mammary microvascular endothelial cells (hMMEC) were
cultured in the vascular channels while a GFP-labeled metastatic breast
cancer cell (MDA-MB-231) and a GFP-labeled non-metastatic cell (MCF-7)
mixed with and without human fibroblast cell line BJ-5ta was cultured in
the primary tumor site in a 3D environment using Matrigel. The tumor
networks were perfused with endothelial cell media and the growth,
migration, invasion and metastasis of the tumor cells from the primary
site to secondary and tertiary site was monitored for 28 days using time
lapse microscopy.Results and Discussion: The aggressively metastatic
MDA-MB-231/BJ-5ta tumor at the primary site was found to proliferate
rapidly resulting in breakdown of the Matrigel and invasion across the
endothelial cells. Secondary sites were localized with pockets of tumor
colonies within 48 hours and by 120 hours had metastasized to the
tertiary site. By 14 days, the primary site tumor formed a necrotic core
while the tumor cells at secondary and tertiary were viable. In contrast,
the non-aggressive MCF-7/BJ-5ta tumors were able to proliferate within
the Matrigel scaffolding but did not break down beyond the primary site
until 14 days. Culture of tumor cells without the presence of fibroblast
or endothelial cells resulted in a significant difference in the invasion
and metastasis pattern highlighting the importance of the native tumor
microenvironment.Conclusions: We have developed a 3D, heterogenic model
of invasive tumor growth and metastasis which closely mimics the in vivo
microenvironment of solid tumors. This model can be used to investigate
tumor progression and their underlying mechanisms using a combination of
real-time techniques as well as omic methodologies for screening and
evaluation of the therapeutics.Acknowledgements: We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from NIH (#HHSN261201400037C).References:
B. Prabhakarpandian et al., J Control Release 2015; 201:49-55

