Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic role of heavy metal cadmium exposure in the etiology
of pancreatic cancer


Persistent and cumulative human exposures to toxic metals lead to various
health concerns and chronic illnesses. Cadmium is a heavy metal of
considerable occupational and environmental concern, and has been shown
to have an epidemiological association with pancreatic cancer. In this
pursuit we have demonstrated that cadmium metal is carcinogenic and can
induce transformation and reprogramming of normal pancreatic epithelial
cells. In this study we have shown that exposure of normal pancreatic
ductal epithelial HPNE cells to low levels of Cd+2 induce cellular
transformation and also induce the expression of a transcription factor
SATB2 which is oncogenic in pancreatic cancer. During cadmium-induced
cellular transformation, cells gain the phenotype of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) / progenitor cells and express pluripotency maintaining factors.
SATB2 is a transcription factor and its role in cadmium-induced cellular
transformation in pancreas has never been examined. SATB2 (special
AT-rich binding protein-2), a transcription factor and epigenetic
regulator that binds DNA in nuclear matrix attachment regions influences
gene expression both by orchestrating chromatin structure and by
functioning as a transcriptional co-factor. Our data have demonstrated
that human pancreatic normal ductal epithelial (HPNE) cells do not
express SATB2, whereas it is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer cell
lines and cancer stem cells (CSCs). The CSCs / tumor initiating cells are
believed to be the cause of cancer initiation, progression, and
metastasis. During cadmium-induced cell transformation, cells gain the
phenotype of cancer stem cells (CSCs) / progenitor cells and express
pluripotency maintaining factors. This suggests that overexpression of
SATB2 may induce cellular transformation. Interestingly, our data also
reveal that chronic exposure of HPNE cells to low levels of cadmium
results in SATB2 induction and cellular transformation. Using ChIP assay,
we have demonstrated that SATB2 can directly bind to Bcl-2, Nanog, Bsp,
Klf4, Myc, Xiap, and Hoxa2, and regulate the expression of EMT genes,
pluripotency maintaining factors and drug resistance genes. Based on
these observations, we conclude that the SATB2, induced by cadmium
exposure or through over-expression studies, play a role in cell
transformation of human pancreatic normal ductal epithelial cells. It can
thus serve as a potential novel target for treatment of pancreatic
cancer. To evaluate the human health risks associated with chronic
exposure to cadmium we develop a mechanistic understanding of the cadmium
induced human pancreatic normal ductal epithelial cell transformation.
The results shown set the stage that cadmium toxicity enhances pancreatic
carcinogenesis by up-regulating SATB2 which may thus be a potential
target for development of targeted therapeutic interventions.

