Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The progesterone analogue, Norgestrel, impairs tumor immunity and
promotes metastatic breast cancer progression


The immune system is responsible for recognition and elimination of
cancer cells. Tumors, however, can elicit different evasive mechanisms
that contribute to immune escape Thus, understanding the
immunosuppressive pathways that hamper tumor immunity is critical for the
identification of novel therapeutic targets. Progestin-containing
hormonal supplementation (as hormone replacement therapy or
contraceptive) has been associated with an increase in the risk of breast
cancer incidence and recurrence. Moreover, progesterone, as a natural
hormone, generally impairs cellular immune responses responsible of
preventingfetal rejection during pregnancy. We postulated that progestins
and in particular the widely used contraceptive Norgestrel may impair
tumor immunity and foster immunosuppressive tumor microenvironments. We
injected Balb/c mice with the triple-negative 4T1breast tumor,, and
treated them with a Norgestrel releasing depot for 30 days.
Norgestrel-treated mice displayed a higher frequency of suppressive
regulatory T cells (Tregs) in draining lymph nodes and tumors which
displayed a CD4+CD25+Foxp3+CD44+ phenotype. Accordingly,
norgestrel-treated mice showed greater number of exhausted PD1+ Tim-3+
CD8 T cells in the tumor microenvironment. Furthermore, in vitro exposure
to Norgestrel also promoted differentiation and expansion of Tregs which
activated the mTOR pathway assessed by phosphorylation of S6
ribonucleoprotein. These effects could not be prevented by the
progesterone nuclear receptor antagonist, Zk 230211, suggesting that
Norgestrel acts preferentially through membrane progesterone receptors.
Although no significant difference regarding tumor growth could be
observed, Norgestrel-treated mice showed greater number of lung
metastasis. Mechanistically, Norgestrel-driven Treg cells showed
increased expression of RANKL, a protein involved in breast cancer
development and progression. Our results identify a novel
progestin-mediated tumor-promoting mechanism and indicate caution onthe
use of Norgestrel-supplementation therapies. Our findings suggest that
Norgestrel may impair tumor immunity, thereby promoting metastatic
dissemination of breast cancer cells.

