Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous targeting of ODC and 5-LOX/COX block the tobacco
carcinogen-induced lung adenoma progression to adenocarcinoma in A/J mice


Increased polyamine synthesis and inflammation have long been associated
with intraepithelial neoplasia and their progression to malignant tumor
growth, including lung cancer. Targeting multiple pathways simultaneously
with low-dose combinations may be an effective approach to modulate
different pathways and their downstream signaling, which may result in an
increased efficacy and reduced side effects than a single-agent high dose
strategy. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of
DFMO (ODC inhibitor) and licofelone, a dual 5-LOX-COX inhibitor,
individually and in combination, on
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone NNK-induced lung adenoma
and progression to adenocarcinoma in female A/J mice. At 6 weeks of age,
mice (25 /group) were fed AIN-76A-modified diet, and one week later, lung
tumors were induced with a single intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 10
mol NNK/mouse. Three weeks after the NNK treatment, groups of mice were
fed with either control or experimental diets containing DFMO (1500 or
3000 ppm) or Licofelone (200 or 400 ppm) or combination of low doses of
DFMO and Licofelone. Mice were killed after 17 or 34 weeks of drug
exposure and tumors were evaluated via histopathology and lung tumors
were assayed for modification of various biomarkers of proliferation and
apoptosis. Results suggest that both DFMO and licofelone showed
dose-dependent inhibition of NNK-induced lung adenoma progression to
adenocarcinoma. At high dose DFMO and Licofelone showed 46% and 55% of
adenocarcinoma inhibition. Importantly, low dose combination of DFMO and
licofelone showed more pronounced effects at both 17 or 34 weeks in
inhibiting the total adenocarcinomas (adenoma and adenocarcinoma
progression) by >65% and somewhat in a synergistic manner as compared to
individual low doses of DFMO and licofelone. Combination-treated lung
tumors exhibitedmodulation of ODC pathway key components (Arg1, Oat, Oaz,
SRM, SMS, and SAT) along with decreased proliferation (PCNA, cyclin D1
and Cyclin A) and increased expression of p53, p21 and p27 compared to
tumors from mice fed with control diet. These data suggest that targeting
ODC plus 5-LOX/COX decreases the progression of adenoma to
adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, adenoma progression delay by combination of
DFMO and Licofelone is associated with decreased tumor invasive markers
such as MMTPs and EMT markers. In conclusion, targeting two or more
pathways is an effective chemopreventive approach for high-risk lung
cancer individual's particularly former tobacco smokers with lung
hyperplasia and adenomas.(Supported by Kerley-Cade Chair Endowment and
NCI-N01-CN-53300)

