Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking IL-1-NF-kB axis inhibits Kras-induced pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer mortality in the USA with approximately 50 000 new cases and 40
000 deaths in 2015.The 5-year survival rate has remained at 5% for the
past three decades and the median survival duration is less than 6
months. The very high rate of mutant Kras occurs in pancreatic cancer
(>90%) and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (panIN) (>50%). However,
the key signaling pathway of downstream Kras remains unidentified.We
previously uncovered that the NF-B signaling pathway was constitutively
activated in most PDAC specimens and pancreatic cancer cell lines. More
recently, our results showed that constitutive NF-B activity in PDAC was
induce by IL-1 autocrine mechanism. IL-1/p62 feedforward loops that
initiated by the mutant Kras sustained NF-B activity and were required
for pancreatic cancer development. Therefore, we hypothesize that
blocking IL-1 - NF-B signaling pathway will inhibit Kras-induced
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.To identify the mechanistic role of
mutant Kras-induced IL-1 expression in PDAC, we generated genetically
engineered mice of Pdx1-cre/Kras LSL-G12D/p53 M/+IL-1/. Our findings
revealed that these mutant mice had developed significantly less PDAC
number and a significantly delayed PDAC at old ages. Furthermore, we
assess the effect of pharmacological IL-1R1 antagonist (anakinra) in
human pancreatic cancer cell lines and orthotopic pancreatic cancer
mouse. We found that IL-1R1 antagonist significantly decreased NF-B
activity and inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion. More
interestingly, the combinational treatment IL-1R1 antagonist plus
gemcitabine significantly reduced the tumor burden in orthotopic
pancreatic cancer mouse.These results suggested that pharmacologically
targeting IL-1 may provide a novel therapeutic approach for pancreatic
cacner.

