Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of breast cancer stem cells by Hedgehog-inhibitory
peptide conjugated with Elastin-like biopolymers


The Hedgehog(Hh) signaling pathway has been reported to play a pivotal
role in cancer. Studies have shown that suppression of this aberrantly
activated Hh pathway may be effective in controlling the development and
proliferation of many cancers. However, to date, there is no drug in
clinical application that can be used to inhibit the Hh signaling pathway
and suppress cancer growth.In attempt to address this problem, we
developed a thermally responsive polypeptide inhibitor of the Hh pathway.
This polypeptide is derived from a mammalian tropo-elastin protein which
will aggregate and accumulate at the tumor site where local hyperthermia
is applied. For this study, ELP was fused to a peptide that inhibits Hh
signaling by blocking interaction of Sonic Hh ligand (Shh) with the
Patch-1 docking site. To improve bioavailability, ELP was further
modified by adding the cell penetrating peptide, Tat.The
anti-proliferative activity of Tat-Hhi-ELP was examined in three breast
cancer cell lines: MCF7, MDA-MB-231, and SKBR-3. Treatment of the cells
with 20 uM of peptide for 2 days resulted in maximally 40% inhibition of
cell proliferation. Observed cytotoxicity was further increased two fold
by application of hyperthermia.To validate that Tat-Hhi-ELP is targeting
the Hh pathway, we determined the levels of GLI-1, which is a downstream
target in the Hh pathway. Treatment of the breast cancer cells with
Tat-Hhi-ELP resulted in reduction of GLI-1 levels, indicating that the
cytotoxicity is based on hedgehog pathway inhibition. Furthermore, the
formation of mammospheres was significantly reduced by treatment with
Tat-Hhi-ELP in SKBR-3 cells. These results suggest that thermal targeting
of ELP-based Hedgehog inhibitory peptides to breast cancer cells may be
an effective and promising treatment strategy against breast cancer stem
cells.

