Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide screen reveals a role for glucocorticoids in B cell
development that can be exploited to improve treatment of B cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Glucocorticoids (GCs) are a component of highly effective therapy for B
cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), the most common childhood
cancer. Although successful in 90% of patients, the prognosis for the
remaining 10% is dismal. Because sensitivity to GCs alone predicts
outcome well, we hypothesized that enhancing or restoring GC sensitivity
can improve outcome. To first determine how GCs kill B-ALL cells, we
first measured the transcriptional response of sensitive B-ALL samples to
dexamethasone (dex). In addition to apoptotic genes (BIM, BCL2), and
metabolic genes (TXNIP) identified in other studies that contribute to
cell death, we also found broad regulation of B cell development genes,
including key checkpoints (ITGA4, IL7R, and BCL6). This suggested that
high levels of GCs push arrested B-ALL cells through development,
resulting in cell death. To validate these results, and to identify
cellular pathways that modulate GC cytotoxicity, we used a
next-generation shRNA screen to knock down every protein-coding gene in
the genome. The screen identified 265 genes that significantly modulate
GC sensitivity. In addition to validating the importance lymphoid
development genes, the screen revealed which cofactors and chromatin
modifiers collaborate with GR to orchestrate cell death gene programs.
Further we were able to map critical signaling pathways with high
resolution, including the pro-survival B cell receptor pathway.
Inhibition of PI3K at the apex of this pathway potentiated the response
of GC-regulated genes to dex, and synnergized with dex to induce cell
death in even the most refractory B-ALL tissue. These results indicate a
previously unrecognized for GCs in B cell development that can be
exploited to improve both the potency and treatment of lymhoid disease.

