Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NFATC1 regulates the long non-coding RNA MALAT1 in breast cancer


Metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) is a long
non-coding RNA overexpressed in many solid tumors such as breast,
colorectal, liver, lung, and pancreatic. Its expression progressively
increases, first in comparison of adjacent normal tissue to the primary
tumor and again from the primary tumor to secondary metastatic sites. It
has been reported that MALAT1 controls gene expression through regulation
of alternative mRNA splicing as well as chromatin binding and histone
modification. These processes result in cell cycle advancement, cell
proliferation and migration. In tumor cells, loss of MALAT1 prevents
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), reduces proliferation, invasion,
migration, and increases apoptosis. Even though MALAT1 is overexpressed
in many tumors, the signaling pathways and transcription factors which
regulate its expression are poorly understood.To identify positive
activators of MALAT1, we first selected candidate transcription factors
for screening which were identified by ENCODE ChIP-Seq as bound to the
MALAT1 promoter and were linked to metastasis. Through small inhibitory
RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown, we identified NFATC1 (nuclear factor of
activated T-cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin-dependent 1) as a
transcription factor that activates MALAT1 expression in multiple breast
cancer cell lines. Overexpression of NFATC1 demonstrated an increase in
MALAT1, verifying the siRNA results. Our luciferase reporter assay
demonstrated that the MALAT1 promoter region is indeed controlled by
NFATC1. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation using an NFATC1
antibody demonstrated enrichment of NFATC1 at multiple sites within the
MALAT1 promoter region.Examination of endogenous levels of NFATC1 and
MALAT1 in five breast cancer cell lines indicated those which were
HER2-positive had highest expression of both NFATC1 and MALAT1. To
determine the effect of HER2 on NFATC1 activity and MALAT1 expression, we
ectopically expressed HER2 in HER2-negative cell lines. Interestingly,
this increased total and nuclear NFATC1 protein as well as MALAT1
transcript levels.In conclusion, these results demonstrate that NFATC1 is
a positive activator of MALAT1 in breast cancer and HER2 expression can
modulate this activity. Notably, NFATC1 is associated with breast cancer
EMT, invasion, and migration which match well with those phenotypes
ascribed to MALAT1. Furthermore, HER2-positive status is associated with
increased tumor proliferation and risk of metastasis. Therefore, our
findings demonstrate that the HER2-NFATC1-MALAT1 signaling axis is a
novel driver of breast cancer tumorigenesis and represents a potential
therapeutic target.

