Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD40L-CD40 signaling on B-cell lymphoma response to BTK inhibitors


The aberrant activation of B cells receptor (BCR) signaling plays an
essential role in the pathogenesis of B-cell lymphomas. Targeting BCR
signaling by inhibiting Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) has been shown to
be a successful strategy in treating B-cell lymphomas including
mantle-cell lymphoma (MCL) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Ibrutinib, an oral, covalent BTK inhibitor achieved high overall response
rate (ORR) and prolonged duration of responses in CLL and MCL patients.
In contrast, ibrutinib was reported to have much lower response rate in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and follicular lymphoma (FL) and
the responses in DLBCL was restricted to the activated B-cell (ABC)
subtype. These differences highlight the need to understand the bypass
signaling/pathway to BTK inhibition. In this study, we identified
CD40L-CD40 pathway as one of the potential bypass pathways to BTK
inhibitory therapy. We showed that CD40 was consistently expressed in
mature B cells, whilst CD40L expression levels were heterogenic in tissue
microarray (TMA) with 150 lymphoma samples. In these samples, circa 57%
of lymphoma tissues have medium or strong level of CD40L expression in
TMA, indicating the existence of CD40L-CD40 signaling in human lymphoma
tissues. Consistent with the response rate of ibrutinib in patients, in
68 non-GCB type of DLBCL, in which aberrant activation of NF-kB pathway
is important for the pathogenesis, about 60% samples showed CD40L
expression. Co-culture of Rec-1 or TMD8 cells with HEK293/CD40L
attenuated the anti-proliferation activity of ibrutinib in vitro. This
observation was also confirmed with recombinant soluble CD40L protein.
Detailed mechanistic analysis revealed that CD40L-CD40 signaling
activated the NF-B and MAPK pathway and offset the inhibition of
ibrutinib. Additionally, activating NF-B pathway with PKC agonist
abolished the cell killing effects of ibrutinib. These data suggest CD40L
may be used as a potential biomarker for studying clinical responses to
BTK inhibitors. Additionally, our results support combination strategies
of BTK inhibitors with agents blocking CD40 or downstream NF-B and MAPK
pathway in patient population where CD40L-CD40 pathway is activated.

