Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of hepatoma upregulated protein (HURP) promotes
radioresistance in prostate cancer cells


Despite progression in diagnosis and treatment, prostate cancer (PCa)
still represents major cause of cancer-related mortality and morbidity in
men. Although radiation therapy offers clinical benefit over other
therapeutic modalities, the success of this therapeutic modality is
commonly hampered by significant resistance in advanced tumor. So far,
the mechanisms governing the acquired resistance to radiotherapy have not
been discussed in detail. Hepatoma Up-Regulated Protein (HURP) is a cell
cycle-regulated and microtubule-associated protein. It functions as a Ran
GTPase effector and is involved in the stabilization of the mitotic
kinetochore fibers. The expression of this protein is elevated in
different tumor types and associated with tumor progression and
aggressiveness. We recently reported on the value of HURP as an
independent prognostic factor for high-risk PCa. The aim of this study
was to address the role of HURP in the modulation of PCa resistance to -
irradiation. Cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, and DU145) with regulated expression
of HURP protein using a Lent viral Tet-On 3G Inducible Expression System
were irradiated using a Cs-137 -source. Overexpression of HURP suppressed
- irradiation- induced apoptosis. This suppression was associated with
the expression of E2F1, p53, p21 together with the phosphorylation of
apoptosis signal-regulating kinase1 (ASK1), c-jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK)
and Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and histone family member X
(H2AX). Also, inhibition of - irradiation- induced- cytochrome c release,
cleavage of caspase-9, caspase-3, PARP, and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
was noted. The observed resistance was consequence of HURP's ability to
trigger the ubiquitination of p53 and ATM that, in turn, resulted in the
inhibition of downstream pathways, which are essential for the modulation
of - irradiation-induced apoptosis. Our data provide evidence for the
involvement of HURP in the modulation of PCa cell resistance to
-irradiation via a mechanism mediated by ubiquitination of ATM and p53.
Understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying HURP-mediated
resistance of PCa to available therapies may help to improve the
treatment strategy and emphasize HURP as therapeutic target for PCa
treatment.Funding sources: Department of Defense Grant PC094680 and
Prostate Cancer Foundation Creativity Award.

