Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complex behavior of ALDH1A1 and IGFBP1 in liver metastasis of
colorectal cancer


The present study aimed to identify upregulated genes associated with
colorectal cancer (CRC) liver metastasis (CLM) using our dataset
(GSE50760) previously established by RNA sequencing and to verify their
biological behavior. Candidate genes were assessed for their role in
tumor proliferation, invasion, and the expression of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition/CRC stem cell (EMT/CSC)-related
molecules. The role of the identified genes in CLM was verified in mice
after intrasplenic transplantation of CRC cells. Of nine candidate genes,
ALDH1A1 and IGFBP1 were selected and showed few post-translational
changes. The upregulation of ALDH1A1 and IGFBP1 significantly and
time-dependently decreased cell proliferation (p 0.001-0.003) and
suppressed invasiveness by 3 fold over control cells (p The present study
aimed to identify upregulated genes associated with colorectal cancer
(CRC) liver metastasis (CLM) using our dataset (GSE50760) previously
established by RNA sequencing and to verify their biological behavior.
Candidate genes were assessed for their role in tumor proliferation,
invasion, and the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition/CRC
stem cell (EMT/CSC)-related molecules. The role of the identified genes
in CLM was verified in mice after intrasplenic transplantation of CRC
cells. Of nine candidate genes, ALDH1A1 and IGFBP1 were selected and
showed few post-translational changes. The upregulation of ALDH1A1 and
IGFBP1 significantly and time-dependently decreased cell proliferation (p
0.001-0.003) and suppressed invasiveness by 3 fold over control cells (p
< 0.001) in the SW480 cell line, whereas it had a mild effect on reducing
SW620 cell proliferation. EMT/CSC-related molecules showed different
patterns of expression in CLM tissues and treated CRC cells. The cadherin
switch, namely, N-cadherin upregulation with E-cadherin downregulation,
was not observed in CLM tissues and treated CRC cells. Persistent
overexpression of -catenin, vimentin, and ZO-1 in IGFBP1-overexpressing
SW480 cells may have contributed to CLM development in mice implanted
with IGFBP1-overexpressing cells (CLM occurrences: SW480/IGFBP1
transfected mice vs. SW480/vector and /ALDH1A1 transfected mice, 4/8 vs.
0/10, p = 0.023). ALDH1A1 and IGFBP1 were differentially overexpressed in
CLM and may play a dual role, functioning as tumor suppressors and
metastasis promoting genes in CRC. Unidentified behaviors of these genes
may facilitate the reassessment of their potential value as CLM
modulators and as therapeutic targets.

