Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delta-tocotrienol and simvastatin induce cytotoxicity and synergy
in BRAF mutant SK-MEL-28 but not in wild type BRAF SK-MEL-2 melanoma
cancer cells


Targeting the mutant BRAF protein is an accepted approach to the
treatment of metastatic melanoma. Potent and specific BRAF inhibitors
like vemurafenib and dabrafenib are superior to chemotherapy in treatment
of BRAF mutant melanomas which represent nearly 50% of all melanomas.
Previous studies have shown that certain isoforms of vitamin E and
statins can have synergistic anti-cancer activity. We determined whether
a combination of delta-tocotrienol (DT3), an unsaturated vitamin E
isoform, and simvastatin, an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, can exert an
anti-neoplastic activity on BRAF-mutated SK-MEL-28 and BRAF-wild type
SK-MEL-2 melanoma cell lines and whether a differential effect would be
evident.MTS assays were used to analyze cytotoxicity. SK-MEL-28 and
SK-MEL-2 cells were cultured in MEM media containing 10% serum and plated
in 96-well culture plates for 24 hours then treated with DT3 (0-40 M),
simvastatin (0-5 M), or a combination and dosed again at 48 hours.
SK-MEL-28 and SK-MEL-2 cells grown in 60 mm plates and were treated with
DT3 at concentrations of 40, 30, 20 M, simvastatin at a concentrations of
20, 10, 5 M or dissolution vehicle as a control for 6 h. Protein
concentration of cell lysates was measured spectrophotometrically (GLO
Max Multi+, Promega), using a BCA protein assay kit. The samples were run
in SDS PAGE and blotted onto nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were
incubated with antibodies against Hsp 70 (Enzo Life Sciences,
Farmingdale, NY), Hsp 90 (Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX), pS6 and pBAD (Cell
Signaling, Danvers, MA).Using MTS assay, we found that DT3 (IC50 38.8 M)
and simvastatin (IC50 22.7M) have cytotoxic effects on melanoma cell line
SK-MEL-28, but on the SK-MEL-2 cells DT3 does not have an effect at the
concentrations studied (10-40 M DT3) yet simvastatin (IC50 16.9 M) does
have cytotoxicity. Further studies determined that combinations of these
drugs display a synergistic effect on SK-MEL-28 by inhibition of pS6 and
pBAD and subsequent apoptosis. However, these effects are not observed in
SK-MEL-2 cells; treated SK-MEL-2 cells show over-expression of Hsp70 and
Hsp90 suggestive of a rescue effect leading to lesser cytotoxic activity.
The selective cytotoxicity observed in BRAF-mutated cells and not in wild
type BRAF melanoma cell lines by both DT3 and simvastatin warrants
further research into the potential therapeutic use of these
combinations. This observation has added importance in the light of
recent findings that show the acquisition of BRAF mutation is an early
event in melanogenesis and hence these compounds may have a key role in
chemoprevention approaches to melanoma.

