Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel Nrf2 inhibitors and their application to overcome
chemoresistance of anticancer drugs


A large number of malignant tumors, for example, colonic, thyroid,
endometrial, lung, ovarian, breast and pancreatic cancers, exhibit an
increased Nrf2 expression and constitutive activation. This enhanced Nrf2
activation originates from rare gain-of-function mutations of Nrf2
itself, and from loss-of-function mutations, promoter hypermethylation or
microRNAs targeting Nrf2 inhibitory protein Keap1/INRF. As a consequence
of the enhanced Nrf2 activity, tumor cells acquire protection from
apoptosis and are more capable of proliferation, both conditions favoring
tumorigenesis on one hand and making tumor cells more refractory to
chemo- and radiotherapy on the other hand. These findings suggest that
Nrf2 exhibits profound protumorigenic activity, and can be a crucial
target for anticancer therapy, particularly by overcoming
chemoresistance.In the current study, we have rationally created a
library of about 150 flavonoid-based compounds and screened them for Nrf2
inhibition effect using a novel intact cell based bioluminescence imaging
assay which directly measures the expression of NQO1, the downstream
target gene of Nrf2. HeLa cells transfected with Luciferase reporter gene
expressed under the promoter of NQO1 gene were treated with the library
compounds at 10 M concentration for 16 hours in a 96-well plate format.
After treatment, the cells were imaged by the addition of 25 g/ml of
D-Luciferin using IVIS bioluminescence imaging system. The
NQO1-ARE-luciferase signals measuring its expression in different wells
were quantified. In parallel, the drug-associated toxicity was assessed
by MTT assay, the results were used to normalize the bioluminescence
signal, and the inhibitory effect was assessed by comparing the signal
induced by each compound with the DMSO control. In this preliminary
screening, 11 compounds that inhibited the expression of NQO1 by more
than 3-fold, as compared to the DMSO control, were identified.
Dose-response studies showed that these compounds inhibit Nrf2 in a
linear dose-dependent pattern. Moreover, 3 of the hit compounds exhibited
6-10 fold of Nrf2 inhibition (compared to DMSO) at as low as 0.16 M
concentration. We also evaluated Hela cells treated with Doxorubicin
(Dox, 1 M) and four hit compounds (10 M conc.) for induced apoptosis
after 48 hours of treatment, to evaluate synergistic effect.
Quantification studies by FACS assay using PI staining revealed that our
hit inhibitors enhanced the apoptosis effect of Doxorubicin.In
conclusion, we have identified new potent inhibitors of Nrf2, which also
enhanced the apoptotic effect of Doxorubicin. Further studies to probe
the mechanism of action of these inhibitors and medicinal chemistry
efforts to study the structure activity relationship are underway.

