Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C epsilon is a mediator of KRAS-driven lung
tumorigenesis


Exposure to a number of environmental carcinogens, such as polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), are the major causative agents of lung
cancer, the leading cause of cancer related deaths in the U.S. Oncogenic
mutations in KRAS, one of the most common alteration found in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), are induced in high frequency by PAHs and
environmental carcinogens. Studies from many laboratories, including
ours, established key roles for PKC, a member of the protein kinase C
(PKC) family, in mitogenesis and survival of cancer cells. Notably, PKC
is up-regulated in several epithelial cancers, including human NSCLC,
suggesting a role in the development and/or maintenance of the malignant
phenotype. We observed that PKC inhibition/depletion blunt the
proliferative, motile, and invasive properties of lung cancer cells with
KRAS mutation (PLoS One;7(2):e31714,2012). More importantly, silencing
PKC reduced the ability of human NSCLC cells with KRAS mutation to form
tumors in nude mice as well as impaired their metastatic potential
(Oncogene 31(20):2593-600, 2011). As Ras-transformed cells have enhanced
DAG levels and signaling, we hypothesized that genetic targeting of PKC
reverses lung tumorigenesis driven by oncogenic Ras. To address this, we
intercrossed lung-specific mutant Ras mice (KrasLSL-G12D/+) with PKC
knockout mice. Notably, significant inhibition occurred in the formation
of lung tumors upon loss of either one or both PKC gene (PRKCE) alleles,
with significant extension of mice lifespan, suggesting a role for PKC in
the initiation of lung tumorigenesis driven by oncogenic mutant KRas.
Furthermore, in silico database analysis of KRAS mutated human lung
adenocarcinomas revealed a significant association between high PRKCE
expression and poor patient outcome. As environmental lung carcinogens
(PAHs) induce mutations in Ras, we next intended to test the hypothesis
that PKC is implicated in the action of these carcinogens. Interestingly,
alveolar hyperplasia as well as pulmonary adenomas induced by
benzo(a)pyrene, a prototypical PAH, were significantly reduced upon loss
of one or two PKC alleles, suggesting that genetic ablation of PKC
impairs chemically-induced lung carcinogenesis. Overall, our results
indicate that PKC is a novel effector of KRAS in lung cancer that may
represent a promising target for disease treatment.

