Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Hedgehog signals and growth inhibition by
itraconazole in endometrial cancer


Background: There are limited therapeutic opportunities for the treatment
of endometrial cancer (EC). Itraconazole, a common antifungal agent and a
potent inhibitor of the Hedgehog pathway, has been shown to be clinically
effective for various types of cancer, but its clinical efficacy for EC
is unknown. Herein, we evaluated the efficacy of itraconazole in treating
EC.Patients and Methods: We reviewed cases of patients with serous
endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma (SEIC) and patients who were
diagnosed with EC with endometrioid adenocarcinoma grade 1 or 2 at FIGO
stage IA with myometrial invasion and negative cytology of ascites and
who recurred at our institution from January 2005 to December 2013. We
also reviewed cases with endometrioid adenocarcinoma grade 1 or 2 at FIGO
stage IA with myometrial invasion and negative cytology of ascites
without recurrence over 5 years after surgery during 2006 and 2007.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on EC tumour samples including SEIC
for sonic Hedgehog (sHh), glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1),
Progesterone receptor (PR), and chemokine ligand 18 (CCL18). Furthermore,
we examined the effects of itraconazole on human EC cell lines (Ishikawa
and HEC-1A cells) using a modified methylthiazol tetrazolium (MTT) assay
and a migration assay.Results: SHh and GLI1 were expressed in SEIC and
endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical evaluation of sHh and
GLI1 did not distinguish between recurrent and non-recurrent low-grade
FIGO stage IA EC. The MTT assay revealed that itraconazole significantly
inhibited the growth of Ishikawa and HEC-1A cells in a dose-dependent and
time-dependent manner. However, migration was not significantly effected
for either Ishikawa or HEC-1A cells. HEC-1A cells exhibited
dose-dependent migration retardation.Conclusion: Hedgehog signalling
plays a role in carcinogenesis and malignant progression in EC.
Itraconazole at a physiological dose may suppress progression of EC.

