Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Skin microenvironment enhances proliferation index and activates
mTORC 1 signaling in sezary syndrome


IntroductionSzary Syndrome (SS) is a rare and aggressive variant of
Cutaneous-T-Cell Lymphoma (CTCL) characterized by the presence of
malignant lymphocytes named Sezary (SS) cells in the skin, lymph nodes,
and peripheral blood. With a poor prognosis, SS has not a specific
therapy still available. As a role of skin in SS pathogenesis is not
elucidated yet, here we study the contribution of this microenvironment
by comparing matched skin and blood derived SS cells for tumor cell
proliferation and activation levels of PI3k/AKT pathway. Using our
previous SNP array data we also verified the genomic status of members
belonging to this pathway in a large cohort of SS
patients.MethodsExpression of Ki67 proliferation marker was evaluated in
perfect-paired blood and skin-paraffin biopsiesobtained from eleven SS
patients by flow cytometry analysis and immunohistochemistry
respectively. KI67+ neoplastic cells were calculated as percentage within
neoplastic CD4+ cells recognized by a co-staining with the specific TCRVb
rearrangement.Phosphorylation levels of members of PI3k/AKT pathway were
compared between matched circulating and skin resident SS cells proteins
derived from 2 SS patients using an AKT kinase array (Cell Signaling).
Affymetrix SNP6.0 arrays was used to investigate the copy number (CN)
status of members of mTORC 1 pathway in a cohort in 37 SS samples derived
from 23 SS patients and 3 cell lines.ResultsSkin derived SS cells showed
a significant higher proliferation index (PI) respect to SS cells
obtained from blood (12%11 vs 1,24%+1,18; P = 0,00025). In order to
identify the signals responsible for SS proliferation, we used a PI3K/AKT
kinase array that revealed an enhanced phosphorylation levels of many
components of this cascade, particularly of PRAS40 with a Fold change
(Fc) of 6,15; GSK3a (Fc = 4.83), mTOR (Fc = 4.61) mP70S6K (Fc = 4.64) BAD
(Fc = 7.09) and 4EBP1 (Fc = 5.40)in skin-SS cells respect to circulating
ones.We next deepen our observations in mTORC1 signaling because of this
and earlier observations made in CTCL cell lines. Using our SNP6 array
data we have verified the genomic status of members of this pathway.
Results obtained showed that P70S6K, the kinase downstream TORC1 that
plays a crucial role in protein synthesis, showed a mono-allelic gain in
9 out 23 patients (39%) whereas PDCD4, a protein that inhibits protein
translation displayed a mono-allelic loss in 10 of 23 individuals (43%).
4 of these patients showed a concomitant P70S6K gain and PDCD4 loss.
Overall these genetic defects suggest that an abnormal protein synthesis
can occur in these patients..Conclusion:Our data demonstrate that skin
microenvironment enhances SS cell proliferation index and activates
mTORC1 signaling, an unbalanced pathway that reveals novel potential
therapeutic targets for Sezary Syndrome.

