Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual IAP antagonist, ASTX660, increases the anti-tumor
activity of paclitaxel in preclinical models of triple-negative breast
cancer in vivo


Background: Paclitaxel-mediated secretion of inflammatory mediators,
including TNF, potentially creates paracrine and autocrine signaling
loops that can reduce paclitaxel-induced apoptosis with resultant cancer
cell survival (paclitaxel resistance). One mechanism of cancer cell
survival is the expression of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs):
Cellular IAP (cIAP) is involved in inflammatory pro-survival NF-B
activation, blocking the activation of effector caspases 3 and 7, while
X-linked IAP (XIAP) directly binds the effector caspases 3, 7 and 9,
inhibiting the full activation of the apoptotic pathway. Antagonism of
IAPs in the setting of paclitaxel treatment may enhance the cancer cell
death by switching the chemotherapy-induced inflammatory TNF signaling
from pro-survival to apoptosis. ASTX660 is an orally bioavailable dual
antagonist of cIAP and XIAP, currently being investigated in a
single-agent Phase 1/2 clinical trial in patients with advanced solid
tumors and lymphomas (NCT02503423). Here, we characterize the activity of
ASTX660 in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) preclinical models as a
single agent and in combination with paclitaxel.Results: We first
investigated the viability of 21 TNBC cell lines treated with ASTX660 in
vitro and found that 43% were sensitive either to ASTX660 alone
(MDA-MB-231 and HCC38) or in the presence of exogenous TNF (HCC1806,
Hs578T, BT549, HCC1395, DU4475, MDA-MB-453 and mouse EMT6). In HCC1806
xenografts in mice, both ASTX660 (daily oral treatment) and paclitaxel
(weekly intravenous treatment) as single agents caused moderate tumor
growth inhibition but not regression. ASTX660 and paclitaxel combination
treatment, however, caused regression and all tumors achieved a partial
response by Day 19 of treatment. An increase in circulating
acute-phase-proteins in animals was also observed on paclitaxel
treatment.Conclusions: Our study suggests that paclitaxel treatment
causes an inflammatory response which could qualitatively change the
tumor environment. Inhibition of IAPs in such inflammatory environment
induced by paclitaxel may lead to rapid apoptotic cell death. Thus,
addition of IAP antagonist may be a promising approach to enhance the
TNBC response to paclitaxel therapy.

