Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of REV3like and TYMS gene expression in
blood samples from non-small cell lung patients treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy plus pemetrexed


BACKGROUND: Pemetrexed is an effective antineoplastic agent as
monotherapy (second line and maintenance setting) or in platinum-based
combination regimes (first-line). Pemetrexed inhibits three key enzymes
in the folate metabolic pathway: thymidylate synthase (TS), dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR) and glycinamide ribonucleotide formyl transferase
(GARFT). As a consequence, pemetrexed interferes with the synthesis of
both pyrimidine and purine, thereby effectively inhibiting both DNA and
RNA synthesis. The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of the
PBMC (peripheral blood mononuclear cells) expression levels of AEG1,
BRCA1, REV3like, ant TYMS mRNA in the clinical outcome in NSCLC patients
treated with Pemetrexed-based therapy.MATERIAL AND METHODS: This is a
prospective, observational cohort study, of consecutively selected
patients. We included patients with non-squamous NSCLC, stage IV, treated
with platinum-based chemotherapy plus Pemetrexed. Blood samples from each
patient were collected at the beginning of treatment. Quantitative
reverse transcription (qRT)-PCR was performed with the use of the TaqMan
gene expression assay (Applied Biosystems) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. Amplifications were carried out on the
Applied Biosystem 7500 RT-PCR system, and relative gene expression values
were calculated by the Ct method (Sequence Detection System 2.0.5).
Results from analysis, done in triplicate, are expressed relative to
expression levels of GAPDH.RESULTS: We here present preliminary results
of 16 patients included in the study: median age was 63.4 (range 52-82);
12 were males. Histological subtypes were 13 adenocarcinomas, and 3 large
cell carcinomas. Pemetrexed was combined with Carboplatin in 9 patients
and Cisplatin in 7 patients. Best response obtained was partial response
in 7 patients, stable disease in 3 patients, and progression in 5
patients. We found significant differences in the REV3like expression
levels between patients with PR&SD and patients with PD (0.69 0.14 vs
0.44 0.07; P = 0.003). In addition there were statistically significant
differences in disease free survival (3 0.74 vs 13 1.89, P = 0.035; 12
2.32 vs 3 2.19, P = 0.003, months), and overall survival (10 5.21 vs not
reached, P = 0.026; not reached vs 12 2.38, P = 0.007, months) between
patients with mRNA levels of REV3like and TYMS under mean value of the
cohort and patients with levels over mean value of the our
cohort.CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the value of the PBMC expression
profiling of the REV3like and TYMS genes in the prognosis of NSCLC
treated with platinum-based chemotherapy plus Pemetrexed.

