Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of proinflammatory chemokines in triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC)


Objective: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 12-24% of
total breast cancer, and contributes to the more aggressive,
therapy-resistant and poorer outcomes. Our analysis based on The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) indicated that basal-like BC subtype representing
TNBC has enriched expression profiles for epidermal growth factor
receptor 1 (EGFR) and transforming growth factor alpha (TGF) compared to
other subtypes. In addition, TNBC has a higher proinflammatory index
compared to non-TNBC. Here we report that the proinflammatory chemokines
such as CXCL1-3 and 8 are highly expressed in human TNBC cells and might
be potentiated by TGF-EGFR axis that contributes to cancer progression of
TNBC.Methods: To gauge the role of TGF-EGFR axis as a proinflammatory
driver in TNBC cells, we first checked the expression profiles for EGFR
family such as EGFR, HER2, ErbB3, and ErbB4 between TNBC (MCF10A, MB468,
MB231, and BT549) and non-TNBC cells (MCF7, T47D). In addition, the
expression levels of downstream signaling for EGFR (Akt/Erk) were
measured by western blot. To dissect the role of TGF-EGFR axis in
enhancing proinflammatory index in TNBC cells, we utilized a more
comprehensive study of the chemokines and chemokine receptors using human
chemokine PCR array. Finally, to further confirm the role of TGF-EGFR
axis in inflammatory burden and cancer progression in TNBC, we used EGFR
inhibitor and its downstream targets.Results: TNBC cells expressed more
proinflammatory chemokines such as CXCL1-3 and 8 compared to non-TNBC
cells. TNBC cells (MB468, MB231, and BT549) showed higher expression of
EGFR which led to higher Akt activation as compared to non-TNBC cells.
However, Erk is only activated in MB231. To dissect the involvement of
Akt, expression of Akt isoforms in TNBC cells was accessed and Akt1 is
the predominant isoform expressed in TNBC cells. To further assess the
involvement of Akt1 in proinflammatory burden in TNBC cells, we used a
commercial siRNA of Akt1 to knockdown Akt1. Knockdown of Akt1
significantly reduced the CXCL2 promoter activity. In addition, afatinib
(an EGFR inhibitor) and MK2206 (an Akt inhibitor) significantly reduced
the CXCL2 promoter activity.Conclusion: Thus, higher expression of
proinflammatory chemokines CXCL1-3, and 8, via TGF-EGFR axis-activated
Akt, contributes to the inflammatory burden, probably promoting cancer
progression, thereby followed by the overall high mortality in TNBC
compared to non-TNBC.

