Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the synergy between temozolomide and PARP inhibition
in Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma is the fourth most common highly malignant childhood
cancer; it is defined by a tumor-specific chromosomal translocation. In
approximately 85% of all tumors, the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 is fused
to a member of E26 transformation-specific sequence family of
transcription factors, the FLI1 gene on chromosome 11. DNA damage induced
by expression of EWSR1-FLI1 fusion gene is potentiated by PARP1
inhibition in Ewing cells, where EWSR1-FLI1 genes act in a positive
feedback loop to maintain the expression of PARP1. As single agents, PARP
inhibitors have shown promising activity in vitro, but only modest
activity in in vivo models. In our previous work (in PPTP), we showed
that low level damage to DNA by temozolomide (TMZ) can be potentiated up
to 40-fold through inhibition of PARP by BMN-673, leading to dramatic
tumor regressions in 5 of the 10 Ewing sarcoma xenograft models.
Therefore, we were aimed to determine the differences between the tumors
that respond to treatment with BMN-673 and those intrinsically resistant
to it, and to understand the underlying mechanisms of such resistance,
with the ultimate goal to develop more effective therapy for Ewing
sarcoma.We have used the same cell lines to investigate biochemical
differences between those Ewing sarcoma lines where there is synergy in
xenograft models in mice, and those where the combination is inactive.
Our studies using cell lines show that, 1) in vitro BMN-673 and TMZ are
synergistic in all cell lines, irrespective of their response as
xenografts; 2) In vivo synergy correlates with intrinsic sensitivity to
BMN-673 and TMZ in vitro. For Ewing lines, where there is no in vivo
synergy when they are grown as xenografts, they are 9-fold resistant to
BMN-673, and 15-fold resistant to TMZ relative to lines where there is
synergy as xenografts.The resistance of the Ewing sarcoma xenografts to
the synergy of the combination of BMN-673 and TMZ in mice is a
consequence of intrinsic resistance to either or both of the drugs.The
combination of BMN-673 and TMZ in Ewing sarcoma xenografts is the most
dramatic synergy between two drugs to be reported. The synergy in vivo is
restricted to Ewing sarcoma, yet only half of the models respond to
combination treatment with the other half completely resistant. Studies
proposed in this application will potentially identify biomarkers that
will allow identification of patients likely to benefit from such
treatment, and spare toxicity for those unlikely to respond.

