Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-canonical Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling drives lung adenocarcinoma
stem cells survival and its targeting inhibits CSC-derived tumors


Introduction: Lung Adenocarcinoma (AC) is the most frequent lung cancer
histological subtype and is a leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Hedgehog/Gli (Hh/Gli) signaling pathway regulates lung
development and its aberrant activation contributes to tumor pathogenesis
and play a role in cancer stem cells (CSC) control.We investigated
oncogenic Hh/Gli signaling in AC-CSC.Methods: human AC-CSC were derived
from primary tumors. For in vitro studies AC-CSC were maintained in
serum-free medium supplemented with EGF/bFGF. For in vivo experiments,
immunocompromised mice were injected with AC-CSC. Gli1 inhibitor GANT61
was used both in vitro and in vivo (IP 40 mg/kg twice/we)
treatments.Results: Using mRNA datasets and tissue microarray of
Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NCSLC) samples we found that in AC Gli1 is
expressed independently of its canonical activator Smoothened (Smo)
expression level. Similarly, CSC were Gli1 positive regardless of Smo
expression levels. Indeed, we found that SMO regulatory region is highly
methylated in AC cells where Smo mRNA and protein are low.Looking for
Smo-independent regulation of GLI activity we found that NRP2/Erk and
IGF1R/Erk axes regulate Gli1 in AC-CSC. Suppression of Gli1 with GANT61
in CSC resulted in impairment of cell growth and stemness features. We
performed in-vivo experiments: CSC-derived xenograft from GANT61 treated
mice showed impaired tumor growth, reduced proliferation and increased
apoptosis. We next highlighted a tumor-stroma crosstalk. A positive
autocrine oncogenic feedback loop sustains Gli1 in AC-CSC since we found
that the CSC expressed NRP2 and its ligands VEGF-A and VEGF-C. A
paracrine positive loop also sustain Hh/Gli signaling in AC where
Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts (CAFs) harbor Hh/Gli1 canonical pathway
that regulates the expression of VEGF-A, VEGF-C and IGF2 ligands of NRP2
and IGF1R respectively.Conclusion: Our findings suggest a non-canonical
activation of Hh/Gli pathway in AC. In this context, GLI1 transcription
factor is effectors of NRP2/Erk and/or IGF1R/Erk signaling inputs.Our
results have implications for the understanding of AC development and
sustain the inclusion of target therapy acting downstream of Smo level in
the design of AC treatment.

