Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS and clinical context: Differential dynamic signaling output
of KRAS mutant lung, colorectal and pancreatic cancer cell lines when
exposed to targeted anticancer drugs


BackgroundClinical trials have shown that cancers originating from
different tissues driven by the same oncogene respond differently to
targeted anticancer drugs. We aimed to understand different signaling
patterns in KRAS mutant cells derived from non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), colorectal cancer (CRC) and pancreatic cancer.Materials and
methodsWe optimized a 50 phosphoprotein antibody-based assay on the
Luminex 200 platform. We then exposed a panel of 15 KRAS mutant cell
lines (5 cell lines each originating in the lung, pancreas and colon) to
a DMSO control (n = 3) and clinically significant concentrations (Cmax
achieved in humans adjusted for protein binding in culture medium) of a
PI3K (GDC-0941), AKT (AZD5363), m-TOR (everolimus), BRAF (vemurafenib),
EGFR (gefitinib), MEK (trametinib) and an HSP90 inhibitor (luminespib)
for 1 hr. We quantified the change in phosphorylation of proteins for
each drug compared to control. Logistic regression analysis was used to
analyse differences between KRAS-driven cell lines originating from
different anatomical sites.ResultsThere were changes in phosphorylation
related to the pharmacodynamic effects of the drug independent of cell
line of origin; however, there were interesting differences between KRAS
mutant cells originating from different anatomical sites. In NSCLC cell
lines, p-EGFR levels changed significantly less when exposed to PI3K, AKT
and m-TOR inhibitors (p = 0.047, 0.022 and 0.047, respectively) when
compared to cells originating from CRC and pancreatic cancer. CRC cell
lines, when compared to NSCLC and pancreatic cancer cell lines, showed
significantly less changes in phosphorylation of key cell cycle
regulators such as CHK1 when exposed to PI3K, AKT and m-TOR inhibitors,
(p = 0.001, 0.047 and 0.047, respectively) and RB when exposed to an AKT
and m-TOR inhibitor (p = 0.047 and 0.047, respectively). Interestingly,
pancreatic cell lines showed significantly more changes in p-m-TOR
compared to CRC and NSCLC cell lines following exposure to PI3K and AKT
inhibitors (p = 0.0095 and 0.022, respectively). Of note, drugs not
directly targeting the PI3K pathway differentially regulated different
nodes in the PI3K pathway, for example, BRAF inhibitors significantly
differentially changed levels of phosphorylation at different nodes in
the PI3K pathway such as AKT in NSCLC cell lines, p = 0.047, p70S6K in
CRC cell lines, p = 0.0472 and PRAS40 in the pancreatic cancer cell
lines, p = 0.022.ConclusionThese results suggest that there are
significant differences in signaling patterns caused by PI3K pathway
inhibitors in KRAS mutant NSCLC, CRC and pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Our findings shed light on the putative use of PI3K pathway inhibitors in
KRAS mutant cancers. They also question the universal application of
solely using genetic mutations to stratify patients in basket clinical
studies.

