Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel compound conferring selectivity for cancer cells


There is a need to develop novel compounds that can effectively treat a
broad range of cancers on their own, or in combination with approved
therapies. As personalized medicine is developed, combinatorial
approaches will become more common making it crucial to increase the
repertoire of available drugs. In the past, drugs often were developed to
target a biologically-relevant molecule, but structural limitations,
stability and solubility issues, or lack of selectivity have hindered the
clinical use of many of these drugs. Our approach was to first find a
high-quality compound that is selective for cancer cells, then
characterize its mechanism of action and identify its target. High
throughput screening (HTS) helped to rapidly identify a subset of
compounds with selective toxicity toward MCF-7 (breast cancer) cells.
Some of these compounds were further tested for their efficacy in HeLa
(cervical cancer) cells, and we found one that selectively causes mitotic
arrest at 250 nM in comparison to non-cancerous HFF-1 (foreskin
fibroblast) cells. At 200 nM, this compound synergizes with drugs known
to affect microtubule dynamics and cause mitotic arrest including
Nocodazole and Paclitaxel (currently in use as an anti-cancer drug),
causing them to be more effective at lower concentrations. Excitingly,
this compound also provides a shielding effect for HFF-1 cells treated
with Paclitaxel. To learn the mechanism of action for this compound, we
performed immunofluorescence microscopy on HeLa and HFF-1 cells treated
with a range of concentrations. We found that the mitotic spindle is
improperly organized in HeLa cells at 250 nM, but not in HFF-1 cells.
Interestingly, microtubules are completely gone in mitotic HeLa cells and
are reduced in mitotic HFF-1 cells treated with >500 nM. Given that this
compound synergizes with drugs that directly bind to tubulin subunits to
modify their dynamics of assembly and disassembly, and differently
affects cancerous vs. healthy cells, we hypothesize that it has a unique
mechanism of action and may affect microtubule nucleation. We are
continuing to characterize the compound, and will identify its molecular
target. In addition, we are generating further iterations to explore the
Structure-Activity Relationship, and optimize its efficacy. Our in vitro
data shows that our approach has the potential to identify novel
compounds with the potential for therapeutic use.

