Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of minute amounts of clinical biospecimen for the AXL
receptor expression using real-time PCR and Simple Western size technology


Targeted therapy in personalized medicine is often affected by resistance
mechanisms, such as activating mutations of signaling molecules and
signaling pathway bypasses. It has become obvious that targeted therapy
of patients has to be monitored by taking biopsies on a regular basis.
Therefore, laboratory methods have to be optimized to be able to handle
minute amounts of biospecimen, e.g. biopsies. In this study we are
presenting the development of a Simple Western Size assay and a
quantitative Real-time PCR assay for the analysis of AXL protein and gene
expression in biopsies.AXL, a tyrosine kinase receptor, is expressed in a
variety of cancers and the most highly expressed gene in preclinical
models with acquired resistance, and second most common alteration in
EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) inhibitor-resistant tumors,
behind the T790M mutation. Up-regulation of AXL is shown to be predictive
for lack of response to ErbB family receptor-targeted inhibitors, e.g. to
Her2-targeted agents. Protein expression was examined by Simple Western
Size technology and gene expression was analyzed using quantitative
Real-time PCR. For assay development, high and low AXL expressing breast
cancer cell lines were used to establish fit for purpose assays.
Subsequently, Her2-positive and Her2-negative clinical samples from
breast cancer patients were analyzed by screening AXL gene and protein
expression.In this study, we developed and validated an assay for the
detection of AXL protein expression using the Simple Western technology.
This highly sensitive technology enables high-throughput screening of
extremely small sample amounts such as biopsies or laser capture
microdissected material. Therefore, the assay is well-suited for the
monitoring of patients by using biopsies. Our results showed a broad
linear dynamic range in both, high and low AXL expressing cell lines as
well as a high reproducibility between multiple runs. The protein loading
range suitable to detect AXL within whole cell lysates showed a lower
limit of detection of 10 ng of total protein. AXL protein expression
results were highly comparable to AXL gene expression results in analyzed
breast cancer cell lines and breast cancer patient samples. This newly
developed assay will allow us to analyze and quantify AXL protein
expression profiles in breast cancer tissue and subsequently correlate
them with e.g. Her-2 expression status.The elucidation of networks and
mechanisms underlying drug resistance will greatly improve the
development of new drugs and promote personalized therapy. In order to
gain scientific knowledge regarding gene and protein expression of
resistance relevant marker, e.g. AXL, it is mandatory to establish assays
that are very robust, sensitive and furthermore, if not most important,
applicable to amounts of biospecimen being collected in the clinical
setting.

