Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel evidence that blood plasma vitronectin is a major
chemoattractant for cancer cells and its pro-migratory activity is
suppressed/chaperoned after binding to fibrinogen


Background. One of the crucial problems with cancer therapy is migration
of cancer cells that leave primary tumor and migrate to vital organs
where they form metastases. Throughout the years several factors have
been identified that direct metastatic process including growth factors,
chemokines, bioactive lipids or extracellular nucleotides. To our
surprise however, we noticed that highly diluted plasma (1%) possess
remarkable chemokinetic activity against several cancer cell lines that
highly exceeds those observed for optimal doses of chemokines (e.g.
SDF-1) and growth factors (e.g. HGF/SF), that are considered as a main
metastatic factors present in plasma. Aim of the study. Based on this
observation our aim was to identify the factor/s responsible for this
remarkable chemokinetic activity of normal diluted 1% plasma.
Experimental strategies. We employed several human cancer cell lines and
different dilutions of normal human, murine and bovine plasma and serum
in Transwell migration assays, adhesion and cell signaling studies. We
tested effect of heat inactivation, protease exposure, dialysis and
molecular filtration on chemotactic activity of plasma. We also used gel
filtration followed by hydrophobic interaction chromatography (HIC) to
identified plasma fractions with the most potent chemotactic activity
that were further analyze using MassSpec. Results. We found that
remarkable chemokinetic activity of highly diluted 1% plasma against
malignant cells, rapidly decreased at higher plasma concentration (>5%).
Our initial characterization studies revealed that this activity is
sensitive to proteolytic treatment, is not removed from plasma by
dialysis and is temperature sensitive. The similar effect has been
observed for diluted 1% serum however chemotactic responsiveness of serum
was maintained with its higher concentrations. Based on this we
hypothesized possible involvement of inhibitory effect of fibrinogen,
which was subsequently confirmed in experiments where fibrinogen was
removed from plasma or it was added to serum. Finally, gel filtration
followed by HIC and MasSpec analysis allow us to identify several
possible candidates that were further tested in in vitro experiments.
These studies revealed that vitronectin (VTN) is a main factor
responsible for observed chemotactic response and that its effect can be
inhibited by fibrinogen. Conclusions. Our data indicate that VTN present
in normal plasma is a main migration inducing factor responsible for
metastasis of malignant cells and that VTN is more potent chemoattractant
than already known pro-metastatic chemokines or growth factors.
Pro-migratory effect of VTN is neutralized/chaperoned by fibrinogen what
may explain preference in migration of tumor cells into lymphatic vessels
and body cavities, where concentration of fibrinogen is low.

