Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells might sustain stemness by the induction of
autophagy in starvation stress


Background: Cancer stem cells (CSCs), which have capacity for
self-renewal and cancer cell supply, have been thought to be responsible
for tumor initiation, distant metastasis, and chemoresistance. Side
population (SP) cells extracted by the fluorescence-activated cell
sorting technique using Hoechst 33342 are thought to be enriched for
CSCs. Autophagy is an intracellular degradation system that is induced
under stress, such as starvation. Although autophagy has been reported to
be associated with tumor progression under various stresses, the
significance of autophagy in CSCs has still remained to be unknown. The
aim of this study is to clarify the role of autophagy of CSCs under
starvation stress.Materials and Methods: Two gastric cancer cell lines,
OCUM-2MD3 and OCUM-12 were used. Two side population (SP) cell lines,
OCUM-2MD3/SP and OCUM-12/SP were sorted by flow cytometry as CSC-rich
cells from the parent OCUM-2MD3 and OCUM-12 cells, respectively. The
effects of starvation stress, including low glucose, low amino acid, or
low serum, on the stemness of CSCs were examined. The expression level of
autophagy associated proteins, LC3A and LC3B, was evaluated by RT-PCR and
western blotting. The effects of autophagy on the stemness and the
proliferation of CSCs were examined by SP fraction and MTT assay.
Chloroquine was used as an autophagy inhibitor.Results: The percentages
of SP cells were significantly higher in the OCUM-12/SP cells (10.2%) and
OCUM-2MD3/SP cells (12.3%) than in their parent OCUM-12 cells (2.1%) and
OCUM-2MD3 cells (1.2%). The expression level of LC3A and LC3B was high in
both OCUM-2MD3/SP cells and OCUM-12/SP cells, in comparison to that in
OCUM-2MD3 cells and OCUM-12 cells. Starvation stress increased the
autophagy status of OCUM-2MD3/SP and OCUM-12/SP cells. Chloroquine
significantly decreased the SP fraction and proliferation activity of
OCUM-2MD3/SP cells and OCUM-12/SP cells.Conclusion: Autophagy acts as a
survival pathway in CSCs under starvation stress. CSCs might sustain
stemness by the induction of autophagy in sarvation status. The autophagy
inhibitor might be a promising therapy for CSCs.

