Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Outlier overexpression of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism
and processing define two aggressive prostate cancer phenotypes


Major shifts in fatty acid metabolism are part of the malignant phenotype
of many types of cancer, including prostate cancer. We have used a biopsy
based approach to characterize high grade prostate cancers in both
African American and European American patients. This approach allows us
to analyze prostate cancers from patients whose disease is too advanced
for radical prostatectomy and who are thus not represented in the study
specimens available from conventional biorepositories. mRNA gene
expression profiling of high grade prostate cancers from biopsies
revealed cancer subtypes with very high (>10 fold) levels of
overexpression of fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5) and fatty acid
synthase (FASN). Interestingly, these prostate cancer subtypes showed an
either-or phenotype, with super-overexpression of either FABP5 or FASN
but not both. These findings suggest two outlier prostate cancer subtypes
with striking differences in the pathways that drive a shift in tumor
fatty acid metabolism; one is a fatty acid synthase (FASN) dominant
phenotype and the other a previously unrecognized fatty acid binding
protein (FABP5) dominant phenotype. In contrast, prostate cancers with
lower levels of FABP5 and/or FASN overexpression (2-4 fold) often
co-overexpressed both of these genes. Immunohistochemical analyses
confirmed prostate cancer FABP5 and FASN overexpression; both showed
strong cytoplasmic staining. FABP5 also showed robust nuclear staining
consistent with its proposed role in regulating fatty acid mediated gene
expression. At both the mRNA and protein levels, the high grade prostate
cancers with the highest levels of FABP5 over-expression were more common
in African Americans, while the highest levels FASN overexpression were
more common in prostate cancers from European Americans. These findings
may provide the basis for more effective dietary interventions and
targeted therapies for African American and European American patients
with these two different subtypes of high grade prostate cancer.

