Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYP3A4 regulation of androgen receptor signaling in ER+ breast
cancer


Purpose: Eighty percent of breast cancers that are estrogen
receptor-positive (ER+) express AR. According to American Cancer Society,
every two out of three women are ER+ and initially respond to
estrogen-receptor targeted therapies but later almost 50% of breast
cancers, despite the presence of ER, fail to respond. Acquired resistance
to these therapies is common and portends a poor prognosis, frequently
requiring the use of cytotoxic therapies. Our preliminary results
indicate that endocrine-resistant tumors express higher levels of AR and
may depend on AR for their growth. Hence AR targeted therapies may be
appropriate for these resistant tumors. As we have recently demonstrated
that CYP3A regulates androgen receptor signaling, we wish to ascertain
the role of CYP3A in regulating AR in endocrine-resistant breast
cancer.Methods: The ER+ cell lines MCF7 and T47D were used to study the
role of AR in breast cancer. To study endocrine resistance in breast
cancer, tamoxifen resistant MCF7 and T47D lines were generated with
recurrent treatment of IC90 dosage of tamoxifen over 6 months time
period. Cell fractionation, western blotting and q-RTPCR techniques were
used to study the role of AR. siRNA inhibition of CYP3A4, the isoform
expressed in breast, was used to study its role in regulating AR in
breast cancer.Results: Our results indicate that both MCF7 and T47D
express active AR, inducible by DHT and R1881. Similar to prostate cancer
we also observe that AR in these lines is regulated by CYP3A4. Cell
fractionation studies indicate that inhibition of CYP3A4 by siRNA results
in reduced AR migration to the nucleus inhibiting its role as a
transcription factor. Our results also indicate that tamoxifen resistant
cell lines express increased levels of AR. Tamoxifen resistant cell lines
respond to bicalutamide/enzalutamide with a lower IC50 value than the
native cell lines, reflecting their AR dependence. The resistant cell
lines also show increased AR nuclear migration with R1881 induction as
compared to native breast cell lines.Conclusions: Endocrine-resistant
breast cancer is sensitive to antiandrogen therapy. CYP3A4 may play an
important role in endocrine-resistant breast cancer by negatively
regulating AR activity.

