Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) with the small molecule
inhibitor LY2606368 mesylate monohydrate in models of high-risk pediatric
cancer yields significant antitumor effects


CHK1 is a serine/threonine protein kinase essential for S-phase and G2/M
cell cycle checkpoint regulation following DNA damage. Targeted
inhibition of CHK1 in several tumor types increases DNA damage and
replication stress, culminating in cell death through mitotic
catastrophe. Recent studies have identified CHK1 as a therapeutic target
in several pediatric tumor types. We evaluated the antitumor efficacy of
LY2606368 mesylate monohydrate (LY), a checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1)/CHK2
inhibitor currently in early phase clinical trials for adult solid
cancers, in a panel of pediatric tumor cell lines and mouse models of
embryonal tumors and pediatric sarcoma. In vitro effects of LY were
assessed via Cell Titer Glo, immunoblotting, and cell cycle analysis by
flow cytometry. For in vivo studies, mice bearing cell-derived (CDX) or
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) of several pediatric tumor types were
treated with four weekly cycles of 10 mg/kg LY BID for 3 consecutive
days, followed by a 4 day dosing holiday. Tumor volume and body weight
were measured 2x weekly. Xenograft tumor health following LY,
chemotherapy, or combination treatment was evaluated by fluorescent
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for a panel of markers for cell proliferation
(Ki67), apoptosis (TUNEL), and angiogenesis (CD31, smooth muscle actin
[SMA], MECA32). Single digit nanomolar sensitivity to LY was observed in
the majority of pediatric cancer cell lines evaluated in vitro. A more
detailed analysis of LY-treated neuroblastoma and pediatric sarcoma cell
lines showed increased DNA damage, CHK1 phosphorylation, and MAPK pathway
activation. Significant single agent LY activity was observed in mouse
models of neuroblastoma and pediatric sarcoma, but not in models of
hepatoblastoma or retinoblastoma. Acquired resistance to LY was observed
in the ST162 and SJCRH30 models of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.
Interestingly, more stroma was observed following LY single agent
treatment as measured by CD31, SMA, and MECA32 IHC staining; co-treatment
with chemotherapy reduced the amount of SMA expressing-cells. Overall,
our data demonstrate that LY is highly effective as a single agent in
murine in vivo models of human neuroblastoma and several pediatric
sarcoma subtypes. Current studies include further evaluation of the LY
mechanism of action; investigation into the mechanism of intrinsic and
acquired resistance; and identification of possible biomarkers for LY
sensitivity.

