Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 alternative splice variants are associated with prostate
cancer cell identity and migration


Patient tumors can demonstrate tremendous cell-to-cell genetic
heterogeneity while cultured cancer cell lines are often more
homogeneous. This fundamental difference can undermine in vitro findings
and their application to the more complex in vivo tumor environment.
However, it should not be assumed that cultured cells are homogeneous
even in well established and widely used cell lines. In my study of CD44
alternative splicing in the prostate cancer cell line PC3, I encountered
varying CD44 alternative splicing expression profiles dependent on the
origin of the PC3 cell line. CD44 is a cell surface glycoprotein that
binds to components of the extracellular matrix, including hyaluronan,
and is primarily involved in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions. CD44
contains 10 variable exons that when combined in particular combinations
significantly alter/guide CD44 downstream activities. In the context of
cancer biology, alternative splicing of CD44 can control the epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer cells and is associated with
metastasis in many types cancers such as breast and prostate. To
determine if cellular heterogeneity was the source of variable CD44
alternative splicing profiles, I isolated PC3 single cell clones. From
these clones I identified two cell populations based on colony
morphology: a compact colony subset with cells of a epithelial phenotype
(PC3-EL), and a diffuse colony subset with cells of a mesenchymal
phenotype (PC3-ML). I then performed reverse transcription-PCR (rt-PCR)
on cDNA generated from these two populations with primers that
specifically amplify the CD44 variable region to generate a fingerprint
of CD44 alternative splicing. I found that PC3 cells with an epithelial
phenotype express multiple CD44 variant exons (CD44v), including the
epithelium-associated CD44v1,v8-10 variant (CD44E). However,
phenotypically mesenchymal PC3 cells show a complete loss of CD44 splice
variants and primarily express standard CD44v1 (CD44S). These differences
in CD44 mRNA alternative spicing are manifested at the protein level as
phenotypically epithelial PC3 cells express predominantly high molecular
weight CD44 variants. I then monitored the association of CD44v
expression on cell migration and determined that PC3 cells that express
CD44E are non-motile, while PC3 cells that predominantly express CD44S
are highly motile. Acquisition of CD44S over CD44E can signal EMT, an
early and critical step in cancer metastasis. These data indicate that
the CD44 alternative splice fingerprint may provide a predictive
biomarker for EMT and the acquisition of other early pro-metastatic
features in prostate cancer cells.

