Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hic-5 modulation of the stromal matrix is required for mammary
tumor progression


Primary tumors grow and invade into surrounding tissues/stroma,
frequently resulting in metastasis to distant organs. Tumor cell-stroma
crosstalk plays a crucial, but incompletely understood role during tumor
progression and metastasis. For example, increased stromal matrix density
and/or rigidity correlates with poor prognosis in human breast cancer
patients. Previous studies have implicated Hic-5, a focal adhesion
scaffold protein, in tumor cell invasion, proliferation and metastasis.
To investigate the role of Hic-5 in mammary tumor progression, Hic-5 -/-
mice were generated and crossed with mice expressing Polyoma Middle T
Antigen (PyMT) driven by the MMTV promoter. The PyMT mouse is a
well-established model for human breast cancer progression. Tumors from
the Hic-5 -/- PyMT mice demonstrated an increased latency and had reduced
growth as compared to Hic-5 +/- PyMT controls. The absence of Hic-5 did
not affect the progression of the tumor to a carcinoma stage, but there
was a decrease in metastasis to the lungs. Immunohistochemical analysis
showed that Hic-5 is primarily expressed in the cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) and the Hic-5 -/- PyMT tumor stroma exhibits reduced
extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. Furthermore, 3D cell-derived
matrices (CDM) generated in vitro using isolated CAFs, confirmed that
Hic-5 -/- PyMT CAFs do not efficiently deposit and organize ECM. The
organization of the stromal matrix has been shown previously to increase
the rigidity of the tumor, which in turn promotes FAK Y397
phosphorylation in the tumor cells to promote cell invasion and
proliferation. Accordingly, the Hic-5 -/- PyMT tumors exhibited a
reduction in FAK phospho-Y397 staining and attenuation of downstream ERK
activation, suggesting that their stromal matrix is not optimally
organized for tumor cell signaling. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that Hic-5 expression in CAFs is important for stromal matrix
organization/remodeling during tumor progression and that the loss of the
organization of the ECM in the Hic-5 -/- tumor stroma may contribute to
the reduced tumor growth and metastasis observed in these
animals.Supported by NIH CA163296 to CET, NS066071 to EO and Carol M.
Baldwin Breast Cancer Fund to CET.

