Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of two novel drivers of
hepatocellular carcinoma


Liver cancer is globally the sixth most commonly diagnosed and the third
most deadly cancer. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common
form of the disease and a difficult cancer to treat due to inadequately
understood pathways involved in tumorigenesis and progression. To obtain
a better understanding of key HCC driver mutations, we performed a
forward genetic screen using Sleeping Beauty transposon mutagenesis in a
damaged liver microenvironment. Briefly, T2Onc3;
Rosa26-SB11lsl/lsl;Alb-Cre mice were treated with carbon tetrachloride
(CCl4) during ongoing transposition. We then sequenced the resulting
liver tumors using linker mediated PCR (LM-PCR) and Illumina sequencing.
We analyzed the sequenced data using gene-centric common insertion site
(gCIS) analysis that allowed us to determine common insertion sites
across tumors. These common insertion sites are referred to as candidate
driver mutations.This screen demonstrated the role of Glioma associated
protein-2 (Gli2) and Fidgetin (Fign) as candidate driver mutations in a
significant subset of HCC tumors (20% and 10% respectively). Gli2 is a
key member of the Hedgehog signaling pathway, acting as a transcription
factor for genes promoting cell proliferation. Fign is a relatively
uncharacterized protein in the AAA-ATPase family with the ability to
sever microtubules in vitro. We validated Gli2 as a driver of HCC by
generating a hepatocyte specific Gli2-overexpression mouse model using
hydrodynamic tail vein injection of Gli2 cDNA into FAH-/- mice. Mice
underwent rapid tumorigenesis, regardless of CCl4 treatment,
demonstrating that Gli2 is a strong oncogene. Additionally we have
demonstrated that overexpression of Fign drives cell proliferation and
promotes stabilization of the primary cilium in hepatocytes, a novel
finding that provides insight into the mechanism of Fign-driven HCC.The
discovery of two novel HCC candidate driver mutations, validation of Gli2
as a bona fide HCC oncogene, and mechanistic insight into these commonly
mutated genes in HCC will allow for future research into understanding
HCC tumorigenesis and potential therapeutic options.

