Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined circulating tumour cell (CTC) and circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) analysis of blood from patients with pancreatic cancer


BackgroundThe challenge to improve outcomes for patients diagnosed with
advanced pancreatic cancer remains very real with only small improvements
in median survival gained by the use of systemic chemotherapy and little
improvement in 5-year survival over the past decades. The advent of next
generation sequencing (NGS) of tumor nucleic acids has opened up the
possibility of improving outcomes through personalized therapies selected
on the basis of tumor genetics.Whilst NGS biomarkers can be measured in
tumor biopsies sampled shortly before and after treatment this is often
not practical for ethical, logistical and simple lack of availability. To
circumvent problems associated with tumor sampling we have developed and
evaluated blood-borne nucleic acids biomarkers for patients diagnosed
with advanced pancreatic cancer.ApproachWe developed a NGS circulating
free DNA (cfDNA) analysis pipeline based on the generation of whole
genome NGS libraries followed by sequencing of over 600 cancer-associated
genes using Agilent SureSelect. Using whole blood collected with Streck
cell free DNA blood collection tubes (cfDNA BCT) we optimised combined
circulating tumor cell (CTC) enrichment and cfDNA isolation. Quantitative
measurements of KRAS mutations using both NGS and droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR) were used to compare the tumor component present in both CTCs and
cfDNA. We evaluated the overall approach using External Quality
Assessment (EQA) controls and over 50 advanced pancreatic cancer patient
samples. For CTC analysis we also compared epitope dependent (CellSearch)
and independent (Parsortix) enrichment.ResultsAfter applying our NGS
pipeline to 5 EQA genomic controls we identified all 14 known mutations
correctly indicating high sensitivity and specificity. Both ddPCR and NGS
identified KRAS mutations in patient cfDNA with a higher success rate
seen for ddPCR consistent with the higher sensitivity of this
methodology. From the NGS output additional mutations were detected in
samples which either harboured or lacked detectable KRAS mutations.
Consistent with previous observations CellSearch CTCs were detected at
low levels in around 20% of patients with a similar frequency seen in
initial analysis of CTCs obtained by epitope independent enrichment
(Parsortix). In general KRAS mutations were detected at a higher level in
patient cfDNA compared to enriched CTCs although some patients showed
detectable CTC KRAS mutations with no KRAS mutations detected in their
cfDNA by either ddPCR or NGS. Ongoing analysis is aimed at establishing
if the molecular observations correlate with clinical
outcome.ConclusionCombined CTC enrichment and cfDNA isolation is readily
achievable using a single Streck cfDNA BCT. Results indicate that
combined CTC and cfDNA analysis is more sensitive than either approach
alone.

