Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the longitudinal transcriptomic landscape of tyrosine
kinase inhibitor treatment response in chronic myeloid leukemia patients


The interpretation and implementation of large-scale genetic profiles
into clinical practice remains a challenge despite substantial growth in
our understanding of genetic contributors to drug response. Most current
omic studies focus on identifying genetic features that are distinct
between normal and tumor samples, but fail to capture the dynamics of
association between omic profiles, treatment response and disease
progression over time. The focus of this research is to analyze the
longitudinal transcriptomic profile of chronic myeloid leukemia patients
(CML) in context of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment and
clinical status. The main objectives were to compare a series of post-TKI
treatment transcriptome profiles to their baseline levels, and
characterize the impact of TKI treatment and CML disease status on the
individual's transcriptome over time. Our ultimate goal is to develop TKI
response predictors using the longitudinal expression data collected over
the treatment course.Peripheral blood samples, buccal swabs and detailed
clinical data were collected from each study participant (screened for
BCR-ABL1 translocation) for a period of 6 months, in addition to
pre-therapy baseline. RNA was extracted from granulocytes isolated from
peripheral blood samples, and profiled using RNA sequencing. RNAseq
profiles over TKI treatment course were compared to baseline, as well as
against hematologic response (complete blood count), cytogenetic response
(FISH), and clinical disease progression.We investigated dynamic trends
in RNAseq profiles associated TKI response, as well as with the clinical
status of the patient over time. We identified genetic features that were
either 1) Differentially expressed between baseline and post-TKI time
points; 2) Showed non-random spikes in expression levels at specific time
points; 3) Associated with hematological and clinical phenotypes,
including white blood cell count, percentage granulocytes and percentage
cells with BCR-ABL1 translocation; 4) Demonstrated highly correlated
patterns of expression over time. Through clustering and enrichment
analysis of the selected transcripts, we identified several pathways and
molecular features associated with TKI-response, and altered disease
state. Of note, we found mTOR signaling, and pro-apoptotic pathways to be
significantly altered between baseline and TKI-responding individuals. In
addition, we observed significant changes in transcription regulatory
network of several transcription factors, notably AP-1, over the
treatment time course.To our knowledge, this is the first study to
establish the utility of comprehensive longitudinal multiple
transcriptome profile analysis of TKI-response in CML. We believe this
study will pave way for future large-scale longitudinal omic profiling of
CML and other cancer-types.

