Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Over-expression of PARP is associated with an aggressive phenotype
and can be synergistically targeted using combination of PARP and XIAP
inhibitors in breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in females and despite
improvement in treatment modality with the introduction of hormonal
targeted therapy, these cancers still remains a major cause of morbidity
and mortality in females. Poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) is an enzyme
which plays a critical role for repairing single-strand breaks. The main
function of PARP1 is dependent upon cellular stress responses and directs
cells towards DNA repair based on the strength of the stress stimulus.
PARP has been found to be over-expressed in various tumors including
ovarian cancer; breast cancer and lung cancer, however, its role in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer of Middle Eastern origin have not been
completely elucidated. Therefore, we examined the expression of PARP in a
large cohort of more than 1000 breast cancer by IHC in a tissue
microarray format and found PARP was over expressed in 44.7% (451/1008)
and was found to be significantly associated with aggressive markers such
as Triple negative phenotype, high grade tumors, large tumor size, stage
4 disease and had a poor 5 year overall survival of 72.6 months as
compared to 85.4 months (p = 0.0005). Interestingly PARP expression was
also found to be significantly associated with aggressive molecular
markers such as activated AKT, XIAP and proliferative marker; ki67. Next,
in vitro effect of inactivation of PARP was evaluated using a PARP
inhibitor; olaparib on a panel of BC cell lines. Olaparib treatment alone
did not affect the cell viability and apoptosis at doses up to 10M
concentration. However, when BC cells were treated with sub-optimal dose
of Olaparib (1M) and Embelin (XIAP inhibitor)(5M) in combination for 48
hours, there was appreciable inhibition of cell viability via induction
of apoptosis. Combination of Olaparib and Embelin induced apoptosis via
activation and cleavage of caspases-9, -3 and PARP in BC cells. These
studies highlight the importance of targeting PARP in combination with
either small molecular inhibitors or chemotherapeutic agents in BC can
improve the management and survival of this aggressive disease.

