Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventive effects of pentoxifylline on hepatic tumorigenesis in a
novel mouse model of NASH-related liver cancer


Overweight and obesity are becoming more prevalent worldwide. As the
hepatic manifestation of the metabolic syndrome, non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease (NAFLD) and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) have
received attention as major causes of liver disorder. In addition,
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) associated with NASH becomes an important
issue. Although no standard medicinal treatment for NASH is established,
pentoxifylline (PTX), a medicine used to improve circulation, is reported
to ameliorate histopathological appearance of NASH and is thought to be a
candidate therapeutic agent for NASH. In the present study, we
investigated effects of PTX on NAFLD/NASH and the development of
diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced liver tumorigenesis in monosodium
glutamate (MSG)-treated mice, a novel mouse model of NASH-related
hepatocarcinogenesis, and db/db obese and diabetic mice. Male MSG and
db/db mice were administered DEN, and then they received drinking water
containing PTX (100 mg/kg/day) throughout the experiment. At sacrifice,
drinking water with PTX significantly inhibited the development of
hepatic pre-neoplastic lesions compared with respective control groups.
MSG mice were thought to be susceptible to liver tumorigenesis. Hepatic
triglyceride contents in db/db mice were decreased by PTX administration.
The serum levels of total cholesterol, triglyceride, free fatty acid, and
alanine aminotransferase were all decreased by PTX treatment, as was the
mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-alpha and IL-1beta)
the macrophage-inducing chemokine CCL2/MCP-1, and several lipogenic genes
(FASN and SREBP1c) in the liver. In vitro studies also revealed that PTX
treatment decreased the expression of several genes associated with de
novo lipogenesis and CCL2/MCP-1 in hepatoma and hepatic stellate cell
lines, respectively. These findings suggest that PTX prevents
NAFLD/NASH-related liver tumorigenesis by attenuating chronic hepatic
inflammation and decreasing lipogenic gene expression in the liver. PTX
might be a promising and efficient agent for treatment of NAFLD/NASH
patients, who have a higher risk for developing liver cancer.

