Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated stromal cells increase malignancy of human
colorectal cancers triggering EMT induction


In the last decades it has been demonstrated that the stroma surrounding
tumor not only provides mechanical support, but profoundly influences the
outcome of the primary tumor and its possible relapse, impacting on
proliferation, metastatic progression and resistance to therapies. Major
components of the stroma in most types of human carcinomas are the
Tumor-Associated Stromal Cells (TASC). Different sources have been
proposed for this population, ranging from the resident fibroblasts to
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BM-MSC) recruited to the
trans-differentiated epithelial and endothelial cells, but the scenario
is still unclear. Moreover, TASC have an intrinsic heterogeneity,
combined also with the presence of multiple subpopulations, and they
share several markers with other cell subsets of the stroma, thus making
the identification of this population, based on the expression of
specific markers, an arduous task.In this intricate context, we aim to
address phenotypic and functional characterization of TASC isolated from
colorectal cancer specimens, and to analyze TASC-mediated effects on CRC
development and progression in vivo.TASC were characterized for phenotype
and differentiation capacity. Human CRC cells were cultured in the
presence or absence of TASC for five days. After co-culture tumor cells
were sorted by flow cytometry and evaluated for the expression of
EMT-related genes by Real Time PCR and for in vitro invasiveness by
chemoinvasion assay. Furthermore, their tumorigenicity and the metastatic
potential were assessed upon subcutaneous and intracoecally injection in
NOD/SCID mice. Developed tumors, metastatic foci and circulating tumor
cells were assessed by histology, flow cytometry and Imaging Flow
Cytometry.Our results indicate that TASC resemble BM-MSC in morphology
and phenotype. They also comprise a multipotent subpopulation that is
able to differentiate into adipogenic and osteogenic lineage. After
co-culture with CRC cells, TASC express membrane-bound TGF-, through
which they are capable to trigger epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Upon subcutaneous injection in NOD/SCID mice, tumor cells
co-cultured or admixed with TASC before injection, show a faster growth
kinetic and develop larger tumor masses as compared to tumor cells alone.
Furthermore developed tumor masses are characterized by a higher vessel
density. Notably, upon intracoecal injection TASC presence or
conditioning leads to a higher metastatic formation in lungs and livers
and an increased number of circulating tumor cells in the peripheral
blood, most importantly comprising cells undergoing EMT.Our data clearly
show that the stromal component in the human colorectal cancer
microenvironment increases the malignancy of tumor cells, by providing
pro-mitogenic factors and by triggering EMT initiation in vitro and in
vivo, thus promoting tumorigenicity and metastasis formation in vivo.

