Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDE10A overexpression in cancer cells and tumors as compared to
normal cells and tissues


Phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10A) is a cGMP and cAMP degrading PDE isozyme
that is expressed in areas of the brain related to motor function and
cognition. An elevation in neural PDE10A expression has been strongly
linked to many diseases that affect cognition, including schizophrenia
and Huntington's disease. Recently, high levels of PDE10A were shown to
be expressed in colon tumor cells in vitro and in vivo compared with
cells derived from normal colon and normal colonic mucosa (Li et al.,
Oncogene 2015). PDE10A inhibition by small molecules or genetic
silencing, attenuated tumor cell growth by a mechanism involving cGMP/PKG
activation, the suppression of -catenin and a decrease in TCF
transcriptional activity (Li et al., Oncogene 2015). These observations
suggest that PDE10A may play an important role in tumorigenesis and
PDE10A could serve as a novel therapeutic target for colorectal cancer.
However, the expression and role of PDE10A in other cancer cell types has
yet to be elucidated. Here we report that PDE10A expression is elevated
(compared to controls) in tumor cells and solid tumors from xenograft, as
well as, genetic models from the colon, breast, and lung using western
blot and immunohistochemistry. The human colon adenocarcinoma cell line,
HT29, the human breast adenocarcinoma cell line, MDA-MB-231, and the
human lung carcinoma cell line, A549, showed elevated expression of
PDE10A as compared to the normal colon mucosal epithelial cell line,
NCM460, normal human mammary epithelial cells, and normal human airway
epithelial cells, respectively. Solid tumors collected from the colons of
heterozygous APCmin mice displayed an elevation in PDE10A levels as
compared to uninvolved mucosa from the APCmin mice and wild type colon
mucosa. Solid tumors collected from the mammary glands of viral
transgenic FVB-MMTV-Her2 mice also possessed high levels of PDE10A as
compared to FVB wild type mice. These findings suggest that PDE10A could
be a novel therapeutic target for not only colorectal cancer, but breast
and lung cancers as well.

