Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trastuzumab increases uptake and cross-presentation of
HER2-derived antigens by dendritic cells


Introduction:The purpose of this study was to identify the effect of
trastuzumab on the uptake and presentation of HER2-derived peptides by
dendritic cells (DCs). Clinical trials for HER2-derived peptide vaccines
have shown improved outcomes for patients receiving a combination of
vaccine and trastuzumab suggesting potential synergy between the two. We
hypothesized that antigen processing and cross-presentation would be
enhanced via trastuzumab facilitating antigen presenting cell (APC)
uptake of HER2 shed from breast cancer cells.Methods:An ELISA assay was
used to evaluate HER2 shedding in multiple cancer cell lines (SKBR3,
SKOV3, BT474, MDA-MB-231). To look for uptake of HER2 shed from breast
cancer cells into culture media by APCs, DCs were generated by incubating
healthy donor monocytes in media supplemented with GM-CSF, IL-4, and
TNF-. These DCs were co-incubated with SKBR3, BT474, and SKOV3 (high HER2
expressers) as well as MDA-MB-231 (low HER2 expresser) in the presence of
trastuzumab. Rituximab was used as an isotype control to determine
trastuzumab specificity and an Fc blocker was used to evaluate the
importance of the Fc receptor in the uptake mechanism. Cells were then
stained for DC markers, including CD11c and HLA-DR, permeabilized and
stained for HER2 to detect uptake, and then analyzed using flow
cytometry. To evaluate antigen cross-presentation, antigen-specific T
cells were expanded by co-culturing healthy donor PBMCs with DCs that
have been pulsed with SKBR3 cells or trastuzumab-treated SKBR3 cells. DCs
pulsed with E75 peptide (HER2, aa: 369-377) were used as a control. After
T cell activation and expansion, the number of E75-specfic CD8+ T cells
was enumerated using an E75-dextramer assay.Results:When compared to
SKOV3 and MBA-MB-231 cells, SKBR3 and BT474 cells shed a significantly
higher concentration of HER2 into the growth media. DCs took up HER2 when
co-cultured with cell lines with higher levels of HER2 shedding (SKBR3,
BT474). Trastuzumab treatment of SKBR3 resulted in a 50% increase in HER2
uptake by DCs at 24 hours (p = 0.0014). This finding persisted among all
trastuzmab doses. Treatment with rituximab showed no significant increase
in HER2 uptake when compared to untreated SKBR3. The effect of
trastuzumab on uptake was abrogated by adding an Fc blocking agent. DCs
treated with SKBR3 and trastuzumab also led to an increase in the
generation of E75-CTLs as measured using a dextramer
assay.Conclusions:Trastuzumab treatment leads to increased uptake of
soluble HER2 by DCs in vitro. This effect is specific to trastuzumab and
is Fc receptor mediated. Increased HER2 uptake led to increased E75-CTL
generation secondary to increased cross-presentation of E75 by DCs. These
data have global implications for HER2-targeting vaccine approaches.
Specifically, by enhancing antigen presentation, trastuzumab can augment
the immune response initiated by a peptide vaccine.

