Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of SIRT6 reactivates the oncofetal RNA-binding protein Lin28b
to drive pancreatic cancer


Chromatin remodeling proteins are frequently dysregulated in human
cancer, however little is known about how they control tumorigenesis. The
NAD+-dependent histone deacetylase Sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) is a nutrient sensor
that reprograms the epigenome in response to nutrient stress and shows
reduced expression in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
relative to normal tissue. Thus, we aimed to determine the role of SIRT6
in PDAC and to determine how the loss of this chromatin modifier could
influence PDAC formation, progression and metastasis.Here, we uncover an
epigenetic program mediated by SIRT6 that is critical for suppression of
PDAC. We demonstrate that SIRT6 inactivation cooperates with oncogenic
KRAS to greatly accelerate the development of lethal pancreatic tumors
regardless of p53 status. In addition to developing PDAC and high-grade
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) at an earlier age,
SIRT6-deficient tumors had a greater propensity to metastasize to the
lung, compared to their SIRT6 wild-type (WT) counterparts. Through
genome-wide profiling of SIRT6 WT and knock-out (KO) PDAC cell lines, we
identified the oncofetal RNA-binding protein Lin28b as a target of
Sirt6-mediated transcriptional repression. Loss of SIRT6 in both murine
and human PDAC cell lines resulted in hyperacetylation of histone 3
lysine 9 and lysine 56 at the Lin28b promoter, MYC recruitment, and
pronounced induction of Lin28b expression. Knocking down Lin28b resulted
in potent suppression of cell proliferation and tumor sphere formation in
Sirt6null/low murine and human cell lines, while murine and human
Sirt6WT/high PDAC lines were completely insensitive to the same
treatment. Functionally, Lin28b binds to and induces the degradation of
the let-7 family of microRNA, thus resulting in increased expression of
let-7 target genes such as the Igf2bps, which have been correlated with
increased agressiveness and metastasis in pancreatic tumors. Furthermore,
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) comparing PDAC tumors and cell lines
with high versus low expression of LIN28B revealed that LIN28Bhigh tumors
were strongly enriched for the expression of let-7 targets.Thus, our
critical findings define SIRT6 as a tumor suppressor in PDAC, working as
a transcriptional repressor of the oncofetal RNA-binding protein Lin28b.
We demonstrate that loss of Sirt6 creates a permissive hyperacetylated
chromatin state, allowing for MYC-dependent transactivation of Lin28b.
This work not only provides new insights into the epigenetic mechanisms
governing the reactivation of oncofetal proteins in cancer but also
demonstrates that this pathway is well-conserved in human PDAC, where
reduced SIRT6 expression defines a specific subset of tumors which may
benefit from novel therapeutic approaches aimed at targeting components
of the LIN28B/let-7 pathway.

