Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting components of intercellular communication in a
heterogeneous tumor


Background: Recent advancements in single-cell sequencing technologies
have enabled the study of complex biological systems such as tumors. They
provide quantification of the extent and nature of the underlying
heterogeneity and its impact on the disparate levels of response to
therapy. The roles of receptor-ligand signaling in intercellular
communication during embryogenesis and, in multicellular development and
function is fairly well understood. Intercellular communication within
the heterogeneous tumor mass, may proceed through the coordinated action
of ligands and their cognate receptors. However, this phenomenon has not
been explored in detail, especially in the context of tumor
heterogeneity. We propose that a systems-level understanding of ligand-
and receptor-states would shed novel insight in to dysregulated pathways
in tumorigenesis and perhaps treatment.Data: By performing single-cell
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on freshly resected and dissociated primary
glioblastomas (GBMs), Bradley Bernstein and colleagues (Patel AP et al,
Science 2014) provided novel insights into the underlying heterogeneity
at the molecular level. We used the data obtained from 430 cells analyzed
by single-cell RNA-seq from five patient samples. The data were
mean-centered, log-transformed and included about 6000 genes.Methods: For
our analysis we relied on a comprehensive list of ligand-receptor pairs
from Ramilowski JA et al (Nature Communications 2015) and used 137 pairs
for which data was available. Based on levels of their expression, we
quantized ligand-receptor states and categorized each pair into one of
four states. We adopted an unsupervised approach using hierarchical
clustering to identify tightly grouped clusters. In order to test for the
robustness of the clustering, we used multiscale bootstrapping and
identified groups with ITGB1, LRP1, CD44, EGFR as high confidence
clusters. We performed these analyses both globally and on individual
samples to account for patient genotype differences.Results: We observed
that most of the tightly grouped clusters were ligand-receptor pairs that
shared the same receptor. Global clustering revealed enrichment of
receptors (ITGB1, ITGA5, EGFR and FGFR1) in pathways relating to signal
transduction of L1 and L1CAM interactions. LRP1 and ITGB1 clusters were
found in all five samples and pathways relating to hemostasis and
extracellular matrix organization, respectively, were
enriched.Discussion: Bernstein et al observed that several receptors and
ligands associated with GBM showed mosaic expression even among cells
within a given patient sample. We broadened the scope and specifically
posed the hypothesis that networks of ligands and receptors are involved
in intercellular communication critical to tumor progression and
pathogenesis. These molecules may also serve as good therapy targets and
more detailed analyses is required to explore this possibility.

