Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plumbagin, a medicinal plant-derived naphthoquinone, inhibits the
growth of docetaxel resistant prostate cancer cells via inhibition of the
expression of P-glycoprotein and NF-kB activation


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of death in men across
the world. Despite the initial success of androgen ablation therapy,
resistance to anti-androgen therapy manifests by progression to
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), which is the end stage that
accounts for the majority of PCa patient deaths. Docetaxel (DTX) is an
approved drug for the treatment of CRPC. However, development of DTX
resistance and toxicity are the major limitations in the use of DTX in
the treatment of CRPC. Now we investigated to determine whether these
limitations may be overcome by combining DTX with plumbagin (PL). PL is a
quinoid constituent isolated from the root of Plumbago zeylanica L. The
roots of Plumbago zeylanica L. have been used in Indian medicine for more
than 2500 years for treatment of various ailments. We were the first to
report that PL inhibits the growth and PCa metastasis. Now we present
that PL: 1) sensitizes CRPC cells to DTX and thus reduces its effective
therapeutic dose to prevent DTX resistance and toxicity, and 2) inhibits
the viability and growth of DTX resistant cells (22Rv1R). In combination
therapeutic experiments, the effects of different concentrations of PL
(0, 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 M) alone or in combination with DTX (0.25 nM and
0.5 nM) on colony formation in 22Rv1 and C4-2 prostate cancer cells, was
determined. Combined treatment of PL and DTX has more than additive
inhibitory effects on colony formation. This synergism of PL and DTX on
colony formation can be explained on the basis of unique mechanism of
action of PL and DTX. PL-induced inhibition of PCa growth and metastasis
involves inhibition of the expression of multiple targets including PKC,
which correlates with the aggressiveness of PCa and plays roles in both
androgen independent androgen receptor (AR) activation and promotion of
PCa cell survival. DTX targets microtubules, impairs AR signaling, and
inhibits cell division. To determine the effects of PL on DTX resistant
PCa cells, we established DTX-resistant 22Rv1 cell line (22Rv1R). 22Rv1R
overexpresses multidrug resistant protein 1 (MDR1, also known as
P-glycoprotein). MDR1 is overexpressed in many tumors and thus causing
intrinsic drug resistant. Transcription factor NF-KB, which is linked to
cell proliferation and survival, is also activated in 22Rv1R. PL
inhibited the colony forming efficiency of 22Rv1R cells which accompanied
inhibition of MDR1 expression and NF-KB activation. In summary, the
results presented here and the ones reported by us previously with
preclinical mouse models (TRAMP and PTEN knockout mice) of PCa indicate
that PL has the potential to prevent as well as treat PCa. PL is a
potential natural agent worthy of investigation for prevention and
treatment of human PCa. (Support: NIH grant CA102431).

