Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of cathepsin L1 by U87 KIF9 suppression in glioblastoma
multiforme: a potential therapeutic target


Glioblastoma multiforme is a fatal primary brain cancer. It has remained
one of the most difficult cancers to treat because of glioblastomas
aggressive and local invasive nature. Glioblastoma tumors have many
myeloid cells, especially microglia. Increased levels of microglia result
in increased glioblastoma invasion and are associated with worse clinical
outcomes. Glioblastomas infiltrative mechanisms are mostly unknown which
hinder the efficacy of current treatments. Therefore, further
investigations on the mechanisms responsible for local invasion are
potential targets for therapeutic interventions.Recently, there has been
interest in evaluating the role of kinesin family members (KIFs) and
cathepsins (CTS) as possible targets for therapeutic interventions. KIFs
play an essential role in both physiological axonal transport processes
and in processes of cell division. Previous studies have investigated the
inhibition of KIF11 as a possible therapeutic target in glioblastoma.
Preliminary studies in our group have found that the inhibition of KIF9
reduces microglia-stimulated glioma invasion. CTS, which are proteases
that function in many pathways and increase neoplastic progression, are
other possible therapeutic targets. Specifically in glioblastoma,
inhibition of cathepsin L1 (CTSL1) (i) promotes tumor cell death, (ii)
decreases apoptosis threshold and (iii) sensitizes glioblastoma cells to
radiation. Our study investigated the role of KIF9 suppression in
secretion and production of CTSL1.In order to investigate this
relationship, U87 cells were incubated with and without the presence of
microglia. Non-targeting and stable KIF9 knockdown cells were incubated
with and without the presence of microglia. CTSL1 concentration levels
were measured by enzyme immunoassay (ELISA). We investigated CTSL1
concentrations in the cell lysates as well as the cell supernatants. Our
results demonstrated an overall decrease in production and secretion of
CTSL1 in KIF9 knockdown cells as compared to non-targeting shRNA cells.
The effect of KIF9 knockdown was evident in the presence and absence of
microglia. Although the exact mechanism needs to be further clarified,
inhibition of CTSL1 by KIF9 suppression could be a possible potential
target for therapeutic intervention.

