Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomics reveals dependency on 6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase in OXPHOS-deficient tumors


Cancer cells display metabolic properties distinct from normal cells and
are therefore believed to be dependent on key metabolic enzymes. The
effectiveness of targeting metabolism for cancer therapy has been largely
restricted due to metabolic adaptability. We postulate that tumors with
metabolic vulnerabilities will be limited in such adaptation, thus
providing a unique opportunity for therapeutic intervention. Hereditary
leiomyomatosis renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) is a metabolically vulnerable
cancer, due to mutations in a key TCA cycle enzyme - fumarate hydratase
(FH), thus rendering them deficient in oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS). We performed a loss-of-function genetic screen in a FH-null
HLRCC model (UOK262 cells) and identified 6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase (6PGD) - a rate-limiting enzyme in the non-oxidative arm of
pentose phosphate pathway - as a critical regulator of cell growth.
Inhibition of 6PGD using either dox-inducible shRNA or a small molecule
inhibitor dramatically blocks the growth of UOK262 cells, and in
contrast, has no effect on 6PGD-deficient NB1 cells. The growth
inhibition from knockdown is fully rescued by expressing shRNA-resistant
6PGD. Conversely, ectopic expression of 6PGD in NB1 cells results in a
gain of function phenotype. Importantly, in vivo, 6PGD knockdown causes
robust regression of established UOK262 xenografts. Mechanistically, 6PGD
inhibition causes the accumulation of 6-phosphogluconate, blocks
glycolysis, and induces ROS production. Furthermore, in tumors with
intact TCA cycle, 6PGD inhibition shows synergism with OXPHOS Complex I
inhibitor IACS-10759. Together, our data suggest that 6PGD is a bona fide
oncology target and provide a strong rationale for developing small
molecule inhibitors that could be used to treat OXPHOS-deficient tumors
as single agent, or combined with inhibitors of OXPHOS.

