Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antigen-specific immunity and regulation as predictive biomarkers
for anti-tumor vaccination


We have reported the results of two phase I trials using a DNA vaccine
encoding prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) in patients with biochemically
recurrent prostate cancer. In both trials, PAP-specific proliferating and
IFN-producing T cells developed in some patients, and persistent Th1-type
immunity was associated with an increase in PSA doubling time. In the
current study, we sought to determine if one or more measures of
antigen-specific or antigen non-specific immunity present prior to
treatment was associated with subsequent immune response as a possible
predictive biomarker. Specifically, patients who had developed
PAP-specific, IFN-secreting immune responses, detectable at least twice
over one year after immunization, were defined as immune responders. The
frequency of peripheral T cell and B cell lymphocytes, natural killer
cells, monocytes, dendritic cells, myeloid derived suppressor cells, and
regulatory T cells did not differ between the immune responder and
non-responder groups. PAP-specific immune responses, detected as cytokine
secretion following antigen stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear
cells in vitro, were detected in many patients pre-immunization.
PAP-specific expression of granzyme B, IFN, and IL-6 was not
significantly different between immune responding (n = 7) and
non-responding patients (n = 23), however non-responder patients tended
to have higher PAP-specific IL-10 production (p = 0.09). Using a trans
vivo delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) assay to assess for
antigen-specific immune regulation, responder patients tended to have
preexisting PAP-specific bystander regulatory responses that suppressed
DTH to a recall antigen, a response previously demonstrated to be
IL-35-mediated (p = 0.049). While the number of patients analyzed was
low, these results suggest that different measures of antigen-specific
regulation might help predict outcome from vaccination. These will be
prospectively evaluated in an ongoing randomized, placebo-controlled,
phase II trial evaluating this vaccine (NCT01341652).

