Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor stimulation decreases PD-L1 expression in
androgen-responsive thyroid cancer cells


Women develop thyroid cancer more often than men; however, when men
develop thyroid cancer, the disease course is more lethal, with a
mortality rate that is two to three fold higher than in females. Immune
elimination of nascent tumor cells may explain the differences in disease
occurrence/course between men and women. To address this possibility, we
examined the effect of androgen on the expression of immune checkpoint
molecules in an androgen responsive-thyroid cancer cell line. The
undifferentiated thyroid cancer cell line, 8505C, does not express a
functional androgen receptor (AR). 84E7 is a clone of 8505C that was
transfected with an AR containing plasmid resulting in constitutively
expressed AR. Transcriptome analysis was performed on 8505C and 84E7,
with and without 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) treatment. Raw sequencing
reads were aligned to the UCSC hg19 human reference genome with Tophat,
and Cufflinks was used to measure transcript abundances in Reads Per
Kilobase of exon model per Million mapped reads (RPKM) as well as to find
genes with statistically significant changes in expression as per
Trapnell et al (2012). RNASeq data indicated that DHT treatment of 8505C
cells does not result in a significant change in gene expression (only 14
of 23,285 genes), consistent with the lack of a functional androgen
receptor. In contrast, DHT treatment of 84E7 resulted in >2 fold
expression changes in 1,552 genes. Examination of the immune checkpoint
molecules CD28, CD80, CD86, CTLA-4, PD-1, PD-L1, PD-L2, TIM-3, TIM-3L,
4-1BB, 4-1BBL, OX40, and OX40L revealed that in DHT-treated 84E7 cells,
PD-L1 was the sole immune checkpoint molecule that exhibited a
significant expression change with a 1.8 log2 fold decrease (p = 0, q =
0), or 72% reduction in mRNA content. This is potentially significant as
PD-L1 is produced by tumor cells as a strategy for subverting and evading
the immune response, specifically T cells, allowing for continued tumor
growth and metastases. In the thyroid, the presence of androgen-activated
androgen receptors could perhaps lead to an environment that is more
favorable for the immune system and may help eliminate nascent thyroid
cancer cells. Thus, men may experience a decreased incidence of thyroid
cancer due to an enhanced (less inhibited) anti-tumor environment.
However, failure of this system and a subsequent increase in PD-L1
expression may help to explain the onset and severity of thyroid cancer
in males. This finding opens the possibility for the use of immune
checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment of thyroid cancer.

