Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of ibrutinib and corticosteroids in B-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphomas (NHL)


Introduction: The B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling pathway is a major
driver in the pathogenesis of B-cell malignancies. A vast array of
BCR-associated kinases have emerged as rational therapeutic targets,
including Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK), which plays a pivotal role in
BCR signaling. Ibrutinib is a first-in-class, oral, covalent BTK
inhibitor approved in the US for patients with mantle cell lymphoma and
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) who have received at least 1 prior
therapy, CLL patients with 17p deletion, and patients with Waldenstrm's
macroglobulinemia. While ibrutinib is efficacious as a single agent,
combinations with other drugs may further enhance efficacy and increase
response rates in patients with NHLs. Corticosteroids are included in
nearly all combination regimens for NHL treatment, showing promising
results when combined with chemotherapy and antibodies (Cunningham,
Lancet 2013). We therefore evaluated corticosteroids in combination with
ibrutinib in preclinical models of activated B cell-like (ABC) and
germinal center B cell-like (GCB) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL),
and follicular lymphoma (FL).Methods: ABC-DLBCL, GCB-DLBCL, and FL cell
lines were used in this study. Drug effect on cell growth was evaluated
with CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay (Promega) following
treatment with ibrutinib or the combinations for 3 days. Combination
index (CI) was determined using CalcuSyn. Synergy score (SS) was
calculated using the Chalice Analyzer (Horizon CombinatoRx). Mutation
profiles were extracted from the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer
database.Results: Synergistic growth suppression of dexamethasone and
ibrutinib was identified in 7 of 14 GCB-DLBCL cell lines. Dexamethasone
had a stronger effect on cells with lower EC50 on ibrutinib treatment.
Intriguingly, 4 of these 7 cell lines that showed synergy of the 2
compounds had BCL-2 nonsynonymous mutations, whereas only 1 of the cell
lines with no combination effect had BCL-2 silent mutation. In addition
to dexamethasone, other corticosteroids, including hydrocortisone,
prednisolone, and mometasone, also showed synergy with ibrutinib in
GCB-DLBCL (SU-DHL-4, CI = 0.219-0.668, SS = 5.08-15.15; SU-DHL-10, CI =
0.008-0.224, SS = 7.27-11.24), ABC-DLBCL (TMD-8, CI = 0.001-0.016, SS =
21.1), and FL cell lines (DoHH2, CI = 0.020-0.467, SS = 12.3-30.86;
WSU-FSCCL, CI = 0.017-0.022, SS = 18.24). The in vivo effect and
underlying mechanisms of the combinations are currently under
investigation.Conclusions: We identified synergistic inhibitory effects
of ibrutinib and corticosteroids on ABC-DLBCL, GCB-DLBCL, and FL cell
growth, providing a rationale for the design of combination clinical
trials in these NHL types. Further understanding of the mechanisms
contributing to the synergy may help to stratify patient populations and
expand treatment to other lymphoid neoplasms.

