Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed nuclear area and micronucleus screening identifies
SKP1 as a human chromosome instability gene


Chromosome instability (CIN) is defined as an increase in the rate at
which whole chromosomes or large chromosomal fragments are gained or
lost. It is hallmark of cancer that occurs frequently in both solid and
liquid tumors. In addition, CIN is associated with highly aggressive
tumors, the acquisition of multi-drug resistance, tumor recurrence and
poor patient prognosis. Despite this, the majority of human CIN genes
have yet to be elucidated, highlighting the need for studies aimed at
identifying the defective genes that underlie CIN. In this study we
utilized two complementary, image-based approaches capable of detecting
CIN-associated phenotypes following RNAi-based silencing of candidate CIN
genes. The first assay involves quantifying nuclear areas following
silencing, where changes in mean nuclear area relative to controls act as
a surrogate marker of CIN. The second approach monitors micronucleus (MN)
formation where increases in the number of micronuclei are indicative of
DNA damage or the mitotic defects that underlie CIN. These assays were
employed in a high-content screen of 164 human candidate CIN genes in two
unrelated cell lines, HT1080 and hTERT. In HT1080, the nuclear area and
MN enumeration assays identified 88 and 96 putative CIN genes,
respectively. In hTERT, the nuclear area and MN assays identified 112 and
19 putative CIN genes, respectively. Promising putative CIN genes such as
SKP1 were identified and prioritized for subsequent validation based on
the number of assays that identified the gene, and the strength of the
CIN phenotype. Preliminary data collected through Western blotting,
mitotic chromosome spreads and flow cytometry, provides evidence to
support the validation of SKP1 as a bona fide human CIN gene.
Identification and characterization of human CIN genes will provide
critical insights into CIN and tumorigenesis, as well as identify
potential targets that could be exploited in novel, precision medicine
approaches for superior cancer treatment.

