Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethal killing of RAD54B-deficient cancer cells by PARP1
silencing and inhibition


Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in North America. Currently, many chemotherapeutics are
non-specific and preferentially kill cancer cells based on their high
proliferation rate. However, due to the lack of tumor specificity, many
treatments have unwanted side effects. Accordingly, identifying novel
therapeutic strategies and drug targets that better target and combat
cancer are needed. To address this need, synthetic lethal (SL) approaches
are now being explored in many cancer contexts. Synthetic lethality
refers to the lethal combination of two independently viable mutations
and functions by exploiting the aberrant genetics contained within cancer
cells. RAD54B is an excellent candidate to exploit using a SL paradigm as
it normally functions in homologous recombination repair (HRR) and
hypomorphic expression and/or function are implicated in tumorigenesis in
a wide array of cancers. We predict that RAD54B and PARP1 are SL, as
BRCA1 and BRCA2, which also encode functions within HRR, are SL with
PARP1. To identify PARP1 as a novel SL interactor of RAD54B, we employed
an established RNAi-based screening approach along with a RAD54B isogenic
CRC model. Conceptually, following PARP1 silencing, a SL interaction will
result in fewer cells within the RAD54B-deficient cells relative to
RAD54B-proficient controls. Accordingly, we sought to determine whether
PARP1 silencing or inhibition (Olaparib or BMN673) would induce selective
killing within RAD54B-deficient HCT116 cells relative to controls. As
predicted, PARP1 silencing with either individual or pooled siRNA
duplexes and inhibition with both Olaparib and BMN673 was associated with
statistically significant decreases in the number of RAD54B-deficient
cells relative to controls. To confirm the SL interaction did not occur
due to de novo mutations within the RAD54B-deficient cells, dual
silencing of RAD54B and PARP1 was performed within the parental line and
confirmed the above findings. Finally, real-time cellular analyses were
conducted and revealed the decrease in cell numbers was due to cellular
cytotoxicity rather than cell cycle arrest. Collectively, these data show
that RAD54B and PARP1 are SL, and identify PARP1 is a candidate lead
target in CRCs harboring RAD54B defects.

