Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An inhibitor to the WEE1 kinase has pre-clinical activity in
mutant KRAS/LKB1-deficient non-small cell lung cancer


Within eukaryotic cells, the G1/S and G2/M cell cycle checkpoints
activate in response to intracellular or extracellular stress to prevent
defects in DNA synthesis and mitosis. Deregulation of the cell cycle is a
fundamental characteristic of cancer, with loss of the G1/S checkpoint
playing an important role in carcinogenesis. Phenotypically, loss of the
G1/S checkpoint within tumor cells results in increased reliance upon the
G2/M checkpoint for adaptation to stress and DNA damage repair. This
dependence has led to interest towards inhibition of the G2/M checkpoint
for therapeutic treatment. Efforts have produced several clinically
relevant compounds that target the regulatory proteins of the G2/M
checkpoint. One of these compounds the WEE1 kinase inhibitor, AZD1775
displays favorable activity in a variety of pre-clinical tumor models in
combination with DNA damaging agents and in particular, AZD1775 shows
enhanced activity in tumor cells harboring inactivating mutations to p53.
However, whether AZD1775 or other G2 checkpoint inhibitors have improved
activity in the context of other mutations remains poorly understood. The
tumor suppressor, LKB1 (STK11) is one of the most frequently mutated
genes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is commonly co-mutated
with oncogenic mutations to KRAS (mtKRAS). Functional studies have
revealed that mtKRAS/LKB1-deficient (LKB1-) NSCLC cells display increased
activation of the G2/M checkpoint and this characteristic of mtKRAS/LKB1-
NSCLC has been proposed as a point for therapeutic intervention. Based
upon the reported response of tumor cells to AZD1775, we investigated the
pre-clinical effects of AZD1775 in mtKRAS/LKB1- NSCLC. Employing NSCLC
cell lines, we find that AZD1775 has increased activity in mtKRAS/LKB1-
cells in vitro. mtKRAS/LKB1- NSCLC cells display increased protein levels
of markers of DNA damage (phosphorylated -H2AX) and apoptosis (cleaved
PARP) and reduced cell viability with AZD1775 treatment, compared to
mtKRAS NSCLC with functional LKB1. The effects of AZD1775 in mtKRAS/LKB1-
NSCLC cells were enhanced in the presence of DNA damaging agents
(radiation, cisplatin). Using a genetically-engineered mouse model of
mtKRAS/LKB1- NSCLC, combined treatment of AZD1775 and cisplatin were
found to increase overall survival, compared to cisplatin mono-therapy in
vivo. Collectively, these findings suggest that application of AZD1775
with DNA damaging agents may have therapeutic efficacy in mtKRAS/LKB1-
NSCLC, a genomic subgroup of lung cancer with no effective therapeutic
regimens.

