Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic profiles and potential pharmacodynamic biomarkers in
female Sprague-Dawley rats on a standard (4% fat) or Western (20% fat)
diet and treated with known active or inactive chemopreventive agents


The methylnitrosourea (MNU) - induced model of ER+ mammary cancers in
female Sprague-Dawley rats has been routinely used in our laboratories
for screening chemopreventive agents. In this study, we evaluated
multiple known effective [tamoxifen, Targretin (an RXR agonist), Iressa
(EGFR1 inhibitor)] or ineffective agents (Lipitor, metformin) in rats
placed on either standard diet (20% fat) or a Western diet (20% fat, low
calcium) at 43 days of age (DOA). Rats were given MNU at 50 DOA and
administered the various agents or vehicle beginning at 57 DOA until the
end of the study. Palpation of the rats showed that agents yielded the
same results in rats on either diets. Somewhat surprisingly, metformin
was ineffective in rats on either diet; confirming our lack of efficacy
in a standard diet (Thompson, et al, Cancer Prev Res., 2015). To look for
potential pharmacodynamics biomarkers, serum was obtained from the
various groups at 78 days of age and at sacrifice; when a large tumor
burden was observed in rats given vehicle, Lipitor, or metformin. Levels
of approximately 500 metabolites were compared in the serum (Metabolon
Research, Research Triangle Park, NC). We initially looked for metabolite
changes related to different diets and found differential expression of
alpha 10-undecanoate, 13-methylmyristic acid, 4-hydrox-benzoate,
2-amino-heptanpate, tocopherol and nicotinamide when comparing serum from
rats on Western vs standard diets. Interestingly, each of the highly
effective agents (tamoxifen, Targretin, and Iressa) yielded metabolic
profiles that were strikingly different from rats given vehicle; based on
unsupervised analysis. These metabolites become potential pharmacodynamic
biomarkers for the highly effective doses of these agents. In contrast,
the two negative agents did not yield a similar dichotomy between treated
and vehicle serum. One could determine, however, metabolites which
differed between metformin or Lipitor treated rats vs vehicle treated
rats when performing a supervised analysis. We also compared serum for
the early and late time points with either diet since the latter serum
was from animals with a significant number of mammary cancers. We
observed a number of metabolite changes including 4-OH butyrate, acetyl
carnitine, oxalate, and threonate. These cancer related profiles will be
discussed at greater length; in addition to the altered profiles caused
by the administration of the various chemopreventive agents. Supported by
NCI contract HHSN261201200021I.

