Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The covalent CDK7 inhibitor THZ1 can counteract apoptotic
resistance and suppress the transcription of genes attributed to chronic
lymphocytic leukemia malignancy


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a malignancy characterized by the
progressive accumulation of CD19+ B-cells capable of overcoming their
regulated life cycle. Because this disease is highly heterogeneous and
utilizes several mechanisms to resist apoptotic death, CLL currently
remains incurable. Based on the ongoing efforts to interpret the
transcriptional dynamics of CLL pathogenicity as well as prior reports
demonstrating the efficacy of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
transcriptional inhibitors, we sought to characterize the molecular
response of CLL cells treated with the covalent CDK7 inhibitor THZ1 and
determine the therapeutic potential of CDK7 inhibition in CLL. We first
observed that THZ1 was able to inhibit growth in malignant B-cell lines
MEC1 and MEC2 in both a dose dependent (IC50: .045uM & .030uM,
respectively) and time dependent manner. The inhibition in cell growth
corresponded with both G1-mediated cell cycle arrest as well as apoptosis
in the respective cell lines. We also observed dose-dependent reduction
in cell viability through apoptosis in patient-derived CLL B-cells after
24 hours. Because of the observed outcomes of THZ1-treated CLL cells, we
then wanted to determine the specific transcriptional targets
significantly suppressed by THZ1 treatment. To identify the
THZ1-sensitive transcripts, we performed a time course RNAseq expression
analysis in both MEC1 and MEC2 treated with 50nM THZ1. Based on the
incremental reduction of covered reads over a 12-hour period, we
determined that the top 50 transcripts greatly diminished in both MEC1
and MEC2 contain significant enrichment in genes attributed to glycolytic
metabolism (ex: ALDOC, SLC2A1, TPI1, GAPDH, ENO2). Along with the
overlapping comparison between the two cell lines, we next compared the
downregulated transcripts from the treated cell lines against the RNAseq
expression profile of 47 CLL patients and 5 healthy donors. We observed
that THZ1 was able to suppress transcripts upregulated in CLL patient
samples including ENO2, FGR, WNT10A, and CBX7 in MEC1 and ENO2, MALAT1,
CCR7, and PLCG1 in MEC2. Finally, we performed H3K27Ac ChIPseq in MEC1 to
identify super enhancers that may overlap with THZ1-sensitive
transcripts. From this comparison, we determined that super enhancers
exist within reported oncogenic drivers CBX7, WNT10A, and FGR. Overall,
we observe that THZ1 can effectively overcome the anti-apoptotic
phenotype of CLL B-cells as well as directly suppress transcription of
genes that can drive CLL malignancy. With the addition of CDK7 ChIPseq,
our ultimate goal is to provide clarity regarding CDK7-mediated
transcriptional regulation in CLL and demonstrate the molecular
consequences of therapeutic CDK7 inhibition in CLL.

