Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic heterogeneity of disseminated tumor cells is
predetermined by primary tumor hypoxic microenvironments


Heterogeneity of primary tumors (PTs) is reflected by genetic and
epigenetic diversity, as well as diverse PT microenvironments. Whether PT
microenvironments might influence the fate of disseminating tumor cells
(DTC) has never been explored in situ. We previously defined, in breast
cancer, a dormancy signature (DS) associated with longer metastasis-free
periods. Key genes in the DS induce quiescence and are also regulated by
hypoxia. Interestingly, a main response of tumor cells to hypoxia is
growth arrest, while clinical evidence links hypoxic tumors to increased
therapy resistance and a worse outcome. We hypothesized that hypoxic PT
microenvironments may spawn a subpopulation of DTCs that, by virtue of
becoming dormant, might escape therapies and eventually fuel incurable
metastasis. We used H2B-GFP inducible HEp3 HNSCC and photo-switchable
H2B-Dendra2 (green-to-red fluorescence) expressing MDA-MB-231 and ZR-75-1
human breast cancer cell lines to identify cells from hypoxic
microenvironments. To initiate spatially defined hypoxic
microenvironments in vivo in primary tumors we implanted induction NANo
IntraVItal Devices (iNANIVIDs) carrying a hypoxia-mimetic agent
(desferrioxamine - DFOM) in T-HEp3 tumors or exposed cultured MDA-MB-231
or ZR-75-1 cells in vitro to 21% or 1% O2. The regions influenced by the
DFOM-iNANIVID displayed significant upregulation of p27, NR2F1 and DEC2
(dormancy genes), as well as induction of hypoxia markers (GLUT1, HIF1).
Human HNSCC PT samples showed the same link between spontaneous hypoxic
regions and upregulation of dormancy markers. We found a significant
increase in quiescent lung DTCs of hypoxia induced T-HEp3 or MDA-MB-231
cells, traceable >2 weeks after extravasation by fluorescent label
retention. Significantly more single, non-proliferating HEp3 DTCs
originating from the iNANIVID induced hypoxic regions showed a dormant
profile compared to DTCs originating from a normoxic milieu. Only the
hypoxic pre-treated group was able to form micrometastases at 10 days
after injection, suggesting the presence of a more aggressive sub clone
in this group. Analysis in 3D culture models revealed that ZR-75-1 cells
(ER+) were more prone to enter a prolonged quiescent state after exposure
to hypoxia (1% O2) while this response was not observed in MDA-MB-231
(TN). The induction of quiescence in ZR-75-1 was NR2F1 dependent. Lastly,
using a spontaneously metastatic PyMT driven Dendra2-tagged breast cancer
model in immunocompetent mice, we found that 75% of dormant DTCs
upregulate the dormancy marker NR2F1 at or soon after reaching the lung,
suggesting a rapid induction of dormancy upon reaching target organs. We
propose that hypoxic PT microenvironments increase phenotypic
heterogeneity of DTCs and lead to the expression of the DS. These DTCs
may be more prone to enter dormancy, evade anti-proliferative therapies
and eventually fuel metastasis.

