Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analyzing cell viability in 3-D tissue models with the ViaLight
plus cell proliferation and cytotoxicity bioassay


Conventional in vitro assays are based on cells grown on two-dimensional
(2D) substrates, which are not representative of the true in vivo cell
environment. In tissue environments, cells interact with neighboring
cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM). Three-dimensional (3D) cell
culture methods allow cells to grow in structures more resembling the in
vivo environment. Cells can develop cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions
in 3D.The RAFT 3D Culture System uses a collagen matrix at
physiologically relevant concentrations. Cells and neutralized collagen
are mixed and subsequently incubated at 37C to allow the formation of a
cell-seeded hydrogel. Specialized RAFT Absorbers are placed on top of the
hydrogels. The RAFT Absorbers gently remove abundant medium, thus
compacting the cell/collagen hydrogel. Additional epithelial or
endothelial cells may be added as overlays on top to study co-cultures or
more complex cultures.Another commonly used 3D cell culture model is
spheroids. Spheroids are compact aggregates of cells that are generated
without the addition of exogenous ECM e.g. in so-called ultra-low
attachment (ULA) plates or by the hanging-drop method.While 3D cultures
more accurately mimic the in vivo cell environment, it might be difficult
to analyze cells in 3D due to the dense, tissue-like structure of these
cultures compared to 2D cell monolayers. This presentation explains how
to measure cell viability in both RAFT 3D cell cultures and in spheroid
cultures with the ViaLight Plus Cell Proliferation and Cytotoxicity
BioAssay. The ViaLight Assay is based on the bioluminescent detection of
cellular ATP as a measure of cell viability. Only minor modifications of
the standard two-step protocol that is used for 2D cell cultures are
required for using the assay for 96-well and 24-well RAFT 3D cell
cultures as well as for spheroid cultures in 96-well ULA plates.Two
different cell types were used in this study: Normal Human Dermal
Fibroblasts (NHDFneo) and the colon cancer cell line HCT-116. Both cell
types efficiently form spheroids in ULA plates. Also in RAFT 3D cultures
HCT-116 cells build compact aggregate-like structures, whereas NHDFneo
grow in as individual cells interspersed in the collagen scaffold.By
elongating the first step of the Vialight Assay, the lysis step, from 10
minutes to 30 minutes, a linear performance of the assay for cell numbers
of up to 96,000 cells in the 96-well format and 480,000 cells in the
24-well format could be obtained for RAFT cultures. For spheroid cultures
an extension of the lysis time to 60 minutes was required to obtain
efficient lysis of spheroids with a diameter of up to 400m, as confirmed
by CalceinAM and propidium iodide staining.In summary this presentation
shows that analyzing cells in 3D cultures can easily and routinely be
done by slightly adjusting standard 2D cell culture assays like the
ViaLight Assay.

