Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated fibroblasts induce immunosuppressive macrophages
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


BackgroundCancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are one of main elements
in the tumor microenvironment (TME). Among the innate and adaptive immune
cells in the TME, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are particularly
abundant and play a protumoral role. However, an interaction between CAFs
and TAMs in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) still remains
unclear. In the present study, we investigated whether CAFs skewed
macrophage function toward the immune suppressive phenotype.Materials and
MethodsIn vitro assay: CAFs were prepared from surgical tissue of HNSCC
patients, and culture supernatants of CAFs were collected. Using this
supernatants and peripheral blood mononuclear cells collected from
healthy donors, immunological interactions between CAFs and TAMs was
investigated.In vivo assay: The immunohistochemistry (IHC) of 73 patients
with HNSCC was performed. Anti--smooth muscle actin, CD68, and CD163
antibodies were used to identify CAFs and TAMs, respectively. The
relationship between immunohistochemical parameters and clinical
parameters was evaluated.ResultsThe expression levels of CD68, CD163,
CD14, CD80, CD86, and HLA-G were up-regulated in CD14+ cells co-cultured
with the supernatants of CAFs (CAF-educated cells) compared with control
cells. Moreover, the gene expressions of ARG1, IL6, IL10 and TGFB1 were
also increased in CAF-educated cells. The CAF-educated cells suppressed
T-cell proliferation more intensively than control cells, and
neutralization of TGF- and IL-10 led to significant restoration of T-cell
proliferation. In IHC, the intensity of CAFs correlated with the number
of CD68-positive macrophages, especially with CD163-positive macrophages.
It also correlated with several clinical parameters such as lymphatic
invasion, vascular invasion, nodal status, tumor stages and recurrence
rate. Moreover, the high intensity of CAFs correlated with poor PFS and
OS. The high intensity of CAFs and M2 macrophage infiltration were
independent prognostic factors of PFS and OS in HNSCC.ConclusionThe
present study suggests that CAFs can induce an immunosuppressive
phenotype of macrophages and contribute to establishing the
immunosuppressive networks in TME, resulting poor prognosis in HNSCC
patients.

