Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIF5B-RET fusion gene may induce EMT via the regulation of two
transcription factors, FOXA2 and STAT5A


Background & PurposeIn recent, KIF5B-RET gene rearrangement has been
discovered as a driver oncogene in non-small cell lung cancers. This
fusion gene was demonstrated to be able to induce tumorigenesis in vivo
mouse model. Hereby, we investigated how KIF5B-RET fusion gene affect
tumor differentiation and which transcription factors and signaling
pathway are activated.MethodsWe analyzed cell proliferative activity in
transformed HEK293T cells with KIF5B-RET fusion gene (K4) and empty
vector (V5) using CCK8 assay. We used light microscopy and H&E staining
to observe morphological changes of transformed cells. We evaluated
protein and mRNA expressions of four EMT markers (E-cadherin, N-cadherin,
Snail, and Twist) and two transcription factors (FOXA2, p-STAT5A) using
transcription factor PCR array, Western blot, RT-PCR, immunofluorescence
staining.ResultsK4 cells showed decreased cell proliferative activity
compared with V5 cells. V5 cells had spreading pattern alike mesenchymal
phenotype when their density was lower. However, their morphology changed
to epithelial phenotype as they were overgrown with higher density. On
the other hands, K4 cells exhibited the island growing pattern similar to
epithelial phenotype in lower density of tumor cells, but changed to
mesenchymal phenotype as the density of tumor cells gradually increased.
On H&E staining, the cytoplasm of K4 cells was much smaller than that of
V5 cells. We observed that E-cadherin mRNA was down-regulated, but
N-cadherin and Twist were up-regulated in K4 cells. Based on the results
of repeated screening assay, we finally selected two transcription
factors, FOXA2 and STAT5A, which were significantly overexpressed in K4
cells. In K4 cells, phosphorylated-STAT5A was increased and FOXA2 was
decreased compared to V5 cells. In addition, the expression of E-cadherin
was reduced, but p-GSK3, p-AKT, and p-ERK were markedly increased in K4
cells. The pattern of immunofluorescence staining of V5 and K4 cells were
similar to the protein expressions of E-cadherin and p-STAT5A in Western
blot analysis.ConclusionTaken together, FOXA2 and E-cadherin are
down-regulated and p-STAT5A is up-regulated in HEK-293T cells stably
expressing the KIF5B-RET. Our data suggest that KIF5B-RET fusion gene may
induce EMT via the regulation of two transcription factors, FOXA2 and
STAT5A.

