Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer analysis of sex differences in somatic mutation profiles


Sex influences the clinical and pathological characteristics of a number
of cancers including those of the lung, colon and kidney. Men and women
differ in incidence rate, response to treatment and survival - even after
controlling for confounding factors such as smoking status, age and
weight. Some gene-specific sex differences have been identified in these
cancers, but there has not been a rigorous, genome-wide analysis of the
mutational differences in tumors between men and women. We fill this gap,
providing a comprehensive assessment of sex-associated differences in
cancer genomics.We leverage resources from the International Cancer
Genome Consortium-The Cancer Genome Atlas pan-cancer project, which
includes genomic, transcriptomic and epigenomic profiles of 25,000
tumours and whole genome sequences of 5,000 tumours. Using this data, we
analyzed mutational differences between the sexes in 15 tumor types.We
use both univariate (t-test, proportions test) and multivariate
(multinomial logistic regression) statistical techniques, along with
bioinformatics and pathway analyses. We found distinct sex-associated
genomic differences in the copy number aberration (CNA) profiles of six
tumor types and in pan-cancer analysis. We observe higher genome
instability in male-derived tumors and sex-biased mutations in specific
genes and across genomic intervals. Using multivariate modeling to
control for confounding variables reinforces the significance of sex in
these genomic regions and also reveals additional sex-biased CNAs.
Ongoing work with mRNA abundance data suggests an association between
sex-differences in CNAs and mRNA abundance both in cis and in trans.
Further investigation into affected genes and pathways may reveal
fundamental differences in how tumors develop in men and women and
provide explanations for reported clinical and pathological sex
differences.

