Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quinomycin A inhibits pancreatic cancer growth and affects stem
cell viability by inhibiting oncogenic YAP1 function


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PCa) remains a leading cause of death in
the United States. Cancer stem cells (CSC) are responsible for tumor
behavior, and therapeutic resistance. Quinomycin (Qui) is an orally
administered quinoxaline antibiotic that bifunctionally intercalates with
double stranded DNA. As a first step for repurposing this drug, we
determined whether Qui affects PCa growth, and if so whether this is by
suppressing stem cells.Method: Growth and apoptosis of PCa lines
(MiaPaCa-2, PanC-1, BxPC-3) and normal ductal epithelial cells (HPNE) was
measured by hexosaminidase and clonogenicity, and caspase 3/7 assays,
respectively. Pancosphere formation and FACS sorting were used to
identify effects on stem cells. For in vivo, MiaPaCa-2 xenografts were
developed in the flanks of nude mice. Immunohistochemistry was performed
for stem cell markers and Hippo signaling proteins.Results: Qui
demonstrated a dose- and time-dependent inhibition of proliferation and
colony formation in all three PCa lines but not HPNE cells. Qui induced
PCa cells to undergo apoptosis. It also significantly reduced the number
and size of pancospheres, and flow cytometry and western blot analyses
confirmed that Qui suppressed PCa stem cell marker proteins DCLK1, CD44,
CD24 and EPCAM. We next determined whether Hippo signaling pathway is
affected. For this, we tested the effect of Qui on Hippo signaling
pathway, which is an active pathway in CSCs including in PCa. The key
effector protein, YAP1 has been shown to be oncogenic in many cancer
types. In the canonical Hippo signaling pathway, YAP1 function is
inhibited. When YAP1 is phosphorylated at Ser127 by the action of
upstream Mst1/2 and Lats1/2 kinases, it is sequestered in the cytoplasm,
and therefore no induction of downstream gene expression. Qui
significantly decreased the phosphorylation oncogenic YAP1. Furthermore,
Qui inhibited the expression of YAP interacting proteins TEAD1, TEAD2,
and TEAD4. On the other hand, ectopic expression of the TEAD1 partially
rescued the cells from Qui-mediated growth suppression. To determine the
effect of Qui on tumor growth in vivo, mice carrying MiaPaCa-2 tumor
xenografts were administered the compound intraperitoneally (20 g/kg bw)
every day for 21 days. Qui treatment significantly suppressed tumor
xenograft growth, with notably lower tumor volume and weight. Western
blot and immunohistochemistry analyses demonstrated significant
inhibition in the expression of CSC marker proteins, oncogenic YAP1
phosphorylation and YAP1 interacting proteins TEAD1 in the Qui-treated
xenograft tissues.Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that Qui
suppresses PCa growth that targets that targets stem cells by inhibiting
oncogenic YAP1 in Hippo signaling pathway.

