Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 as a potential therapeutic target and prognosis marker for
glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a common and very aggressive primary brain tumor
with no cure. The current diagnosis relying on magnetic resonance
imagining, computed tomography, and biopsy is a very expensive and
aggressive process. More effective therapeutic strategies such as target
therapies and simplified early diagnosis tools are urgently needed for
GBM management and prognosis. As recent reports suggest that GBM
expresses CD44, a type-I transmembrane glycoprotein, is a marker of
cancer stem cell and therapy resistance, with a goal of identifying a
therapeutic target and a prognosis maker for GBM, we analyzed several
data sets previously detected by microarrays using an online R2 Genomics
analysis and visualization platform (http://r2.amc.nl). Through examining
of the expression levels of CD44 in the tissues of normal cerebellum
(without brain tumor) and in GBM tissues, we find that the expression
level of CD44 in GBM is higher than that in non-brain tumor tissues.
Comparing the expression levels of CD44 in Primary and recurrent GBMs,
GBM cell lines, neuron stem cell lines, and normal cortex tissues, we
observe that the expression levels of CD44 in recurrent GBMs are higher
than primary GBMs; the CD44 levels in GBM cell lines are similar to
neuron stem cell lines which are significantly higher than that in the
normal cortex tissues. We further evaluated the correlation of CD44
levels with patients overall survival in 4 available complete data sets
in the R2 database, including 2 from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
database. We show that an elevated level of CD44 in GBM is associated
with a short overall survival time although variations exist from cohort
to cohort. In addition, we studied the effect of p53 status on CD44
expression, we reveal that CD44 level is higher in the GBMs carrying p53
mutation compared to those with wild-type p53. Taken together, these
results indicate that CD44 could be a potential therapeutic target of GBM
and the expression level of CD44 in the GBM may be an indicator of poor
outcome for patients with GBM.

