Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional profiling of human TAMs highlights differences in
breast and endometrial tumour microenvironments


Background: Breast and endometrial cancers are two of the most frequently
diagnosed reproductive cancers in women in the western world. Previously,
research has focused on cancer cells, however increasing evidence shows
that the tumour microenvironment plays an important role in cancer
progression. Macrophages are almost entirely derived from circulating
monocytes and are recruited into tumour sites. In murine studies,
tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) have been implicated in promoting
angiogenesis, immune suppression and resistance to treatment. Their
density has been associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer and
decreased survival in endometrial cancer. However, little is known about
the function of TAMs in humans. The aim of this study is to examine the
transcriptional profiles of human TAMs in order to investigate their
biological relevance and potential for therapeutic intervention.Methods:
RNA-sequencing was performed on purified normal macrophages and TAMs from
breast tissue (4 breast cancer and 4 healthy breast) and endometrium
tissue (5 endometrial cancer and 9 healthy endometrium). Statistical
analysis using Limma was used to identify significantly differentially
expressed genes (FDRBackground: Breast and endometrial cancers are two of
the most frequently diagnosed reproductive cancers in women in the
western world. Previously, research has focused on cancer cells, however
increasing evidence shows that the tumour microenvironment plays an
important role in cancer progression. Macrophages are almost entirely
derived from circulating monocytes and are recruited into tumour sites.
In murine studies, tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) have been
implicated in promoting angiogenesis, immune suppression and resistance
to treatment. Their density has been associated with poor prognosis in
breast cancer and decreased survival in endometrial cancer. However,
little is known about the function of TAMs in humans. The aim of this
study is to examine the transcriptional profiles of human TAMs in order
to investigate their biological relevance and potential for therapeutic
intervention.Methods: RNA-sequencing was performed on purified normal
macrophages and TAMs from breast tissue (4 breast cancer and 4 healthy
breast) and endometrium tissue (5 endometrial cancer and 9 healthy
endometrium). Statistical analysis using Limma was used to identify
significantly differentially expressed genes (FDR< 0.05) with a minimum
log2 fold change of 1.5. Gene set enrichment (GSEA) analysis and gene
ontologies (GO) were employed for functional analysis and identification
of important biological pathways.Results: Transcriptome profiling
revealed a significantly altered gene expression profile of TAMs when
compared to normal macrophages. Furthermore, comparison of TAMs between
breast and endometrial cancer also revealed differences suggesting that
different tumour microenvironments induce different gene expression
profiles in TAMs. Interestingly, comparison of normal macrophages between
breast and endometrial tissue also revealed differences in gene
expression suggesting tissue specificity for macrophages. Functional
analysis of significant genes revealed similar biological pathways to
those of murine studies suggesting that TAMs in humans may have similar
functions. We were able to extract TAM-specific genes by comparing with
publicly available datasets that could serve as markers for their
identification. Finally, we identified a list of transmembrane receptors
that could act as potential targets for targeted killing of
TAMs.Conclusion: This is the first study to carry out genome-wide
profiling of TAMs in human breast and endometrial cancer. Expression
profiles differed between TAMs and healthy patients, as well as between
breast and endometrial cancer suggesting cancer specificity for TAMs and
revealing not only potential TAM-specific markers, but also identifying
possible cancer- and TAM-specific therapeutic targets.

