Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor expression in normal breast TDLUs and subsequent
breast cancer risk


BackgroundSex steroid hormone signaling is critical in the development
and progression of breast cancers, though the role of androgens remains
unspecified. Large epidemiologic studies have found a consistent
association between circulating androgens and increased breast cancer
risk, though it is unknown whether circulating androgens reflect the
androgenic milieu in the breast. An interaction between androgen receptor
(AR) and estrogen receptor (ER) signaling in the breast has been
postulated, wherein AR signaling antagonizes ER signaling in
estrogen-rich environments, and AR signaling induces proliferative
effects in estrogen-deplete environments.MethodsWe evaluated the
association between AR expression and subsequent breast cancer risk in a
nested case-control study of women with benign breast disease (BBD)
within the Nurses Health Studies. Cases were women with BBD that
subsequently developed breast cancer (median 9 years later) while
controls had BBD but did not develop breast cancer. Tissue microarrays
were constructed containing normal terminal ductal lobular unit (TDLU)
tissue from the BBD biopsy. AR expression was assessed by
immunohistochemistry and the percent of positive-staining nuclei was
digitally quantified for 61 breast cancer cases and 184 controls.
Logistic regression models adjusting for the year of BBD biopsy, age at
cancer diagnosis, years since BBD biopsy, and BBD lesion type were used
to calculate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for the association
between the tertile of AR expression and breast cancer risk. We further
evaluated the impact of AR and ER co-expression, each dichotomized at the
median, in a sub-analysis of 31 cases and 82 controls. Finally, we
assessed AR expression as a predictor of subsequent ER tumor status using
polytomous logistic regression.ResultsOverall, women in the highest
tertile of AR expression experienced non-significant 1.32-fold increased
odds of breast cancer (95% CI: 0.64-1.73, p-trend = 0.559) compared to
the lowest tertile. A significant interaction was detected between AR and
ER co-expression in normal breast TDLUs and subsequent breast cancer risk
(p-interaction = 0.003). Among women with low ER expression, increased AR
expression was associated with 2.52-fold increased odds (95% CI:
0.68-9.34) of developing breast cancer. In contrast, among women with
high ER expression, high AR expression was associated with a 91% decrease
in the odds (OR = 0.09, 95% CI: 0.01-0.62) of breast cancer. AR
expression was not predictive of subsequent ER tumor
status.ConclusionsThere was little evidence for an overall association
between AR expression in normal breast tissue and breast cancer risk,
though we observed a significant interaction between AR and ER
expression. Our findings support the hypothesis that AR interacts with ER
to promote cell proliferation in estrogen-deprived environments and
inhibit growth in estrogen-rich environments.

