Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling mesothelioma initiation through disruption of the Hippo
pathway revealed involvement of PLCB4 in YAP-driven mesothelioma cell
proliferation


Disruption of the Hippo pathway as a result of deletion and/or mutation
of the involved genes (e.g., neurofibromin 2 [NF2]) is frequently
observed in mesothelioma. The disruption results in reduced
phosphorylation of yes-associated protein (YAP), and the
non-phosphorylated YAP translocates to the nucleus and regulates gene
expression. While the roles of the disrupted Hippo pathway in the
maintenance of established tumors have been investigated using
mesothelioma cell lines, its involvement in the initiation of
mesothelioma remains unclear.We used immortalized human mesothelial cells
to study the transformation process, and found that NF2 knockdown led to
transformation of the cells concurrently with reduction in YAP
phosphorylation. The cells exhibited enhanced growth in vitro, and formed
tumors following transplantation into nude mice. Similar results to those
obtained by NF2 knockdown were also obtained using enforced expression of
wild-type (wt) or constitutively active (S127A) YAP. Although enforced
expression of YAPwt or YAPS127A was insufficient to transform primary
(unimmortalized) human mesothelial cells, our findings provide evidence
for the crucial roles of activated YAP in the transformation of
mesothelial cells.To identify YAP-regulated genes critical for
mesothelial tumorigenesis, we conducted gene expression analysis
comparing control- and YAP-transduced immortalized human mesothelial
cells. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using a gene set
down-regulated by YAP knock-down in mesothelioma cell lines revealed
phospholipase C beta 4 (PLCB4) to be among the top-ranking genes
up-regulated by YAP in our experiments. PLCB4 was up-regulated by YAP in
immortalized human mesothelial cells, and down-regulated by YAP
knock-down in YAP-driven mesothelioma cells. shRNA-mediated silencing of
PLCB4 attenuated the growth of YAP-transduced mesothelial cells and
Hippo-disrupted, but not -proficient, mesothelioma cell lines.Our model
system thus provides a versatile tool to investigate the mechanisms
underlying mesothelioma development. We suggest that PLCB4 may be an
attractive drug target for the treatment of malignant mesothelioma.

