Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated functional RNAi screening and structural genomics
identify cell cycle and kinetochore components co-modulating NF-B
activity as potential therapeutic targets in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer worldwide, with over 600,000 new cases diagnosed each year, and a
five year survival of 50%. Recent findings in The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) analysis of 279 HNSCC patient samples revealed that components of
the NF-B/REL signaling pathways are aberrantly expressed in about 70% of
cases, and implicated in expression of pro-proliferative, inflammatory,
angiogenic, and therapeutic resistance genes. Alterations are prevalent
in this pathway across patient samples; however, the detailed mechanisms
that increase NF-B signaling in HNSCC are not well understood. Recently,
we established an NF-B -lactamase reporter UM-SCC-1 cell line to identify
key regulators of this NF-B oncogenic signaling. We performed genome-wide
RNAi screening using the NF-B reporter line, and upon validation, most
structural components of the TNF receptor complex and downstream NF-B
pathway genes, such as IKKs, were scored highly in the screening. We
integrated the functional genomics data with structural mutation and
expression data from TCGA to prioritize genes that are frequently
deregulated in HNSCC specimens. WNT9/FZD6, NOTCH2, and TGFR2 and several
receptors were identified to cross-activate NF-B signaling. In addition,
we observed novel genes that co-regulate NF-B activity, which are
involved in the cell cycle, such as CDC2, CDC7, WEE1 and CALM2, as well
as components of the kinetochore such as NDC80, PLK1, TTK, and AURKA.
Among these targets WEE1 kinase is currently under investigation as a
therapeutic target in HNSCC using the WEE1 inhibitor AZD1775. To further
investigate potential cross-talk between WEE1 cell cycle regulation and
NF-B activation, we have shown that treatment of HNSCC cells with AZD1775
decreases NF-B transcriptional activation which corresponds to decrease
in TNF-inducible phosphorylation of RELA. These changes also correlate
with alteration in cell cycle regulation detected by flow cytometry.
Mechanistic studies are currently underway to understand how WEE1
signaling connects to NF-B activation, and what role inhibition of NF-B
signaling plays in AZD1775 activity as a sensitizer to chemo-or radiation
therapy for HNSCC.Supported by NIDCD intramural projects ZIA-DC-000073,74

