Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination immunotherapy: T-cell costimulation (OX40L, TL1A,
4-1BBL and ICOSL) secreted locally by Gp96-Ig vaccines, elicits robust
antigen-specific, memory T cell responses and tumor elimination


Combination cancer immunotherapy incorporating T cell costimulation,
vaccination, and checkpoint inhibition is anticipated to broaden clinical
response compared to any single agent. Because T cell costimulation
occurs at the site of immunization, we asked whether the delivery of a
costimulator by a gp96-Ig secreting allogeneic vaccine would provide
comparable costimulation to systemically administered agonist antibodies.
As proof of concept, we engineered gp96-Ig vaccines that locally secrete
Fc-OX40L and demonstrate that the priming of antigen-specific CD8+ T
cells (peak of 13.3% of total CD8+) is significantly higher when compared
to combinations with OX40 antibodies (8.4%) or vaccine alone (5.6%).
Vaccine-expressed Fc-OX40L was associated with increased CD127+KLRG-1-
memory precursor cells and antigen-specific CD4+ proliferation, with
reduced off-target inflammation. Importantly, vaccine-expressed Fc-OX40L
stimulated IFN+, TNF+, granzyme-b+ and IL-2+ by antigen-specific CD8+ T
cells, which enhanced rejection of established CT26 and B16.F10 tumors.
We have subsequently expanded our repertoire of combination vaccines to
secrete gp96-Ig along with either Fc-tagged TL1A, 4-1BBL or ICOSL. Each
costimulator secreting vaccine cell line has a unique functionality,
without the negative consequences of off-target inflammation associated
with systemic administration of its agonist antibody counterpart. For
example, costimulation with a TNFRSF25 (receptor for TL1A) agonist
antibody synergized with gp96-Ig vaccination and generated a robust
antigen-specific CD8+ T cell response. However, TNFRSF25 treatment also
lead to a significant accumulation of FOXP3+ regulatory T cells (Treg). A
gp96-Ig vaccine co-secreting Fc-TL1A resulted in similar antigen-specific
CD8+ T cell production with no activation of the Treg compartment.
Additionally, combining two separate gp96-Ig vaccines (one secreting
Fc-OX40L and the other Fc-TL1A) leads to an additive increase in memory
precursor production (CD127+KLRG1-), which may play a vital role in
maintaining effective anti-tumor immunity. Together, we demonstrate that
the magnitude and specificity of vaccination can be enhanced by locally
secreted costimulatory molecules when delivered within a single product.
This may simplify clinical translation and importantly, provide
significant patient benefit by improving safety and lowering costs.

