Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: One in four Hispanic women with early onset breast cancer carry
BRCA1, BRCA2, or PALB2 mutations: Results from a population-based study
in South America


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer incidence and mortality
among Hispanic women, who are often diagnosed with late stage tumors and
are more likely to die after diagnosis when compared to non-Hispanic
whites. While strides have been made in understanding Hispanic breast
cancer genetics, most studies have been limited to investigating cases
from high-risk clinics. In this study, we aimed to assess the prevalence
of pathogenic mutations in three most important breast cancer genes
(BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2) in an unselected Hispanic breast cancer cohort.
Initially, six hundred and forty-six unselected Colombian breast cancer
cases were screened for four known Hispanic BRCA1/2 mutations by
genotyping. Subsequently, cases that remained mutation negative, as well
as 186 cancer-free controls, were screened for BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2
mutations using targeted next generation sequencing. We identified 67
cases with pathogenic mutations, one case with a likely-pathogenic
variant, and 16 carriers of variants of unknown significance. Among the
pathogenic mutation carriers, 88.1% harbored a founder mutation (n = 59),
which includes the known BRCA1 3450del4 mutation, strikingly found in 32
unrelated cases. Remarkably, we found that 1 in 4 of the cases diagnosed
with breast cancer by age 40 years, regardless of family history of
cancer, carried a pathogenic mutation. The high frequency of pathogenic
mutations in this unselected cohort (10.4%), in particular those with an
early age of onset (25.3%), suggests that population-based genetic
testing among Hispanic communities can identify most carriers who would
otherwise ineligible for testing. Identifying mutation carriers of these
genes has implications in clinical management and surveillance for
Hispanic women, a population that is vulnerable to breast cancer
disparities in the U.S. and Latin America.

