Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated molecular characterization of pheochromocytoma and
paraganglioma including a novel, recurrent and prognostic fusion gene


Pheochromocytomas (PCC) and paragangliomas (PGL) are tumors of the
autonomic nervous system; 25% are metastatic or locally aggressive.
Characterization of the inherited basis of disease has identified a
variety of underlying germline mutations; however, understanding of
somatic alterations remains limited. As part of The Cancer Genome Atlas,
we performed the most comprehensive genomic characterization of PCC/PGL
to date, by applying eight genomic profiling assays to 173 patients.
Despite having a low overall mutation rate per tumor, we observed
remarkable diversity in genomic alterations. 27% of patients had a
pathogenic germline mutation among eight known familial PCC/PGL
susceptibility genes, thus making PCC/PGL the tumor type with the
greatest rate of germline mutations in The Cancer Genome Atlas. 38% of
patients possessed a somatic driver mutation across 12 genes. RET, NF1
and VHL were affected by both germline and somatic mutation, albeit with
different mutation site tendencies. We identified a new somatic driver
gene, CSDE1, which had coordinated intron splicing defects, DNA copy
number loss, and RNA under-expression, suggesting a loss of function
consequence. Most notably, we discovered the first fusion genes in
PCC/PGL from RNA and DNA sequencing (7% of patients), demonstrating for
the first time that inter-chromosomal translocation and gene fusion is a
method of molecular pathogenesis in this disease. Recurrent, novel MAML3
fusion genes spanned three isoforms and were activating based on
over-expression of MAML3 and on fusion transcript exonic expression.
MAML3 fusion positive tumors had concomitant dual focal DNA amplification
of the fusion gene partners and a significantly divergent methylation
profile. Another novel driver gene in PCC/PGL, BRAF, was affected by a
hotspot somatic mutation and by an activating fusion gene. Through
integrated platform analysis, four statistically significant molecular
subtypes of PCC/PGL were detected and found to represent divergent
molecular etiology the kinase signaling subtype, the pseudohypoxia
subtype, the Wnt-altered subtype, and the cortical admixture subtype. In
particular, MAML3 fusions and CSDE1 mutations defined the new Wnt-altered
expression subtype of PCC. Adding to the limited set of prognostic
markers in PCC/PGL, three molecular markers were positively associated
with clinically aggressive disease: germline mutations in SDHB, somatic
mutations in ATRX and fusions involving MAML3. Nearly all somatic driver
mutations, germline driver mutations and fusion genes were mutually
exclusive across the cohort and covered a large portion of the cohort
(69%). Our study provides important novel insights into PCC/PGL biology
and identifies potential markers for aggressive disease and therapeutic
intervention.

