Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic assessment of autophagy
inhibition following hydroxychloroquine in mice


Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is being tested in a number of human clinical
trials to determine the role of autophagy in response to standard
anticancer therapies. However, preclinical studies in mouse models are
equivocal with regard to HCQ exposure (pharmacokinetics) and inhibition
of autophagy (pharmacodynamics) in various tissues. Understanding HCQ
pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) in mice allows for a
comparison to human PK as reported in recent trials and as such the
subsequent PD associated with autophagy inhibition in tissues. In this
study, female BALB/c mice were treated with a single intraperitoneal dose
of 20, 40, or 80 mg/kg HCQ and tissues and whole blood collected at 3, 6,
12, 24, 48 and 72 hours. Levels of HCQ and desethylhydroxychloroquine
(dHCQ), an active metabolite, in whole blood and tissues were determined
via a validated liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
assay. Non-compartmental analysis (NCA) measured exposure, as determined
by area under the drug concentration versus time curve (AUC0-inf), to
both HCQ and dHCQ was dose proportional in whole blood, liver and brain.
The maximum concentration (Cmax) of HCQ was 1.3, 3.1 and 4.7 g/mL and
20.6, 41.7 and 114.7 g/mL in whole blood and liver, respectively,
following 20, 40 and 80 mg/kg. Brain exposure was far less with Cmax
achieving 272, 717 and 2220 ng/mL. In general, the time of maximal
concentration (Tmax) of HCQ and dHCQ was observed at 3 hr or 6 hr,
regardless of dose and location measured. PD assessment for autophagy
inhibition was determined by western blotting. The LC3 protein, which is
involved in membrane dynamics during autophagy, was visualized and the
ratio of LC3-II to tubulin was measured. In the liver, autophagy was
inhibited approximately two-fold following all doses at 24 and 48 hr
compared to controls. Autophagy was inhibited in both the gut and kidney
at 24 and 48 hr at all doses. In the brain, autophagy inhibition was not
dose related and may be a result of low HCQ levels. These results
demonstrate that a dose of 20 mg/kg is sufficient to inhibit autophagy in
most tissues investigated; however, while PK parameters appear to be dose
proportional, increased tissue drug levels does not necessarily equate to
increased PD effects/autophagy inhibition. In addition, the data
establishes a dose of 40 mg/kg in mice results in Cmax and AUC0-inf of
HCQ equivalent to that observed in human clinical trials targeting
autophagy modulation following a dose of 600 mg daily. Studies are
ongoing to assess this relationship in solid tumors.

