Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of 24-h carboplatin pretreatment on olaparib clearance in
women's cancers using noncompartmental and population pharmacokinetic
analyses


Background: Olaparib (OLA) is a PARP inhibitor approved for use in
deleterious germline BRCA mutated recurrent or refractory ovarian cancer.
Combining OLA with carboplatin (CARBO) could have additive effects based
on platinum-DNA adducts requiring PARP for DNA repair. Preclinical data
suggest greater cytotoxicity when CARBO is given prior to OLA. However,
the optimal treatment sequence of these agents has not been studied
previously in patients. We therefore investigated: 1) the effects of
CARBO treatment on the pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of
OLA; 2) in vitro mechanisms of the interaction between CARBO and
OLA.Methods: Clinical PK and PD data of OLA were obtained from 58
patients with confirmed recurrent or refractory women's cancers
participating in a two arm, parallel design, phase 1 trial (NCT01237067).
In cycle 1 OLA tablets (200 mg BID) were given for 7 days either followed
by CARBO (AUC 4) on day 8 (arm A) or after CARBO on day 1 (Arm B). In
cycle 2 the arms received the reversed scheme. PK of OLA were assessed in
both cycles by noncompartmental (NCA) and population pharmacokinetic
(PPK) analyses. For PK/PD analyses, PAR levels were measured at baseline
and 24 h after the first OLA dose. In vitro mechanistic studies were
carried out by incubating whole human blood and avian DT40 PARP-1 KO
cells with 10 M CARBO for 24 h, followed by 1h-treatment of isolated
PBMCs and PARP-1 KO cells with 10 M OLA. Intracellular OLA concentrations
were determined using UPLC-MS/MS.Results: Both NCA and PPK analyses
showed a 50% increase in OLA clearance when CARBO was administered 24-h
prior (PBackground: Olaparib (OLA) is a PARP inhibitor approved for use
in deleterious germline BRCA mutated recurrent or refractory ovarian
cancer. Combining OLA with carboplatin (CARBO) could have additive
effects based on platinum-DNA adducts requiring PARP for DNA repair.
Preclinical data suggest greater cytotoxicity when CARBO is given prior
to OLA. However, the optimal treatment sequence of these agents has not
been studied previously in patients. We therefore investigated: 1) the
effects of CARBO treatment on the pharmacokinetics (PK) and
pharmacodynamics (PD) of OLA; 2) in vitro mechanisms of the interaction
between CARBO and OLA.Methods: Clinical PK and PD data of OLA were
obtained from 58 patients with confirmed recurrent or refractory women's
cancers participating in a two arm, parallel design, phase 1 trial
(NCT01237067). In cycle 1 OLA tablets (200 mg BID) were given for 7 days
either followed by CARBO (AUC 4) on day 8 (arm A) or after CARBO on day 1
(Arm B). In cycle 2 the arms received the reversed scheme. PK of OLA were
assessed in both cycles by noncompartmental (NCA) and population
pharmacokinetic (PPK) analyses. For PK/PD analyses, PAR levels were
measured at baseline and 24 h after the first OLA dose. In vitro
mechanistic studies were carried out by incubating whole human blood and
avian DT40 PARP-1 KO cells with 10 M CARBO for 24 h, followed by
1h-treatment of isolated PBMCs and PARP-1 KO cells with 10 M OLA.
Intracellular OLA concentrations were determined using
UPLC-MS/MS.Results: Both NCA and PPK analyses showed a 50% increase in
OLA clearance when CARBO was administered 24-h prior (P<0.02). The PPK
model included a lag time parameter (P = 1.1E-18), a second absorption
compartment (P = 7.7E-27), a single elimination compartment, and
accounted for covariance among the clearance and volume parameters (P =
6.7E-7). Presence of CARBO was the only significant covariate affecting
OLA clearance (P = 1.9E-13). Final estimates for clearance and volume of
distribution were 6.8 L/h and 33 L, respectively, which were comparable
with related reports. There were no trends between PK data and PAR
levels, nor did the presence of CARBO affect PAR levels (P = 0.89). PBMC
experiments showed that 24-h pretreatment with CARBO significantly
increased intracellular OLA concentrations by more than 30% compared with
control samples (P = 0.013). PARP-1 KO cells confirmed that intracellular
PARP expression was not related to the increased OLA uptake. Possibly,
CARBO affects other intracellular targets or transporters leading to
increased intracellular uptake of OLA from the bloodstream.Conclusion:
This is the first known PK analysis showing a significant increase in OLA
clearance after pretreatment with CARBO, possibly leading to
subtherapeutic plasma concentrations of OLA. Preclinical experiments are
ongoing to reveal the exact pharmacological mechanisms of this
interaction.

