Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumorspheres cultured from circulating epithelial tumor cells
(CETCs) overexpress stem cell markers in patients with solid cancers


Background: Solid malignancies continuously shed tumor cells which may
enter the circulation, spread to other tissues and initiate metastases,
but it is assumed that only a small subpopulation among CETCs is capable
of metastasis formation, the subpopulation of CETCs capable of forming
tumorspheres in vitro and carrying stem cells properties. The aim of this
study was to characterize the pattern of expression of the tumorspheres
as compared to CETCs. Methods: Blood samples were obtained from patients
diagnosed with solid tumors. CETCs were enumerated with the maintrac
method and subsequently cultivated in epithelial stem cell-selective
medium. Immunofluorescence and qRT-PCR were performed to examine the
metastatic ability of tumorspheres in vitro. Results: Analysis of surface
markers in non-adherent tumorspheres forming from CETCs under stem cell-
selective conditions after a period of 14 days showed typical phenotype
for cancer stem cells depending on type of cancer. Furthermore, spheres
had high enzymatic activity for ALDH 1. Array qRT-PCR analysis revealed
that putative stem cell markers, such as Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, EpCAM, ALDH1
and CD133 are overexpressed in relation to house-keeping genes RPL13a and
GAPDH in tumor spheres in contrast to the significantly lower expression
level of these stem cell markers in individually isolated CETCs. High
expression level of pluripotency genes in tumorspheres was associated
with aggressive tumor behaviour in terms of tumor progression and type of
cancer. Conclusion: Here we show that stem cell markers are overexpressed
in tumorspheres as compared to CETCs. Obviously only a small population
of CETCs can be grown into spheres which possess stem cell properties and
most probably are responsible for recurrence and treatment failure.
Precise characterization of CETCs and tumorspheres on the single cell and
sphere level will contribute to a better understanding of metastasis
formation and lead to development of cancer stem cell based cancer
therapy.

