Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung cancer cell derived extracellular vesicles carrying DNAs,
RNAs and proteins that may trigger oncogenic signals and promote
angiogenesis


Extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted from tumor cells have been
implicated in modulating the tumor microenvironment changes. In this
study, we demonstrated that EVs secreted by lung cancer cell are loaded
with several cargos, such as DNA, RNA, cytokines, and growth factors.
After the EVs had been taken up by recipient cells, the cargos might
activate oncogenic pathways. We firstly isolated EVs from cell-free
medium of lung cancer cells lines (AS2, PC9) and malignant pleural
effusion (MPE) from patients with lung cancer. Isolated EVs were
confirmed by the morphology and size in transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and the presentation of specific EV markers (Alix, CD63, and
Tsg101). We found that several RNA species with enrichment of small RNAs
and mutated EGFR DNA in the EVs of PC9 cells. After labeling with the
green fluorescent dye Cellvue, the uptake of EVs by AS2 cells was imaged
by the fluorescent microscopy. With these data, we further investigated
the role of EVs in regulating the tumor microenvironment. We found the
content of IL-6 in EVs, secreted from AS2 and CL1-5 cells, increased
gradually after changing culture medium. And after uptake of EVs by
recipient cells the cargos induced higher phsophorylation of Stat3 and
AKT compared to the treatment with serum-free medium. Previously, we have
shown that IL-6/Stat3/tissue factor (TF)/VEGF pathway enhances lung
cancer angiogenesis, metastasis and the generation of MPE. In the current
study, we demonstrated that EVs from lung cancer cells and in the MPE
contain high level of VEGF and TF. And treatment with the EVs, containing
high VEGF and TF, induced more prominent extravasation than cell free
medium did in Miles assays. In conclusion, we successfully isolated EVs
not only from culture supernatants but also from MPE of lung cancer
patients. The EVs contain many biologically active molecules that may
modulate behaviors of cancer cells and cells in tumor microenvironment.

