Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediagnostic alcohol consumption and colorectal cancer survival:
the Colon Cancer Family Registry


Previous studies have shown an increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC)
among moderate to heavy alcohol consumers relative to non-drinkers;
however, the relationship between alcohol and CRC survival remains
unclear. Using data from the international Colon Cancer Family Registry
(CCFR), we assessed the association between pre-diagnostic alcohol intake
and survival outcomes after CRC diagnosis, overall and stratified by
patient and tumor attributes. CRC cases were identified via
population-based cancer registries at four CCFR study sites, with
diagnoses of incident, invasive CRC from 1997 to 2006. Study participants
completed a risk factor questionnaire at enrollment which included
information on several pre-diagnostic behaviors, including consumption of
wine, beer, and liquor. Prospective follow-up for survival outcomes was
conducted for 4858 CRC cases with complete data on alcohol consumption.
Using Cox proportional hazards regression models with delayed entry to
account for the time between diagnosis and study enrollment, we compared
non-drinkers (i.e., alcohol intake Previous studies have shown an
increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) among moderate to heavy alcohol
consumers relative to non-drinkers; however, the relationship between
alcohol and CRC survival remains unclear. Using data from the
international Colon Cancer Family Registry (CCFR), we assessed the
association between pre-diagnostic alcohol intake and survival outcomes
after CRC diagnosis, overall and stratified by patient and tumor
attributes. CRC cases were identified via population-based cancer
registries at four CCFR study sites, with diagnoses of incident, invasive
CRC from 1997 to 2006. Study participants completed a risk factor
questionnaire at enrollment which included information on several
pre-diagnostic behaviors, including consumption of wine, beer, and
liquor. Prospective follow-up for survival outcomes was conducted for
4858 CRC cases with complete data on alcohol consumption. Using Cox
proportional hazards regression models with delayed entry to account for
the time between diagnosis and study enrollment, we compared non-drinkers
(i.e., alcohol intake <1 drink per week) to individuals who consumed, on
average, 50 years (HR = 0.66 vs. 0.84, p-heterogeneity = 0.35). Similar
patterns were noted with respect to disease-specific survival. There were
no differences in the relationships between wine consumption and survival
outcomes stratified by tumor site, microsatellite instability,
BRAF-mutation, or CpG island methylator phenotype status. These results
suggest that wine consumption prior to CRC diagnosis is modestly
associated with more favorable survival after CRC diagnosis. This modest
inverse association does not appear to be limited to specific colorectal
tumor subtypes and extends beyond overall survival to disease-specific
outcomes.

