Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficiency in recovery of pure tumor cell populations from limited
tumor tissue specimens intended for clinical application


Introduction: We have previously shown reliability in isolating pure
populations of rare cells from complex tissues using the DEPArray system.
Several molecular techniques can be applied to a variety of histological
samples, for example Macrodissection is the gross manual dissection of
FFPE samples used to isolate areas of interest within a specimen for
optimal downstream analysis, while Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA) is a safe
procedure routinely used to examine a lesion helping to make a diagnosis.
These techniques are also used to assess the effect of treatment. Here we
demonstrate preliminary results showing 100% efficiency in recovering
pure tumor cell populations from different samples using the DEPArray
platform to overcome the issue of tumor heterogeneity. Method: FFPE
macrodissected sections (n = 9;) and FNA (n = 5;) originating from
prostate, breast, pancreatic and lung tumors were evaluated. Each was
processed using a tissue disassociation and staining procedure followed
by DEPArray sorting based on cytokeratin (Ker), vimentin (Vim) and
nuclear staining. The recovered cell populations were lysed in the
collection tube prior to PCR-based target enrichment for next generation
sequencing using IonTorrent AmpliSeq CHPv2. Results: DEPArray analysis
allowed identification of well separated cell populations, including
Tumor (Vim-/Ker+) and Stromal (Vim+/Ker-) cells in all the samples
analyzed. In the Macrodissection samples we were able to estimate the% of
tumor cells (mean 23% range 4-54%), demonstrating an unexpected low
frequency of tumor cells remaining following macrodissection. In FNA
specimens analyzed only 21% (4.3% to 42.7% range) of the total (mean of
6335) cells analyzed were of tumor (KER+) origin. For subsequent NGS
analysis, groups of pure cells (mean 174 cells, range from 37 to 280) for
each population were recovered. Among the tumor cells isolated from the
macrodissected and FNA specimens, we observed non-synonymous somatic
variants and LOH events for different genes. This situation can not be
highlighted in unsorted population. Conclusions: DEPArray technology can
be used to isolate pure tumor cells from heterogeneous FFPE samples used
in diagnostic application, such as Macrodissection or FNA specimens.
Thus, the DEPArray platform brings digital precision to detection,
quantification and recovery of pure target cells for subsequent
downstream molecular analysis that can improve cancer diagnosis and
treatment decisions.

