Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LIMK1 functions as a modulator of expression and targeting of
CXCR4 in prostate cancer cells through a negative feedback loop


Increased activation of the GPCR CXCR4/CXCL12 signaling axis is commonly
noted in metastatic prostate cancer and shows an association with poor
prognosis. CXCR4, and its ligand, CXCL12/SDF-1a, are recognized as
powerful mediators for tumor microenvironment remodeling and
chemoprotection. LIM kinase 1 (LIMK1), a serine/threonine kinase, is an
actin and microtubule modulatory protein that is also overexpressed in a
variety of cancers including prostate cancer. Earlier, we showed that
LIMK1 is involved in cell invasion and inhibition of LIMK1 expression
reverted the invasive phenotype of PC3 prostate cancer cells. Activation
of CXCR4/CXCL12 axis promotes activation of LIMK1 through RhoGTPAse
pathway and promotes docetaxel resistance. Here we show that LIMK1
expression and functions have a positive correlation with CXCR4
expression and subcellular localization. We used metastatic prostate
cancer cell lines PC3 and M12 and the non-tumorigenic prostate cell lines
BPH and P69 to monitor expression and membrane localization of CXCR4
using western blots, flow cytometry and immunofluorescence analysis. Our
analysis showed that cells with higher expression of LIMK1 (PC3)
overexpress CXCR4, and that cell lines with low levels of LIMK1 (BPH and
P69) express relatively lower amounts of CXCR4. Flow cytometric analysis
showed a stronger surface staining of CXCR4 in the LIMK1 overexpressing
PC3 cells compared to BPH cells. Next, we studied the effect of
shRNA-mediated inhibition of LIMK1 expression on CXCR4 expression in PC3
or M12 cells. Western blot and immunofluorescence analysis showed
noticeable reduction in CXCR4 levels, and its surface localization, as
noted by flow cytometry, in LIMK1 shRNA transfected PC3 and M12 cells. To
assess if the kinase activity of LIMK1 is essential for CXCR4 expression
and surface localization, we treated these cells with LIMK1 specific
kinase inhibitor BMS-5 and determined expression of CXCR4. Western blots
and immunofluorescence analysis showed reduced expression of CXCR4 in
treated cells compared to vehicle treated cells. Our observation
indicates an indirect association between LIMK1 and CXCR4 expression and
shows for the first time that expression of LIMK1 is required for the
maintenance of CXCR4 expression. Our study demonstrates a novel positive
feed back regulatory mechanism between LIMK1 and CXCR4 and suggest a
possible combination treatment option through inhibition of LIMK1
expression and/or its kinase activity for improving chemosensitivity of
prostate cancer cells with overactive CXCR4/CXCL12 axis.

