Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent complement-dependent cytotoxicity of tumor cells by target
bound hexamerization of EGFR antibodies


Introduction: Activation of complement (C) constitutes an important
effector mechanism of monoclonal antibodies in cancer therapy. Unmodified
IgG1 antibodies against the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a
well-validated tumor target, lack the capacity to induce
complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) as single agents. Recently,
significantly improved CDC was demonstrated after antigen-bound IgG
molecules formed hexameric structures through intermolecular Fc-Fc
contacts. Single point mutations (E345K or E430G) that enhance
hexamerization of IgG molecules conditional on antigen binding have been
identified to represent a platform for enhanced C activation (Diebolder
et al Science 343:1260, 2014, de Jong et al, PLOS Biology, in press).
Alternative strategies to enhance CDC have focused on enhancing C1q
binding via affinity-maturation of the C1q binding site
(S239D/H268F/S324T/I332E; DFTE) or by generating IgG1/IgG3 isotype
chimeras (113F). The aim of the present study was to investigate whether
EGFR antibodies optimized for each of these approaches differed in terms
of CDC activity.Methods: EGFR antibodies comprising engineered Fc domains
that carry mutations to enhance hexamerization (E345K or E430G), or
increase C1q affinity (DFTE), or that exist of IgG1/IgG3 chimeras (113F)
were constructed. CDC activity was assessed by 51Cr release assays in the
presence of human serum. Antibody mediated C1q binding or C4b deposition
on tumor cells was analyzed by flow cytometry. Apparent C1q binding
affinity was determined by C1q specific ELISA.Results: Here, we
demonstrate that affinity maturation of the C1q binding site (DFTE &
113F) increased C1q binding in the absence of antigen, whereas mutations
that enhance Fc-Fc interactions (E345K & E430G), and so enhance
hexamerization after target binding, did not. However, these latter
mutations strongly increased C1q avidity and CDC for EGFR antibodies
bound to cells. Notably, the latter strategy translated in superior CDC
activity, which was particularly evident for tumor cells with low EGFR
expression levels. Furthermore, hexamerization enhanced CDC was
particularly sensitive to peptides inhibiting Fc-Fc interactions,
supporting their different mode of action compared to other CDC-enhancing
strategies. Interestingly, also the EGFR epitope recognized by different
antibodies impacted on the CDC activity.Conclusion: Enhancement of
hexamer formation by EGFR antibodies conditional on antigen binding is a
promising novel approach to improve their anti-tumor activity. Strategies
that enhanced complement binding independent of antigen engagement by the
antibody appeared less effective.

