Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The class I HDAC inhibitor, mocetinostat, induces expression of
PD-L1 and tumor antigen presentation machinery and modifies tumor immune
cellular subsets providing a rationale for immune checkpoint inhibitor
combinations


Immunotherapy has led to major treatment breakthroughs for a number of
cancers including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although initial
responses to immune checkpoint inhibitors are promising, a significant
percentage of patients do not respond or rapidly acquire resistance.
Although the mechanisms underlying intrinsic and acquired resistance
remain largely unexplained; the expression of programmed cell
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), lack of tumor cell capacity to effectively
present neoantigens, and presence of immunosuppressive cellular subsets
have been implicated as potential mechanisms. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors have emerged as a class of agents that may combat checkpoint
inhibitor resistance by reversing immune evasion and eliciting an
anti-tumor activity through a multi-faceted immuno-stimulatory mechanism
of action. Mocetinostat is a spectrum-selective Class I/IV HDAC inhibitor
specifically targeting HDAC-1, -2, -3 and -11. The present studies were
designed to explore mocetinostat's effect as an immune-enhancer and
ultimately, to evaluate its potential to be used in combination with
immune checkpoint inhibitors (e.g., PD-1/PD-L1 antagonists).
Specifically, we assessed mocetinostat's effect on the expression of
various immunomodulatory factors by tumor cells as well as its effect on
immune cell sub-populations in the tumor microenvironment in vivo.
Mocetinostat elicited a concentration-dependent increase in PD-L1 mRNA
expression which translated into increased PD-L1 surface protein
expression in a panel of NSCLC cell lines. In addition, mocetinostat
elicited a concentration-dependent increase in expression of MHC-class I
related polypeptide-related sequence A (MIC-A) and MIC-B, and cluster of
differentiation 86 (CD86). Furthermore, mocetinostat induced expression
of several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene complex family members
including HLA-A, -B, -DRA, and -DPA among others. To determine the effect
of mocetinostat on systemic and tumor immune cell subpopulations we
treated CT26 tumor-bearing mice. Mocetinostat increased splenic
CD4-positive T effector cells and tumor mature cytolytic CD8-postive T
cells and at the same time decreased tumor FoxP3-positive T regulatory
cells and CD11b/Gr1-positive myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC).
These data provide evidence that mocetinostat modulates key immune
regulators both in tumor cells as well as in relevant immune cell types
in the tumor microenvironment and provides strong rationale for
combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors.

