Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of CEA TCB, a novel T-cell bispecific antibody for the
treatment of solid tumors, with PD-L1 checkpoint blockade


Recent results from clinical trials have shown that immune therapies,
particularly immune checkpoint inhibitors, can extend the overall
survival of cancer patients and lead to durable responses. Despite these
promising results, current immune-based therapies are only effective in a
proportion of patients and combination strategies are needed to improve
therapeutic benefit. Programmed death-ligand 1(PD-L1) is found on the
surface of immune and tumor cells and its expression is induced by
interferon gamma (IFNg). It prevents the immune system from destroying
cancer cells by interacting with the inhibitory programmed death-1 (PD-1)
and B7.1 receptors on activated T cells, which results in a T-cell
inhibitory signal. CEA TCB (RG7802, RO6958688) is a novel T cell
bispecific antibody targeting the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) on tumor
cells and CD3 on T cells, currently being investigated as single agent in
a Phase I study in patients with advanced and/or metastatic
CEA-expressing tumors.CEA TCB-mediated killing of tumor cells led to T
cell activation, IFNg secretion and subsequent up-regulation of the
PD-1/PD-L1 immune suppressive pathway in vitro and in vivo, similarly to
what happens during tumor adaptive immune resistance mechanisms where
upon recognition of tumor antigens, TILs produce IFNg, which drives PD-L1
expression in the tumor microenvironment and delivers a suppressive
signal to T cells upon binding to PD-1. Incubation of the high-CEA
expressing gastric carcinoma cell line (MKN45) with human PBMCs (E:T
10:1) and increasing concentrations of CEA TCB, led to a dose-dependent
up-regulation of PD-1 receptor on both CD4+ or CD8+ T cell subsets as
well as of PD-L1 on surviving tumor cells as early as 24 h following
treatment. PD-1 expression was specific as it did not occur in the
absence of CEA-expressing tumor cells or upon treatment with un-targeted
control TCB. In vivo studies performed using MKN45 tumor xenografts
(MKN45) in fully humanized NOG mice demonstrated that CEA TCB treatment
led to increased frequency of intra-tumoral T cells expressing PD-1 and
to a strong induction of PD-L1 expression in tumors. Combination of CEA
TCB with a PD-L1 blocking antibody showed significant increase of
anti-tumor activity as compared to the respective single agents.These
preclinical data indicate that CEA TCB treatment leads to up-regulation
of the PD-1/PD-L1 immune suppressive pathway and that the combination of
CEA TCB with PD-L1 blocking agents results in enhanced anti-tumor
activity. Phase Ib clinical trials investigating the combination of CEA
TCB and atezolizumab are currently ongoing.

