Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGF2 activation of FGFR1 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
is associated with more invasive disease and can be attenuated by FGFR
inhibition


Introduction. Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) account for
nearly 600,000 deaths worldwide annually and have limited treatment
options. Approximately 20% of HNSCCs harbor amplifications of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) on chromosome 8p, however FGFR1
amplification by itself does not predict clinical response to FGFR
inhibitors. We hypothesized that FGF2, or basic FGF, ligand expression is
a better marker of FGFR activation and predictor of response to FGFR
inhibitors.Results. A tissue micro array (TMA) of HNSCC patient biopsies
was stained and quantitated for FGF2 expression by Aperio ImageScope
software. FGF2 was significantly increased in recurrent tissue samples (p
= 0.04). We examined a number of immortalized HNSCC cell lines and found
that overexpression of both FGF2 and FGFR1 predicted response to the
selective FGFR inhibitor PD173074. FGFR inhibition did not cause
apoptosis, but rather induced a G0/G1 arrest and growth inhibition. FGFR
inhibition also induced a change in cell morphology, with a significant
increase in cell size and adherence. The expression of
epithelial-tomesenchymal transition (EMT) proteins was examined and
FGF2-FGFR1 activation was associated with a more mesenchymal phenotype.
Accordingly, FGFR inhibition reversed invasiveness as measured using the
Incucyte WoundMaker scratch assay, suggesting that HNSCCs with FGF2-FGFR1
activation have more metastatic potential. Invasiveness of these cells in
vivo was confirmed using orthotopic injection into the buccal pad of NSG
mice. Once primary tumors reached 0.8 cm in size, mice were sacrificed
and buccal mucosa, lung, liver, and neck tissue were examined
post-mortem. All of the injected animals developed local invasion, and
distant metastases in the lungs. 5/7 mice also had metastases in the
liver and this model is being used to test the ability of FGFR inhibition
to prevent metastasis.The mechanism of autocrine FGF2-FGFR1 activation
was further explored and FGF2 was found to be secreted in association
with extracellular vesicles (ECVs). Interestingly, inhibition of FGFR
reduced secretion of ECVs and FGF2, providing a novel approach to target
autocrine and paracrine FGFR1 activation within the tumor. We further
tested a number of small molecule inhibitors in combination with PD173074
to look for synergistic combinations of kinase inhibitors and found
significant synergy between EGFR and FGFR inhibitors suggesting this
combination may be most effective in patients with HNSCC.Conclusions.
Increased FGF2 in HNSCC patient samples is correlated with recurrent
disease. FGF2-FGFR1 activation increases invasiveness through activation
of EMT genes both in vitro, and in an orthotopic model. Inhibition of
FGF2-FGFR1 reversed the invasive phenotype in vitro and may be an
effective therapeutic strategy to reduce metastases in HNSCC patients.

