Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of surface major vault protein
on circulating tumor cells in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma


The prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is poor
because of frequent metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy.
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in blood have attracted attention as
potential seeds for metastasis and an important indicator of treatment
outcome. However, the biological properties of CTCs are largely unknown
due to rarity and lack of CTC-specific surface markers. Previously, we
produced monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against surface molecules on human
embryonic stem cells. We found that some of them bound to surface
antigens on HCC cell lines but not to normal primary cells. MAb 63-B6,
one of the MAbs, recognized CD45-negative CTCs in 6 out of 8 patients
with HCCs, suggesting that 63-B6-reactive antigen may be a novel surface
marker on CTCs. In a subsequent study, we found that 63-B6 recognized
major vault protein (MVP) on the surface of cancer cells, although MVP
has been known as a cytoplasmic and nuclear protein. To investigate the
role of surface MVP on HCC cell lines, MVP expression was knocked down in
Huh7 cells by small interfering RNA. MVP depletion decreased cell growth
and increased apoptotic cell death. When Huh7 cells were treated with a
polyclonal anti-MVP antibody recognizing surface MVP, Huh7 cell
proliferation was decreased without apoptotic cell death, suggesting that
surface MVP regulates cell proliferation. Huh7 cells treated with 63-B6
or the anti-MVP antibodies also inhibited Huh7 cell invasion and
migration in vitro. Thus, surface MVP is positively associated with HCC
cell proliferation, invasion and migration. To further dissect the
functional role of surface MVP during HCC metastasis, blood samples from
60 HCC patients and 6 normal adults were stained with 63-B6, HSA, and/or
EMT-related antibodies after the depletion of red blood cells and
CD45-positive cells. CTCs were detected with 63-B6 in approximately 92%
(2 CTCs) of patients, and the cell count measured in 7.5 ml of blood
ranged between 2 and 1032. Double staining showed that 80% of
HSA-positive CTCs was 63-B6-positive. Seventy-six% of EpCAM-positive CTCs
was 63-B6-positive while 95% of vimentin-positive CTCs was
63-B6-positive, suggesting that 63-B6-reactive-surface MVP is more
expressed on mesenchymal-phenotypic CTCs. Triple staining further showed
that 36% of 63-B6-positive CTCs was EpCAM(-)Vimentin(+) and 19% of
63-B6-positive CTCs was EpCAM(+)Vimentin(+) while 3% of 63-B6-positive
CTCs was EpCAM(+)Vimentin(-). Interestingly, 42% of 63-B6-positive CTCs
was EpCAM(-)Vimentin(-). These results suggest that 63-B6-reactive
surface MVP is a novel surface marker on CTCs in patients with HCCs,
where it is expressed predominantly on mesenchymal phenotypic and
EpCAM(-)Vimentin(-) CTCs.

