Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-195 represses the tumorigenesis of non-small cell lung cancer
and synergizes with microtubule targeting agents


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in nearly all cellular
physiological and pathological pathways. Dysregulated miRNAs have been
shown to contribute to tumorigenesis of many cancers, including lung
cancer. The let-7 miRNA family, among the first miRNAs discovered,
suppresses the growth of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Other miRNAs
have been shown to regulate the response of cancer cells to anticancer
agents, such as the microtubule-targeting agent (MTA) paclitaxel. These
findings highlight the potential application of miRNAs as the next
generation of therapeutic agents, either alone or in combination with
chemotherapy.A high throughput screen was performed in NSCLC cells.
miRNAs that both inhibited NSCLC cell growth and sensitized NSCLC cells
to paclitaxel were validated by short- and long-term assays for cell
viability. The targets of miRNAs were identified by expression profiling
following miRNA transfection, validated by luciferase reporter assay, and
confirmed by functional assays.We show that miR-195 causes G1 phase
arrest of NSCLC cells by targeting CCND3, and leads to apoptosis and
reduction of cell migration and invasion by targeting BIRC5. Conversely,
the inhibition of cell growth by miR-195 is compromised by overexpressing
CCND3 or BIRC5; the inhibition of cell migration and invasion by miR-195
is abrogated by overexpressing BIRC5. We also show that miR-195
synergizes with MTAs paclitaxel and eribulin to inhibit the growth of
NSCLC cells by regulating CHEK1. Analysis of miRNA and gene expression
profiles from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) shows that miR-195
expression is negatively correlated with BIRC5 and CHEK1 but not CCND3.
Clinical data from TCGA show that miR-195 is significantly down-regulated
in lung tumors compared to adjacent normal tissues and that its
down-regulation in lung cancer patients is associated with worse
survival. The TCGA data also show that BIRC5 and CHEK1 are significantly
up-regulated in lung tumors and that their up-regulation is associated
with worse survival. CCND3, however, is slightly downregulated in lung
tumors and its expression is not correlated with patient survival.
Intriguingly, we also show that miR-195 up-regulates the oncogene MYC,
inhibition of which sensitizes NSCLC cells to miR-195. We show that Myc,
reported to transcriptionally repress let-7c, also represses miR-195, and
further identify a feedback loop between let-7c and miR-195 in which each
inhibits the other.We identify miR-195 as a tumor suppressor and
chemotherapy sensitizer in NSCLC mediated by its repression of CCND3,
BIRC5 and CHEK1. We also uncover a feedback network between miR-195, Myc
and let-7c. The ability of miR-195 and Myc to regulate each other
indicates a mechanism by which NSCLC cells can become more sensitive to
miR-195. The mutual inhibition between miR-195 and let-7c suggests an
interesting regulatory loop between cancer-related miRNAs that deserves
further study.

