Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial genomic backgrounds affect nuclear DNA methylation
and gene expression


Increasing evidence shows mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genetics contribute
to complex diseases like cancer, but the mechanisms responsible are
mostly unknown. A new genetically engineered mouse model was created that
contains nuclear DNA from one mouse strain and mtDNA from different mouse
strain(s), designated Mitochondrial Nuclear Exchange (MNX). We have
demonstrated that specific mtDNA-nDNA combinations could modify
metastasis efficiency. The underlying mechanism is hypothesized to be due
to mtDNA-driven changes in nDNA expression, but how mtDNA regulates the
coordinated gene expression is not yet known. Since DNA methylation is an
important epigenetic modification that occurs in all vertebrate genomes
and retrograde and anterograde cross-talk exists between the nuclear and
mitochondrial genomes, we hypothesized that the nuclear epigenome,
specifically methylation, changes as a result of mitochondrial haplotype.
To test this hypothesis, we performed Meth-Seq using the Agilent Mouse
SureSelectXT, RNA-Seq using Illumina HiSeq 2500, and Affymetrix GeneChip
Mouse Transcriptome Array. Initial studies were performed using four male
mouse brains (8 wk) that were pooled from different litters and cages of
wild-type and MNX mice. Significant and selective differential DNA
methylation and gene expression patterns were observed and indicate that
there are some global, some subtle, but mostly reproducible, differences
between these strains. Pathway analysis show clustering of changes
involving cell adhesion, ion channels, cell surface receptors, metabolism
and molecules involved in transport. Together these observations provide
insights into how mtDNA could be altering epigenetic regulation and
thereby contribute to cancer pathogenesis. Support: Susan G. Komen for
the Cure (SAC11037), Natl Fndn Cancer Res, Steiner Family Fund for
Metastasis Research, Kansas Bioscience Authority CA134981, P30-CA168524

