Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA damage and tumour burden in mouse colon is increased in
response to carcinogen exposure after induction of chronic inflammation -
a more disease relevant model of colitis-associated colorectal cancer


Chronic inflammation (CI) such as inflammatory bowel disease increases
the risk of developing colorectal cancer (CRC). Tumorigenesis is
supported by inflammatory cytokines through increased cell proliferation
and inhibiting apoptosis of neoplastic cells. The classic mouse model of
colitis-associated CRC (CA-CRC) requires treatment with a mutagen
(azoxymethane, AOM) followed by induction of inflammation through
ingestion of a luminal irritant (dextran sulfate sodium, DSS). AOM is
metabolized by colonic epithelium causing DNA damage through formation of
mutagenic DNA adducts. Although the AOM + DSS model of CA-CRC is a
valuable research model, it reverses events that take place in humans
where CI typically precedes CRC. We hypothesise that CI sensitises
colonic epithelium to DNA damage and predisposes the epithelium to
neoplastic transformation.In order to investigate this we reversed the
AOM + DSS model to more accurately represent the disease process in
humans. Using two experimental approaches we treated wildtype (WT) mice
with AOM alone or with DSS then AOM and collected colonic tissue after 6
and 48 hours (short-term) or colonic tumours (long-term). Tumour number
and size were quantified. Immunohistochemistry was used to analyse DNA
damage, apoptosis, and proliferation. Formation of the DNA adduct O6MeG
was measured by a modified method of HPLC, and qPCR was used to analyse
expression of DNA damage signalling pathway components.Compared with an
AOM challenge alone, prior CI induction by DSS treatment increased DNA
damage, reduced apoptosis, and increased tumour number and tumour size.
This data reveals how prior CI modulates the colonic epithelial response
to mutagen exposure in the short-term and how it promotes tumour
formation in the long-term. In addition, this data demonstrates that the
reverse model of CA-CRC can be successfully used as a more appropriate
experimental framework to better understand the molecular mechanisms
underpinning CA-CRC and will allow us to further investigate the
relationship between prior CI, DNA damage, and tumour development.

