Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of resistance to immuno and targeted therapies in acral
melanoma


Acral melanoma is a rare subtype of melanoma found on the non-hair
bearing surfaces of the skin. It is associated with a worse prognosis
than cutaneous melanoma, with higher proportions of patients developing
metastatic disease. Combination treatments targeting the MAP kinase
(MAPK) pathway and immune checkpoint inhibitors have improved overall
survival in patients with stage IV disease. However, resistance to both
modalities remains a challenge. This is exemplified by our comprehensive
analysis of a patient presenting with acral melanoma that developed
resistance to both immune and targeted therapy.The patient developed
metastatic disease in multiple sites and we obtained fresh tumour tissue
and generated cell lines from a skin metastasis at baseline prior to
nivolumab. Following an initial complete response, the patient developed
new mediastinal lymph node and brain metastases, which were also
resected. On further relapse, the patient commenced dabrafenib with a
partial response. Despite ongoing extra-cranial control, the brain lesion
progressed and was therefore resected.To investigate resistance to immune
therapy, we performed comprehensive genomic analysis and gene expression
profiling on the lesions from the three sites, which identified common
mutations in all three lesions and a low overall mutational burden
consistent with acral melanoma. Heterogeneity of the MHC class I and II
restricted antigen profile of the pre-treatment subcutaneous metastasis
versus lymph node and brain progressions could not account for the
development of resistance to immunotherapy. Gene expression profiling
revealed up-regulation of known mechanisms of immune tolerance in both
the lymph node and brain metastasis compared to the pre-treatment
subcutaneous metastasis.To investigate resistance to targeted therapy, we
compared patient-derived cell lines from brain lesions taken pre (DabS)
and on progression on dabrafenib (DabR), and showed ongoing sensitivity
to dabrafenib despite the patient having progressed in the brain. When
cells from the DabR cell line were cultured in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
in the presence of dabrafenib, we observed a reduction in cell death.
Thus, extrinsic factors present in CSF may have resulted in the
progression of the brain lesion in this patient.Using a combination of
platforms to study patient derived tissues, we show that immune editing
through selection of cells with an immune resistant phenotype may have
resulted in the resistance of this patient's tumours to immune therapy
whilst resistance to MAPK targeted therapy could have been mediated by
extrinsic factors in the CSF.

