Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy-induced exosomal secretion promotes chemoresistance
in pancreatic cancer cells


Introduction: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth
leading cause of death from cancer in the United States, with a dismal
median survival rate of 2-8 months after diagnosis and a 5-year overall
survival rate of 7%. It carries a notoriously poor prognosis due to
advanced stage at presentation for most patients, lack of very effective
therapy and development of resistance to available chemotherapy.
Intercellular communication between tumor-tumor and tumor-nontumor cells
is critical for tumor growth and progression. Extracellular vesicles
(EVs) comprising of exosomes, microvesicles and apoptotic bodies are
considered important mediators of intercellular communication and play
pivotal roles in different physiological and pathological processes.
However, role of EVs in the development of acquired resistance to
chemotherapy in PDAC cells is largely unexplored. Here, we examined the
role of EVs in chemotherapeutic resistance of PDAC cells.Methods:
Conditioned media from vehicle-treated and (V-CM) gemcitabine-treated
PDAC cells (Gem-CM) were collected and fractionated into soluble
(Gem-Sol) and vesicular (GEM-EV) factions. PDAC cells were pre-treated
with Gem-CM, Gem-Sol and Gem-EV followed by treatment with various doses
(0-20 M) of gemcitabine for different time intervals (48 and 72 h). EVs
were then separated by differential ultracentrifugation, size was
determined using Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) and assessed for their
chemoresistance conferring activity in PDAC cells. Immunoblotting was
performed to examine the specific markers associated with EVs.Results:
Both Gem-CM and Gem-EV provided significant protection to
gemcitabine-treated cells, while Gem-Sol had only negligible effect. DLS
based-size distribution analysis identified EVs of three different size
viz. large (> 1500 nm), medium (500-1500 nm) and small (100-300 nm).
Treatment of large and medium sized Gem-EVs did not show any
chemoprotective effect in PDAC cells, while smaller Gem-EVs provided
remarkable survival benefits to PDAC cells against gemcitabine treatment.
Immunoblot data revealed that these active EVs are enriched with CD9 and
CD63, specific markers of exosomes. Interestingly, we observed that
exosomes of gemcitabine-treated PDAC cells were larger than those
secreted by vehicle treated cells. Moreover, the amount of exosomes in
Gem-CM was significantly higher as comparison to the CM of
vehicle-treated cells. Studies are being conducted to identify the cargo
encapsulated by exosomes responsible for exosomes-mediated
chemoresistance in PDAC cells.Conclusion: Our findings suggest that
chemotherapy induces secretion of exosomes in PDAC cells that enhances
chemoresistance by spreading the molecular signals.

