Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The biological role of BAT-1 in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the United States and
is the second cause of cancer death in men. In Puerto Rico, prostate
cancer is the most common type of cancer and the leading cause of cancer
death in men. The current available biomarkers are unable to predict
malignant outcomes such as recurrence. Thus, there is a critical demand
for the development of innovative diagnostic and prognostic tools for the
management of prostate cancer. In the current study, we evaluated the
biological role of BAT-1 in prostate cancer. Preliminary data from
patients who had prostate cancer recurrence identified that HLA-B
associated transcript 1 (BAT-1) was down-regulated in patients with
prostate cancer recurrence when compared with non-recurrent patients. We
down-regulated BAT-1 in PC3 and 22RV1 prostate cancer cell lines using
small interfering RNA (siRNA). In vitro assays were performed to measure
de-differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasion.
Flow cytometry analysis using the cell Viability/Annexin V cell staining
kit showed that down-regulation of BAT-1 significantly increased the
proliferation of PC3 cells (PProstate cancer is the most common cancer in
men in the United States and is the second cause of cancer death in men.
In Puerto Rico, prostate cancer is the most common type of cancer and the
leading cause of cancer death in men. The current available biomarkers
are unable to predict malignant outcomes such as recurrence. Thus, there
is a critical demand for the development of innovative diagnostic and
prognostic tools for the management of prostate cancer. In the current
study, we evaluated the biological role of BAT-1 in prostate cancer.
Preliminary data from patients who had prostate cancer recurrence
identified that HLA-B associated transcript 1 (BAT-1) was down-regulated
in patients with prostate cancer recurrence when compared with
non-recurrent patients. We down-regulated BAT-1 in PC3 and 22RV1 prostate
cancer cell lines using small interfering RNA (siRNA). In vitro assays
were performed to measure de-differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis,
migration and invasion. Flow cytometry analysis using the cell
Viability/Annexin V cell staining kit showed that down-regulation of
BAT-1 significantly increased the proliferation of PC3 cells (P<0.05) but
decreased apoptosis. Down-regulation of BAT-1 showed no significant
change in the expression of vimentin, desmin, and alpha-smooth muscle
actin (-SMA). Wound healing and Boyden assays showed that cells treated
with BAT-1 siRNA significantly increased migration and motility at 12h
and 24h of PC3 cells when compared to control (PProstate cancer is the
most common cancer in men in the United States and is the second cause of
cancer death in men. In Puerto Rico, prostate cancer is the most common
type of cancer and the leading cause of cancer death in men. The current
available biomarkers are unable to predict malignant outcomes such as
recurrence. Thus, there is a critical demand for the development of
innovative diagnostic and prognostic tools for the management of prostate
cancer. In the current study, we evaluated the biological role of BAT-1
in prostate cancer. Preliminary data from patients who had prostate
cancer recurrence identified that HLA-B associated transcript 1 (BAT-1)
was down-regulated in patients with prostate cancer recurrence when
compared with non-recurrent patients. We down-regulated BAT-1 in PC3 and
22RV1 prostate cancer cell lines using small interfering RNA (siRNA). In
vitro assays were performed to measure de-differentiation, proliferation,
apoptosis, migration and invasion. Flow cytometry analysis using the cell
Viability/Annexin V cell staining kit showed that down-regulation of
BAT-1 significantly increased the proliferation of PC3 cells (P<0.05) but
decreased apoptosis. Down-regulation of BAT-1 showed no significant
change in the expression of vimentin, desmin, and alpha-smooth muscle
actin (-SMA). Wound healing and Boyden assays showed that cells treated
with BAT-1 siRNA significantly increased migration and motility at 12h
and 24h of PC3 cells when compared to control (P<0.05). Our results
showed that BAT-1 down-regulation increased migration and cell motility.
Cells also tend to proliferate more, but have reduced apoptosis. These
results were expected due to its down-regulation in recurrent prostate
cancer patient samples, suggesting that BAT-1 down-regulation promotes
aggressiveness in prostate cancer recurrence. A possible mechanism of
action for BAT1 is the modulation of cell proliferation and migration.

