Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood-brain barrier penetrating ATM inhibitor (AZ32)
radiosensitises intracranial gliomas in mice


Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase is a central DNA damage
response (DDR) component signalling the presence of DNA double strand
breaks (DSBs) to DNA repair, checkpoint and survival pathways. Clinical
doses of fractionated radiotherapy directed at tumours kill cells by
inducing single strand breaks and DSBs, the latter being particularly
lethal to all cells if not repaired. Poor survival rates of glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) patients is attributed to an inability to excise all
invasive tumor tissue (if operable) and an intrinsic tumour
chemo/radioresistance, which has been linked to elevated ATM activity in
glioma stem cells.ATM inhibition (ATMi) radiosensitises cancer cell lines
in vitro and in vivo. ATMi also acutely radiosensitises patient-derived
glioma stem cells more effectively than by inhibiting other DDR or cell
cycle checkpoint components (PARP, ATR, Chk1). Checkpoint-defective
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines seem to be particularly
radio-sensitised by ATMi. In addition, several studies suggest that
normal brain is radioprotected when ATM activity is deficient, suggesting
ATM is required for apoptosis in neurons. ATMi in brain may therefore
provide a wide therapeutic margin. Furthermore, ATM's role in signalling
DNA damage independent redox stress has been linked to promoting
neoangiogenesis in tumour vasculature. Taken together, these studies
suggest ATM is an extremely attractive target to inhibit during and
potentially following radiotherapy. However, one impediment to
preclinical and clinical studies is that current ATMi's have limited CNS
bioavailability.We report AZ32 as the first known selective, orally
bioavailable blood-brain barrier (BBB) penetrating ATMi probe. AZ32
inhibits the DDR and radiosensitizes p53/checkpoint-defective GBM cells
in vitro. Oral daily dosing providing sufficient mouse free brain
pharmacokinetic exposures over AZ32's ATM IC50, during just four daily
doses of whole brain irradiation results in significant improvement in
median overall survival of syngeneic orthotopic mouse glioma models
(log-rank AZ32/radiation vs. radiation p = 0.0194). Tumor eradication was
confirmed by tumor imaging. This result was recapitulated with a human
orthotopic model. These findings support the development of clinical
grade BBB-penetrating ATMi as a potential treatment for GBM and
potentially other intracranial tumours dosed in combination with
fractionated radiotherapy used in standard clinical practice.

