Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obinutuzumab (GA101) versus rituximab against rituximab-sensitive
and -resistant Burkitt lymphoma (BL) differentially phosphorylate BCR,
Fc-gamma receptor, and natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity
signaling pathways


Background: Burkitt Lymphoma (BL) is the most common NHL in children and
adolescents and has an excellent prognosis (80% 5years, EFS, Cairo et al.
Blood, 2007) and further improved with the addition of rituximab
(Goldman/Cairo et al, Leukemia, 2013, Cairo et al. JCO, 2012). However, a
subset of patients with chemoimmunotherapy resistant disease has a dismal
prognosis ( 10% 5 years, EFS) (Miles/Cairo et al. BJH, 2012, Barth et al.
BJH, 2013). Obinutuzumab, a novel glycoengineered type II CD20 Ab,
mediates enhanced cell death & ADCC against B-cell lymphoma vs. RTX
(Awasthi/Cairo et al. BJH, 2015), and was recently FDA and EMA approved
for first line treatment of CLL in combination with
chlorambucil.Objective: To evaluate phosphorylation of signaling pathway
altered differentially following obinutuzumab vs RTX against
RTX-sensitive/resistant BLMethods: Raji (CD20+) and Raji-4RH) cells were
cultured in RPMI with 10% FBS. Tumor cells were incubated with 100 g/ml
obinutuzumab, and/or RTX for 24 hrs. For phosphoproteomics analysis, we
performed a mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative
phosphoproteomic profiling of the BL cell lines Raji /Raji4RH in the
presence/absence of obinutuzumab or rituximab or isotype control.
Silencing of PLCG2 (Dharmacon, USA) and MAPK1 (Sigma Aldrich, USA) in
Raji/Raji4RH cell lines was carried out according to the manufacturer's
instructionsResults: In all 978 unique phosphorylated proteins were
identified. Out of these 661 phosphoproteins were identified after
obinutuzumab vs. 615 in RTX treatment, respectively. For the Raji4RH, 534
phosphoproteins were identified after obinutuzumab and 534 in RTX
treatment, respectively (Fig.1). Functional annotation of proteins
differentially phosphorylated in response to obinutuzumab vs. RTX
(>1.5-fold) reveals the involvement of the BCR (PLCG2, BTK & GSK3B), FC
gamma phagocytosis (FCRG2B, MAPK1 & RAF1), and Natural killer
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (MAPK1, RAF1& PLCG2) signaling pathways (Fig.
2). Differential phosphorylations of proteins involved in BCR or
cytotoxicity pathways were validated by western blot after incubation
with obinutuzumab vs. RTX in Raji/ Raji4RH cell lines, revealed up
regulation of BTK, PLCY2 and ERK1/RAF1 after obinutuzumab vs. RTX
treatment in Raji. Silencing, of PLCG2 and MAPK1 pathway, significantly
increased cell proliferation and decreased cytotoxicity after
obinutuzumab treatment in Raji (P = 0.0002 & 0.000002) but no change in
Raji4RH.Conclusions: Obinutuzumab and RTX differentially phosphorylate
BCR, and cytotoxicity signaling pathways. Obinutuzumab function
differentially in RTX resistant and sensitive BL cell lines which may
provide insights into alternate therapeutic strategy in RTX resistant BL.

