Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Properties of the immune microenvironment associated with clonal
diversity in high-grade serous ovarian cancer


High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is a challenging disease
characterized by poor survival and relapse. Our group has revealed
extensive clonal diversity of malignant cells in HGSC, which is thought
to facilitate the emergence of resistance and recurrence in response to
chemotherapy. Moreover, we have shown that the presence of tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) is associated with longer patient
survival in HGSC, suggesting that the immune system can contend with the
clonal diversity of tumors in some patients. We sought to determine how
TIL abundance and repertoire diversity relates to the degree of tumor
clone diversity in HGSC.We performed whole-genome sequencing, targeted
amplicon deep sequencing, gene expression profiling, and T-cell receptor
sequencing on 34 spatially separated HGSC tumor samples (8 patients)
including ovarian masses and peritoneal foci. In addition, tissue
sections were immunohistochemically stained for CD3, CD8, CD20, CD79a,
and CD138 to detect major TIL subsets. Using PyClone, we decomposed each
tumor sample into its constituent malignant clones and inferred clonal
genotypes.We discovered profound intra- and inter-patient variation in
the degree of tumor clone diversity from phylogenetic analysis.
Widespread inter-patient variation was also observed in TIL counts and
T-cell receptor repertoires. Intraepithelial CD3+ cell counts ranged from
2.2-173.2 per HPF and the number of unique T-cell receptor clonotypes
varied from 422 to 3164 per sample. Remarkably, quantitative metrics of
tumor clone diversityas defined by phylogenetic divergence and entropy in
the malignant composition of each tumorwas associated with the
proliferative molecular subtype and, accordingly, low TIL density. Tumor
clone diversity showed no correlation with the number of unique T-cell
receptor species. Moreover, preliminary analyses reveal no association
between tumor clone diversity and the expression of several ligands and
receptors involved in inhibitory immune signaling (CTLA-4, PD-1, PD-L1,
PD-L2).Our results reveal an association between low TIL abundance and
high diversity of malignant clones. This suggests that immune
infiltration may inhibit tumor proliferation and clonal diversification,
or vice versa. Collectively, our findings expose a relationship of the
immune microenvironment with the clonal dynamics of malignant cells that
could be exploited to overcome therapeutic resistance associated with
clonal evolution in HGSC.

