Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic control of tumor vasculature with direct observation using
intravital microscopy


IntroductionIntravital microscopy (IVM) provides in vivo real-time
imaging of tumor-associated vasculature. Our group was the first to use
IVM successfully in human subjects to image melanoma associated vessels.
In this preclinical study, we hypothesized that intravenous (IV)
nicardipine increases observable blood flow to tumor through
vasodilatation and therefore may facilitate drug delivery.MethodsStandard
window chambers for IVM were implanted into female BALB/c mice. The
murine colon cancer cell line CT26HA was inoculated in the skin within
the chamber. Fluorescein isothiocyanate dextran (FITC-dex) was injected
IV to enhance vessel observation prior to nicardipine (8 g/mouse).
Observations were performed at 100x magnification using a modified
Olympus microscope for 10 minutes. Nave mice were used for control
observations. Mice bearing CT26HA were observed on post-inoculation day
5, 12 and 20. Vessel architecture and vessel diameter in response to
nicardipine were compared.ResultsIn non-CT26HA bearing mice, nicardipine
resulted in a greater than 10% increase in skin vessel diameters directly
measured using IVM (pre-nicardipine diameter 82.4 3.6 m versus
post-nicardipine diameter 93.0 3.9 m. In CT26HA bearing mice, abnormal
vessels were observed as early as day 7 even in the absence of a solid
tumor mass. Vessel abnormalities included haphazard areas of increased
vessel density, aberrant vessel branching patterns, nonfunctional
vessels, and altered flow rates. Following nicardipine injection, the
diameter of larger tumor-associated vessels did not increase and remained
constant (pre: 111.2 2.7 m vs post: 109.1 3.3 m). Paradoxically, for
smaller vessels (IntroductionIntravital microscopy (IVM) provides in vivo
real-time imaging of tumor-associated vasculature. Our group was the
first to use IVM successfully in human subjects to image melanoma
associated vessels. In this preclinical study, we hypothesized that
intravenous (IV) nicardipine increases observable blood flow to tumor
through vasodilatation and therefore may facilitate drug
delivery.MethodsStandard window chambers for IVM were implanted into
female BALB/c mice. The murine colon cancer cell line CT26HA was
inoculated in the skin within the chamber. Fluorescein isothiocyanate
dextran (FITC-dex) was injected IV to enhance vessel observation prior to
nicardipine (8 g/mouse). Observations were performed at 100x
magnification using a modified Olympus microscope for 10 minutes. Nave
mice were used for control observations. Mice bearing CT26HA were
observed on post-inoculation day 5, 12 and 20. Vessel architecture and
vessel diameter in response to nicardipine were compared.ResultsIn
non-CT26HA bearing mice, nicardipine resulted in a greater than 10%
increase in skin vessel diameters directly measured using IVM
(pre-nicardipine diameter 82.4 3.6 m versus post-nicardipine diameter
93.0 3.9 m. In CT26HA bearing mice, abnormal vessels were observed as
early as day 7 even in the absence of a solid tumor mass. Vessel
abnormalities included haphazard areas of increased vessel density,
aberrant vessel branching patterns, nonfunctional vessels, and altered
flow rates. Following nicardipine injection, the diameter of larger
tumor-associated vessels did not increase and remained constant (pre:
111.2 2.7 m vs post: 109.1 3.3 m). Paradoxically, for smaller vessels (<
20 m), tumor-associated vessels vasoconstricted following nicardipine
injection and returned to baseline diameter after approximately five
minutes. Blood flow in these small vessels decreased or stopped during
this observation.ConclusionsObservation of dynamic vessel changes from
vasoactive agents is feasible using IVM. For tumor-associated vessels,
nicardipine was not shown to increase vessel diameter and
counterintuitively decreased diameters of smaller vessels. Implication on
drug delivery from vasoactive agents will lead to further pre-clinical
study of applications for human IVM.

