Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mucopenetrating magnetic nanoparticles for drug delivery


Objectives: Cervical cancer (CxCa) is one of the most common cancers
among women worldwide. Current standards of care for cervical cancer
includes surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. However, systemic
chemotherapy fails to elicit therapeutic responses and causes severe
systemic toxicity due to limited concentration of drug reaching to
mucosal tissue and blocking of drug penetration through the epithelial
mucus surface of the cervix. Mucus in general functions as a protective
barrier to for viruses and bacteria, but in cervical cancer condition it
poses a serious issue for drug delivery modalities. Therefore, our study
was aimed to develop a nanoparticle formulation that can effectively bind
and penetrate the mucin barrier of the tissues for effective drug
delivery applications.Methods: Iron oxide based magnetic nanoparticles
(MNPs) were prepared by precipitation of iron salts in the presence of
ammonia with subsequent coating with -cyclodextrin (-CD) and/or pluronic
polymer (F127). Four different compositions of MNP formulations, plain
MNPs, MNPs with -CD (MNP+CD), MNPs with F127 (MNP+F127), and MNPs with
-CD and F127 (MNP+CD-F127) were formulated for this study. Particle size,
distribution, and zeta potential of MNPs and MNP-mucin were measured
using the Zetasizer based on dynamic light scattering technique, mucin
binding ability of MNPs was measured using SpectraMax M2e plate reader,
migration of MNPs in the presence of mucin was measured using Boyden
chamber assay, and tissue uptake/internalization was measured by Prussian
blue staining and fluorescence techniques.Results: Among four different
formulations (MNPs, MNPs+CD, MNP+F127, and MNP+CD-F127), MNP+CD-F127
formulation is unique due to its triple layered composition. This MNP
formulation was prevented from aggregation in particle size anaysis in
solution, indicating its dispersive nature along with penetration
compatibility in mucus network. Instantaneous and long term mucin binding
experiments suggest that MNP+CD-F127 nanoparticles strongly interacted
with mucin layer. Further, our mucin incubated nanoparticles effectively
pass through membrane in Boyden chamber migration assay. Moreover, tissue
uptake/internalization studies demonstrated an efficient penetration of
MNP+CD-F127 nanoparticles through mucin layer.Conclusion: All above
biophysical properties of MNP+CD-F127 nanoparticles demonstrate that our
unique formulation can bind and penetrate the mucus barrier. This study
suggest that this unique nanoparticle formulation could a good candidate
for local drug delivery applications for overcoing problems associated
with cervical cancer treatment.

