Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor selective localization of CRLX101, an investigational
nanoparticle-drug conjugate of camptothecin


CRLX101, an investigational nanoparticle-drug conjugate (NDC) containing
the payload camptothecin, is currently being clinically evaluated in
multiple treatment-refractory solid tumors. In preclinical models,
CRLX101 is believed to release camptothecin in the tumor in a slow and
prolonged manner due to its long circulation half-life. CRLX101 has been
shown preclinically to be a dual inhibitor of topoisomerase 1 and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. It has demonstrated striking anti-tumor
activity in several different tumor models. Camptothecin itself was
identified as an active anti-tumor agent preclinically but was not
developed clinically due to its poor tolerability in patients. The
development of CRLX101, which has not shown significant toxicity in over
300 patients to date, offers a unique opportunity to improve cancer
treatment in a meaningful way.We hypothesized that CRLX101 utilizes the
enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect to accumulate
selectively in tumors. In this study, we sought to mechanistically
dissect the process of CRLX101 entry and accumulation into tumor cells
using multiple methods, both in vitro and in xenograft tumors in vivo.
Using confocal microscopy, we detected camptothecin fluorescence in
CRLX101-treated tumor cells in culture as well as in tumor tissue from
mice treated with CRLX101. We can co-localize this camptothecin with
intact nanoparticles using an anti-PEG antibody that specifically detects
the PEG loops in the NDCs. More recently, we have shown that camptothecin
and anti-PEG co-localize specifically in tumors of patients treated with
CRLX101 but not in adjoining normal tissue. We can also demonstrate that
macropinocytosis and activation of actin polymerization play a role in
the process by which tumor cells take up CRLX101. Using an anti-CD31
antibody, we can visualize the distance traversed by CRLX101 from the
tumor vasculature over time. We have developed novel analytical methods
to precisely quantify both released and CRLX101-conjugated camptothecin
over time in CRLX101 treated tumor cells in vitro, as well as in tumor
tissue from mice treated with CRLX101 in vivo. Using cell viability
assays, we can correlate the kinetics of camptothecin released inside
tumor cells to the degree of tumor cell kill. We believe that these data
are an important step forward in understanding the precise mechanism(s)
underlying selective delivery of CRLX101 into tumor tissue.

