Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing a robust NGS laboratory workflow and analysis
pipeline for FFPE specimen RNAseq to support biopharmaceutical
translational research


Pharmaceutical R&D translational programs rely on analyzing DNA and RNA
from patient specimens. High quality histopathology assessment is not
possible from fresh and frozen tissues which are also difficult to store
long term for follow up studies. FFPE preserves tissue architecture and
allows easy archival storage and extracting genomic information from FFPE
clinical trial samples is now commonly done, opening a variety of
research possibilities. NGS is becoming the preferred approach to FFPE
molecular profiling as it generates richer, more complete data than
previously possible with microarray technologies.Our translational
research objective was to quantify RNA isoforms for a number of genes
requiring that we control for NGS coverage and analysis pipeline biases
using embedded controls and comparing multiple calling algorithms. To
optimize RNAseq library construction performance using FFPE samples we
compared five commercially available rRNA depletion/mRNA selection
methods for reducing rRNA abundance: Ovation (Nugen), Ribo-Zero
(Epicentre), Ribo-Zero GOLD (Epicentre), RiboGone (Clonetech) and TruSeq
RNA Access (Illumina). We also evaluated DV200 as a performance metric
for predicting NGS library quality for FFPE samples using TruSeq
(Illumina) and SMARTer (Clonetech) library preparation methods. Finally,
we compared RecoverAll (Life Technologies) and Allprep (Qiagen) RNA
extraction method effects on NGS library quality. By performing the
experimental comparisons using two NGS service providers, we were able to
assess the impact of laboratory performance on NGS RNAseq results.
Ultimately, we were able to define an NGS workflow based on sample QC
assessment at multiple points in the process resulting in a highly
reliable RNAseq workflow for clinical NGS specimens.Among the rRNA
depletion methods, RiboGone and RNA Access outperformed alternative
options. RiboGone virtually eliminated rRNA contamination from FFPE
specimens with high reproducibility. RNA Access both eliminated rRNA and
provided a high fraction of coding RNA sequences relative to the
background of ncRNA allowing experimental designs with lower total read
numbers. Depending on experimental requirements, either method is
reliable; however, the two methods cannot be used interchangeably without
computational normalization. The two library preparation and RNA
extraction methods performed similarly in this experiment. DV200 was
found to be an good metric for evaluating the quality of FFPE RNA and
predicting success in generating RNAseq data.Our experience across NGS
vendors showed that to get optimal results, vendor performance must be
managed by using layers of controls with agreed on laboratory performance
metrics and explicitly setting NGS experimental parameters in advance of
performing the work.

