Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation mechanisms of Integrated Stress Response by inhibition
of oncogenic BRAF in melanoma cell lines


The eIF2-ATF4 signaling pathway termed Integrated stress response (ISR)
plays an important role in protecting cells against various cellular
stresses such as deprivation of glucose and amino acids, virus infection,
and deficiency of heme. Under such stress conditions, eIF2 kinases,
including PERK, GCN2, PKR and HRI, phosphorylate eIF2, resulting in
reduction of general protein synthesis while facilitating selective
translation of ATF4, a central transcription factor that upregulates
expression of stress-induced genes for cellular adaptation. Recently, it
was reported that BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib triggers activation of the
eIF2-ATF4 signaling in BRAF-mutant melanoma cell lines; however,
activation mechanisms of vemurafenib-induced ISR signaling not fully
understood.In this study, we first compared vemurafenib-induced ISR
activation in BRAF-mutant and -wild type melanoma cell lines. Consistent
with previous studies, vemurafenib activated ISR signaling preferentially
in BRAF-mutant cell lines, as determined by phosphorylation of eIF2 and
ATF4 expression. We also found that the ISR activation by vemurafenib was
impaired by knockdown of BRAF in BRAF-mutant cell lines. These results
indicated that existence of mutated BRAF is important for vemurafenib to
trigger activation of ISR signaling pathway. We next examined which eIF2
kinase is involved in the ISR signaling activation by vemurafenib. We
found that knockdown of GCN2, an eIF2 kinase sensing depletion of amino
acids, impaired phosphorylation of eIF2 and ATF4 induction by
vemurafenib. In addition, we confirmed that vemurafenib induced
phosphorylation of GCN2 on Thr899 that is known to occur in response to
amino acids starvation. In agreement with these results, gene expression
profiling with ontology analysis revealed that vemurafenib upregulated
genes that are involved in amino acids biosynthesis via ISR signaling.
Collectively, our results suggested that vemurafenib activated ISR
signaling pathway possibly through mimicking amino acid deprivation in
BRAF-mutant melanoma cell lines.

