Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MondoA mediates in vivo aggressiveness of common ALL and may serve
as a T-cell immunotherapy target


Oncogene addiction provides ideal targets for immunotherapy. We
previously described MondoA (also known as MLXIP, MAX like protein X
interacting protein) as a metabolic stress sensor, required for
leukemogenesis. Here we report on the expression of MondoA in common
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (cALL) compared to other malignancies, its
role in malignancy of cALL in vivo, downstream pathways and correlation
with relapse risk. Given the non-accessibility of transcription factors
by drugs or chimeric antigen receptor transgenic T cells (CARs), we
tested the targetability of MondoA by allo-restricted, peptide specific T
cells.Our human/murine xenotransplantation model with immunodeficient
RAG2-/-gc-/- mice was used (Richter et al. 2009). NALM6 and 697 cALL
lines were lentivirally transduced with MondoA short hairpin RNA (shRNA).
Upon successful MondoA knock down (KD), KD and control lines were
injected into the mice; CD10+ blasts in blood, spleen and marrow were
assessed. MondoA specific T cells were generated by priming of donor
HLAA0201 negative (A2-) T-cells with A2+ dendritic cells bearing MondoA
peptides, multimer-based sorting and subcloning of A2-CD8+ T-cells. For
priming of T cells, five MondoA peptides were chosen by SYMPEITHI, BIMAS
and NetCTL1.2. analyses. Peptide 428 stabilized best A2 expression on
TAP-deficient T2 cells. Specificity and functionality of T cell clones
were tested by ELISpot interferon gamma (IFg) and granzyme B assays with
six MondoA+ leukemia lines (A2+, A2-). Off target effects of MondoA
specific T-cell clones were assessed by IFg reactivity against the MondoA
expressing A2+ NALM6 cell line vs. A2+ and A2- EBV immortalized
lymphoblastoid cell lines from six donors. Peptide homology was assessed
with BLAST algorithms in SWISSPROT.We found MondoA to be most strongly
expressed in pediatric cALL and AML. Moreover MondoA expression was high
in gastrointestinal stromal tumors and alveolar rabdomyosarcoma. MondoA
KD in cALL cell lines and their subsequent analysis in xenograft mice
resulted in a reduced number of leukemic blasts in blood, marrow and
spleen. Spleen size and weight normalized in treated mice after MondoA
KD. Further microarray analysis revealed an induction of aerobic
glycolysis switch genes and hypoxia-response by MondoA. Consequently,
HIF1A stabilization required MondoA expression and tied to these results,
MondoA overexpression correlated with relapse risk; its expression was
63% higher in the very high-risk group as compared to the non-high-risk
group of cALL. Therapeutically, MondoA-derived peptide antigens and A2+
cALL lines were successfully recognized and killed by specific,
allo-restricted CD8+ T cells.In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that
MondoA maintains leukemic burden and aggressiveness of cALL in vivo
possibly by modulating metabolic and hypoxia stress response. Moreover,
we identified MondoA as a promising target for immunotherapy of cALL.

