Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MASH1 expression in high grade astrocytoma may demonstrate a
potential model for prognosis that may lead to a molecular target for
future therapy


Introduction:A large U.S. study showed that 25% of patients diagnosed
with grade 3 astrocytoma survived for 5 years or more after diagnosis.
Unfortunately, the outlook is even worse for patients diagnosed with GBM,
as most patients live for less than a year. Achaete-scute complex homolog
1 (ASCL1, MASH1) is a proneural transcription factor that has an
essential role in the formation of multiple neuronal lineages. Recent
studies have shown that the upregulation of MASH1 and inhibition of the
Notch signaling pathway characterize progressive astrocytoma. Proneural
proteins have been shown to regulate stem-cell proliferation and
differentiation. The convergence with oncogenic pathways combined with
the overexpression in glioblastoma has been shown to correlate with poor
clinical outcome and has identified these transcription factors as
promising therapeutic targets. Recently, a MASH1 mouse monoclonal
antibody has been developed. Most studies have shown MASH1 to be a
specific marker of neuroendocrine carcinomas; however, only one
immunohistochemical study on astrocytoma using a polyclonal antibody has
been reported. This study examined MASH1 expression in grade 1-4
astrocytoma cases.Materials and Methods:Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue microarrays consisting of samples of normal brain and astrocytomas
[grade 1 (n = 22), grade 2 (n = 34), grade 3 (n = 16) and glioblastoma (n
= 35)] were evaluated by immunohistochemical analysis using a monoclonal
MASH1 antibody. A value of >1% staining was scored as
positive.Results:MASH1 stained 61.7% (66/107) of astrocytomas (grades
1-4). In grade 1 astrocytoma, MASH1 was expressed in 31.8% versus 85.3%
in grade 2, 68.7% in grade 3 and 54.3% in grade 4 (p
0.0028).Conclusion:MASH1 is highly expressed in astrocytoma. There was a
variable and progressive increase of MASH1 expression in grade 1 versus
grade 2-4 astrocytoma; and thus, may demonstrate a potential model for
prognosis that may lead to future target therapeutic strategies.

