Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tandem profiling of 5-methyl and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in
glioblastoma identifies tumor-specific distribution of
5-hydroxymethylcytosine and associations with patient survival


Glioblastomas exhibit widespread molecular alterations including a highly
distorted epigenome. Genome-wide assessment of epigenetic alterations to
cytosines in glioblastoma has largely been limited to 5-methylcytosine
(5mC). 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is an additional cytosine
modification that is deregulated in cancer, though the extent and context
of these alterations at single cytosine resolution remain unclear.
Through parallel processing of DNA with bisulfite and oxidative bisulfite
treatments on Illumina 450K arrays we resolved both 5mC and 5hmC in 30
glioblastomas. We developed and applied a novel technique for estimating
5mC, 5hmC, and unmethylated proportions from array data to glioblastoma
tissues and compare with normal brain tissue. Genomic distribution of
5hmC was associated with features of transcription despite the
glioblastoma genome being relatively depleted of 5hmC. When integrating
5mC and 5hmC data using a Gaussian finite mixture model approach, we
observed significant associations between 5hmC levels and gene-sets
involved in immune and RNA regulatory processes while high 5mC classes
were associated with receptor-mediated processes and cancer gene-sets.
Significant differences in patient survival were observed among classes
of 5hmC obtained from a recursively partitioned mixture model. Gene
expression across epigenetic enzymes including methyltransferases and
TETs was also investigated for relation with patterns and levels of 5hmC
and 5mC. Analyses of elevated 5hmC with alternative splicing events that
may promote disease progression are underway. Together, our results
provide a genome-wide map of 5hmC in glioblastoma, indicate that
transcription patterns as well as disrupted processes are associated with
5hmC patterns, and highlight the potential clinical prognostic utility of
5hmC in cancer.

