Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRPFc, a CD47-blocking cancer immunotherapeutic, triggers
phagocytosis of lymphoma cells by both classically (M1) and alternatively
(M2) activated macrophages


Macrophages are characterized by their heterogeneity and plasticity in
response to the microenvironment. Although macrophages have the capacity
to phagocytose cancer cells that express pro-phagocytic signals, tumor
cells often evade macrophage-mediated destruction by increased cell
surface expression of CD47, which delivers an anti-phagocytic (do not
eat) signal by binding the inhibitory signal-regulatory protein (SIRP)
receptor on the surface of macrophages. We have previously shown that
soluble SIRP-Fc fusion protein (SIRPFc) neutralizes the suppressive
effects of CD47 and promotes macrophage-mediated phagocytosis of tumor
cells both in vitro and in vivo. In an attempt to recapitulate the
functional and phenotypic heterogeneity of tumor infiltrating
macrophages, we have examined the ability of SIRPFc to trigger
phagocytosis of lymphoma cells by six distinctly polarized macrophage
populations.We generated human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) and
polarized them into M0, M1, M2a, M2b and M2c subsets. These MDMs varied
greatly in their expression of myeloid surface markers including CD14,
CD11b, CD80, CD86, HLA-DR, CD206, CD200R and CD163; as well as in
expression of the Fc gamma receptors (FcRs) CD16, CD32 and CD64. Next,
the ability of SIRPFc to trigger MDM phagocytosis of lymphoma cells was
examined using a flow cytometry-based assay. Blockade of CD47 on the
tumor cells using SIRPFc dramatically increased phagocytosis of tumor
cells by all subsets, with M1 and M2c MDMs being superior at
phagocytosis. Moreover, we found that M0, M2a and M2b MDMs, which
exhibited slightly lower phagocytic capabilities, were remarkably plastic
in nature and could readily be re-polarized into highly phagocytic MDMs
using a variety of agents. This suggests that SIRPFc will be efficacious
in triggering the destruction of cancer cells by the diverse population
of MDMs found in vivo.To further understand what drives the phagocytic
capacity of polarized MDMs, we analyzed FcR expression and observed a
positive correlation between MDM expression of the high-affinity FcRI
(CD64) and phagocytic activity following SIRPFc treatment. Moreover,
re-polarization of M0, M2a and M2b MDMs resulted in upregulation of FcRs
and enhanced tumor cell phagocytosis. Finally, by individually blocking
CD16, CD32 and CD64 on MDMs prior to the phagocytosis assay, we found
that the low-affinity FcRs CD16 and CD32 also contribute to
SIRPFc-mediated phagocytosis of lymphoma cells.In conclusion, SIRPFc
triggered phagocytosis of lymphoma cells by a diverse panel of polarized
MDMs, which required MDM expression of FcRs. These data support the
evaluation of SIRPFc in cancer patients and a clinical study of SIRPFc in
patients with lymphoma and other hematological malignancies is currently
in progress.

