Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Normal versus tumor and subtype prediction in renal cell carcinoma
TCGA data sets


Background: In clinical practice it is a common challenge to correctly
classify disease against normal cases and to identify disease subtypes.
In complex diseases such as cancer where patterns are heterogeneous,
highly complex interaction of pathways are involved, and continuous
multi-level genomic changes occur, this is a challenging task. Using
genomics data, analyzed by un-supervised and supervised machine learning
tools, we demonstrate the ability to quantitatively and accurately
describe a patient's tumor.Design: We used Level III RNASeq gene
expression data from 20531 genes in 889 tumor samples of RCC across three
subtypes - clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC), papillary renal cell
carcinoma (PRCC), chromophobe carcinoma (ChRCC) and 129 normal samples
from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We developed a computational
framework for feature (gene/transcript) selection and subtype predictive
model construction. This framework relies on a well-known random forest
(RF) method with iterative feature selection and 10-fold
cross-validation. We performed a series of (1) tumor vs normal tissue
experiments for each subtype; (2) pairwise subtype comparison, and
finally (3) all three subtypes comparison and predictive genes
identification.Results: In each computational run our method detected
2054 (10%) top varying genes, and estimated the predictive power of each
of the selected genes using RF. On average this method demonstrated
93-97% accuracy. We identified genes known to play a role in renal cell
carcinoma for example, CA9, LOX, SFRP1, SLC4A1, CDKN2A, KISS1R, EGF and
others. In addition, our analysis uncovered genes that may represent
characteristic patterns for subtyping and differentiation from normal
renal tissue cells, for example TCF21, IRX1, STC2, UMOD, AQP2, ANGPTL4,
BSND and FABP7, genes not previously associated with renal cell
carcinoma.In three different experiments we differentiated each of the
three subtypes from normal tissue, and performed enrichment analysis for
the top most significant genes in each case. We observed that both CCRCC
and PRCC have genes involved in the glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis -
heparan sulfate (HS6ST2, HS6ST3) and riboflavin metabolism (ACPP)
pathways. Whereas ChRCC is more strongly associated with the
glycosphingolipid biosynthesis - lacto and neolacto series pathway
(B3GNT3, FUT6) and have five genes (B3GNT3, CYP2B6, CYP2J2, FUT6, UGT2A3)
involved in other metabolic pathways. Changes in glycosaminoglycan and
glycolipid were also previously reported for associations with
RCC.Conclusions: We demonstrate the effectiveness of a computational
framework and predictive power of gene expression data for tumor
subtyping in RCC. Our framework is generic and can be applied in
combination with other types of data such as different modalities of
genomic data (copy number variations, methylation) as well as clinical
data.

