Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Important role of FTO in the survival of rare panresistant
triple-negative inflammatory breast cancer cells under a severe metabolic
challenge


Cancer is an evolution-like process. Effectively dealing with the
currently untreatable component of breast cancer (the cells that drive
metastasis) is vital. In this regard, we have developed a model of
panresistant cancer cells that allows us to evaluate therapeutic agents
to eradicate them. We have previously shown that only 0.01% cells survive
a metabolic challenge involving lack of glutamine in culture medium of
SUM149 triple-negative Inflammatory Breast Cancer (TN-IBC) cell line.
These cells, designated as SUM149-MA for metabolic adaptability, are
resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs, and they efficiently metastasize to
multiple organs in nude mice. The MA cells can survive a variety of
challenges in the metastasis process because of their embryo-like nature.
We hypothesized that obesity-related molecular networks, which normally
help in cellular and organismal survival under metabolic challenges, may
help in the survival of MA cells. We found that fat mass and
obesity-associated protein FTO is overexpressed in MA cells. It was
reported recently that obesity-associated cis-acting elements in
non-coding region of FTO regulate the expression of IRX3 gene, thus
activating obesity networks. Here we found that IRX3 protein is
significantly overexpressed in MA cells (4 to 5-fold) as compared to the
parental SUM149 cell line, supporting our hypothesis. We utilized
MO-I-500, a pharmacological inhibitor of FTO to investigate its role in
MA cells. When included in a glutamine-starvation medium in 1.5 to 2 M
range, MO-I-500 significantly (>90%) inhibited survival and/or colony
formation of SUM149-MA cells as compared to untreated cells or those
treated with a control compound MO-I-100. Interestingly, MO-I-500
treatment had no significant effect on cell growth of either the SUM149
or SUM149-MA cell line when added to a complete medium containing
glutamine that does not pose a metabolic challenge. Furthermore,
SUM149-MA cells that were initially selected in a glutamine-free medium
were not affected by a subsequent treatment with MO-I-500, even in
glutamine-free medium. These results are significant as they reveal
linkages between tumor adaptability, the embryonic nature of cancer
cells, and obesity-like networks at the roots of therapy-resistant
TN-IBC. They also suggest a novel approach for evaluating potential
anticancer agents that would halt cancer evolution and prevent
development of resistance to currently offered therapies.Supported by a
State of Texas Grant for Rare and Aggressive Cancers.

