Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rab1A and Rab1B promote esophageal squamous cell carcinoma through
activating mTORC1 signaling and inhibiting autophagy


Background: Rab1A has recently been shown to act as an oncogene and
promote colorectal and liver tumorigenesis. In this study, we aim to
understand the potential role of Rab1A and its homolog Rab1B in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and the underlying molecular
mechanisms.Methods: The expressions of Rab1A and Rab1B in139 paired human
ESCC tissues and adjacent normal tissues were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. A series of in vitro and in vivo assays were
performed to elucidate the biological functions of Rab1A and Rab1B, and
their role in the regulation of mTOR signaling, autophagy and ESCC
tumorigenesis.Results: The level of Rab1A and Rab1B is elevated in ESCC
tissues, which is positively correlated with tumor TNM stages and N
stages. The overall expression of Rab1A and Rab1B is an independent
predictor of patient survival (PBackground: Rab1A has recently been shown
to act as an oncogene and promote colorectal and liver tumorigenesis. In
this study, we aim to understand the potential role of Rab1A and its
homolog Rab1B in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and the
underlying molecular mechanisms.Methods: The expressions of Rab1A and
Rab1B in139 paired human ESCC tissues and adjacent normal tissues were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry. A series of in vitro and in vivo
assays were performed to elucidate the biological functions of Rab1A and
Rab1B, and their role in the regulation of mTOR signaling, autophagy and
ESCC tumorigenesis.Results: The level of Rab1A and Rab1B is elevated in
ESCC tissues, which is positively correlated with tumor TNM stages and N
stages. The overall expression of Rab1A and Rab1B is an independent
predictor of patient survival (P<0.01). Down-regulation of Rab1A and
Rab1B individually and in combination in ESCC cells inhibits cell
proliferation and migration, and enhances autophagy. Mechanistically,
Rab1A and Rab1B activate mTORC1 to enhance growth and suppress
autophagy.Conclusion: Our results suggest that Rab1A and Rab1B
cooperatively regulate ESCC proliferation and autophagy by activating
mTORC1 signaling. They may serve as promising prognostic biomarkers
and/or potential molecular targets of ESCC treatments.

