Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Re-isolated metastatic pancreatic cancer cells show distinct
modulation of gene expression during liver colonization


Gastrointestinal cancers typically metastasize into the liver. By
re-isolation of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells from the
liver of rats harboring these cells in their liver we assessed gene
expression during various stages and investigated whether extracellular
matrix (ECM) genes play a role in metastatic pancreatic cancer cells. We
used ASML rat pancreatic cancer cells, which were inoculated into the
portal vein of isogenic BDX rats. These cells had been marked by eGFP,
which allowed their re-isolation following liver perfusion by FACS
sorting after early (1,3 days), intermediate (9 days), advanced (16
days), and terminal (21 days) stages of liver metastasis. Re-isolated
ASML cells were used for total RNA isolation and subsequently their gene
expression was investigated by Illumina chip array for mRNA and miRNA
species, followed by Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA).Pending on the time
span following re-isolation, 7-15% of all known genes and 10% of miRNA
species were modulated significantly in expression. By IPA analysis,
significant alterations in diseases, disorders and canonical pathways
were found. Interestingly, cancer was ranked second within the five top
diseases and disorders at early and terminal stages, and third at
intermediate and advanced stages. Within the cancer category, the gene
groups related to metastasis and advanced malignant tumor were most
significantly altered, but found decreased at early and advanced stages,
and increased at the terminal stage only. In addition, ECM genes were
modulated significantly. These genes included gene families as
chemokines, transforming growth factor -beta (TGF-), laminins, A
Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase (ADAM) peptidases, matrix
metallopeptidases (MMPs), collagens, and others. From all 59 chemokines
investigated, 18 and 11 mRNAs were significantly up- and down regulated.
Similarly, from 21 MMPs, 6 and 2 mRNAs were significantly up and down
modulated. Finally, from 39 collagens, 16 and 7 were significantly up and
down regulated in expression. Also, the respective miRNAs species were
modulated: In case of collagens, the miR-29b-3p species was significantly
down modulated (2-fold) in accord with the upregulation of respective
target collagens. Also, the miRNA species regulating chemokines were
altered as shown e.g. for CCR5, which was more than 10 fold increased at
mRNA level with the corresponding miR-125b-5p being ca. 2 fold
decreased.In conclusion, among the top five modulated diseases and
disorders,cancer ranked only at intermediate positions. In addition, the
expression profiles of ECM genes were altered significantly in metastatic
pancreatic cancer cells and thus hypothetically contributed to successful
colonization of the liver by these cells.

