Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting FGFR4 with monoclonal antibodies as therapeutic agents
for the treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma of
childhood with two major subtypes, embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS),
and current treatment modalities have yielded event free 5-year survival
in only 30% of the patients with high-risk disease. Therefore, there is a
need for novel strategies to identify and validate clinically relevant
targets and therapeutics for the treatment of RMS. The fibroblast growth
factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) is a very attractive therapeutic target
because: 1) the FGFR4 gene is over expressed in RMS, 2) it is directly
transcriptionally induced by the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion oncogene found in
ARMS, 3) it is crucial for survival, proliferation, metastasis and drug
resistance, 4) activating mutations in the kinase domain lead to
aggressive growth and poor survival in patients with ERMS and 5) genetic
or pharmacologic inhibition of FGFR4 signaling inhibited tumor growth in
vitro and in vivo. Most normal human tissues do not express FGFR4 protein
as determined by immunohistochemistry and electrochemiluminesence assay.
Based these, we hypothesize that monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) targeting
FGFR4 and their derivatives can serve as potential therapeutic agents for
the treatment of RMS.We have developed a total of 15 mAbs against human
FGFR4 protein from rabbit and mouse (by hybridoma technology), and from
human immunoglobulin libraries (by recombinant DNA technology). These
mAbs specifically react with human FGFR4 protein in an ELISA and not to
the other members of the FGFR family. Flow cytometer analysis
demonstrated that they specifically bound to cell surface FGFR4 protein
in RMS cell lines although the FGFR4 expression levels was variable in
both ARMS and ERMS cell lines. Furthermore, cell surface FGFR4 mediated
internalization of the bound antibody upon incubation at 37oC for as
little as 30 min and maximum internalization was observed at 2 h. Two of
the mouse mAbs tested were able to mediate specific cytotoxicity in
FGFR4-expressing cell lines in the presence of an anti-mouse secondary
antibody conjugated to cytotoxic drugs (2oADCs), e.g. monomethyl
auristatin F (MMAF) or a duocarmycin derivative (DMDM). Dose titration of
the anti-FGFR4 mAbs revealed maximum killing at 100 pM indicating their
robust activity in vitro, and both ARMS and ERMS cell lines were
susceptible to the mAb-mediated cytotoxicity. Ongoing investigations
include generation of FGFR4-targeting direct ADCs and evaluation of their
efficacy in vivo. Together, these observations support the contention
that anti-FGFR4 mAb can be used as a vehicle to deliver a cytotoxic
payload in the form of small molecule drugs and toxins. Thus, FGFR-ADCs
may serve as potential therapeutic agents for the treatment of patients
with RMS, as well other FGFR4-positive cancers including breast, liver,
prostate and lung.

