Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo efficacy of the PAK4 allosteric modulator KPT-9274 against
a triple-negative breast cancer model


The p21-activated kinases (PAK) belong to a family of serine threonine
kinases that promote cell survival and play an important role in cell
proliferation, cell cycle regulation and cell shape determination. There
are six mammalian PAK proteins which can be subdivided into two groups by
sequence homology and mode of activation- Group A PAKs consisting of PAK
1, 2 and 3 and Group B PAKs consisting of PAK 4, 5 and 6. We have found
that PAK4 protein levels are elevated in breast cancer, including Her2
positive and triple negative breast cancers, while it is expressed at low
levels in normal mammary tissue, making it an attractive drug target. PAK
inhibitors are being tested for effectiveness against solid tumors, but
generation of highly specific PAK4 inhibitors has been a challenge.
Furthermore, PAK4 has been reported to have kinase-independent functions.
Therefore inhibiting its kinase activity alone might not be sufficient in
blocking its tumorigenic potential. Our lab has previously reported the
effectiveness of PAK4 allosteric modulators (PAM; KPT-8752 and KPT-9274)
against multiple breast cancer cell lines. These novel PAK4 inhibitors
reduce steady state protein levels and were able to block cell growth,
cell migration and induce apoptosis in breast cancer cell lines, without
affecting the control cells. Here, we tested the efficacy of the orally
bioavailable PAM, KPT-9274 against tumors formed by the triple negative
breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231. Following six weeks of treatment
with orally administered KPT-9274 (150mg/kg bidx4), there was almost a
five-fold reduction in tumor volume and tumor weight in the treatment
group as compared to the control group. The treatment did not
significantly affect mice body weight. After six weeks of treatment, the
tumors were excised and analyzed for PAK4 levels. We observed a
significant decrease in PAK4 levels in excised tumors from the treatment
group as compared to those from the control group. PAK1 levels were
monitored to see any off-target effects, but their levels were unchanged.
Our results indicate that PAK4 plays a key functional role in triple
negative breast cancer and treatment with an orally administered KPT-9274
was capable of specifically binding and inhibiting PAK4, and consequently
reducing tumor growth. Future studies analyzing the effects of KPT-9274
in blocking PAK4 mediated functions that promote tumorigenesis are
ongoing. Additional studies of the effectiveness of KPT-9274 on mammary
fat pad tumors formed by MDA-MB-231 and the ER positive cell line, MCF7
are under investigation.

