Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TSLP regulates expression of Bcl2 family proteins in Ph-like ALL
with CRLF2 alterations


B cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is the most common
childhood malignancy. A subset of children with B-ALL are at high risk
for relapse and death. Gene expression profiles in these high-risk B-ALLs
is similar to that of Philadelphia chromosome positive ALL. Approximately
half of these Ph-like B-ALL are characterized by genetic alterations that
result in overexpression of CRLF2. CRLF2, together with the IL-7 receptor
chain, forms a receptor complex for the cytokine, TSLP. When TSLP binds,
the receptor initiates downstream JAK2/STAT5 and PI3/AKT/mTOR pathway
activation. The activating JAK mutations found in some CRLF2 B-ALL led to
speculation that TSLP stimulation is not a factor in this disease.
However, we find that TSLP increases phosphorylation of STAT5, AKT and S6
(downstream of mTOR) in CRLF2 B-ALL cells, including those with JAK
defects. Activation of these pathways has been associated with
oncogenesis and chemoresistance and their downstream targets include
members of the Bcl2 family. The Bcl2 family pro-survival molecule Bcl-XL
is a down stream target of STAT5 in Ph+ B-ALL. Mcl-1, another BCL2 family
pro-survival molecule is known to be upregulated by mTOR activation via
post-translational mechanisms in B cell lymphoma. We hypothesized that
TSLP-induced JAK2/STAT5 and PI3/AKT/mTOR pathway activation contribute to
chemoresistance in high risk CRLF2 B-ALL by upregulating the expression
of Bcl-XL and Mcl-1. To test this hypothesis we cultured human CRLF2
B-ALL cell lines (MUTZ5 and CALL4) with and without TSLP and evaluated
expression of the Bcl2 family pro-survival proteins, Bcl-XL, Mcl-1, and
Bcl2. We found that TSLP induced significant increases in Bcl-XL and
Mcl-1 proteins, but not Bcl2 in CRLF2 B-ALL cells. These cell lines have
activating Jak mutations and thus reflect the ability of TSLP to increase
expression of the Bcl2 family proteins in cases where activating JAK
mutations are present. Next we evaluated the effect of Mcl-1 inhibitor on
MUTZ5 and CALL4 cells. Preliminary data from these experiments show that
cell counts in cultures treated with Mcl-1 inhibitor are reduce by >90%
and this reduction is maintained in the presence of TSLP. These data
provide evidence that TSLP-induced CRLF2 signals increase expression of
Bcl2 pro-survival proteins, even in CRLF2 B-ALL cells with activating JAK
mutations. These data also suggest that Mcl-1 inhibitors could be an
effective treatment for this disease. Ongoing studies will evaluate the
effect of TSLP and Mcl-1 inhibitors in primary CRLF2 B-ALL samples.

