Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin D synthase is a potential novel therapeutic agent
for the treatment of gastric carcinomas expressing PPAR


Background & Aims: The antitumor activity of prostaglandin (PG) D2 has
been demonstrated against some types of cancer, including gastric cancer.
However, exogenous PGD2 is not useful from a clinical point of view
because it is rapidly metabolized in vivo. The aim of this study was to
clarify the antitumor efficacy of an alternative, PGD2 synthase (PGDS),
on gastric cancer cells. This is the first report showing that PG
synthase is a promising agent for the treatment of gastric carcinomas
that express peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR).Methods:
The effects of PGD2 and PGDS on the proliferation of gastric cancer were
examined in vivo and in vitro for five human gastric cancer cell lines.
The expression levels of PGD2 receptors and PPAR were evaluated by
RT-PCR. The effects of PGD2 and PGDS on the expression of c-myc and
cyclin D1 were examined by Western blotting in the presence or absence of
a PPAR antagonist.Results: PPAR was expressed in gastric cancer cell
lines, but PGD2 receptors were not. PGD2 and PGDS significantly decreased
the proliferation of gastric cancer cells that highly expressed PPAR.
PGDS increased the PGD2 production of gastric cancer cells. A PPAR
antagonist significantly suppressed the growth-inhibitory effects of PGD2
and PGDS. Expression of c-myc and cyclin D1 was significantly decreased
by PGD2; this inhibitory effect was suppressed by the PPAR antagonist.
Both PGD2 and PGDS significantly decreased subcutaneous tumor growth in
vivo. Tumor volume after PGDS treatment was significantly less than after
PGD2 treatment. PGD2 decreased the proliferation of gastric cancer cells
through PPAR signaling.Conclusion: PGDS and PGD2 decreased the
proliferation of gastric cancer via the PPAR pathway. PGDS is a promising
therapeutic agent for gastric cancer and PPAR might be a predictive
biomarker for PGDS treatment in gastric cancer.

