Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effect of AGM 130 (5-OH-5-nitro-Indirubin oxime), a
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor in colorectal cancer cells


The AGM 130 (5-OH-5-nitro-Indirubin oxime) compound is derived from
Indirubin, which is an ingredient of Danggui Longhui Wan and used in
traditional Chinese medicine. AGM 130 can inhibit the proliferation of a
variety cells by arresting the cell in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle,
it is a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor that has
anti-proliferative activity and apoptotic effects on cancer cells. AGM
130 has improved water solubility compared to Indirubin, however still
displays a low solubility in biologic fluids and a poor bioavailability.
This poor water solubility limits the clinical application of AGM 130 to
treat cancer. In this study, we decided to develop and evaluate a SNEDDS
(self-nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems) formulation containing
AGM130 for improving its solubility, dissolution rate, and
bioavailability.To check the anti-proliferative effect of the AGM 130
compound on colon cancer cell line, we performed the MTT assay with the
CT-26 cancer cell. We also performed cell cycle analysis, apoptotic
assays and western blotting. The CT-26 cell bearing mice were treated
intraperitoneally with AGM 130 loaded PPG-cRGD, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or
AGM 130 loaded PPG-cRGD combined with 5-FU. We measured tumor volume and
tumor progression of each groups.In vitro, AGM 130 showed significant
anti-proliferative activity in CT-26 cell (IC 50, 1.9 M). Cells treated
with AGM 130 showed G2/M cell cycle arrest and also induced apoptosis
compared to untreated cells. The western blotting analysis showed that
AGM 130 inhibited CKD1/cyclin B1 and also CKD2/cyclin E. The greatest
tumor regression (percentage tumor growth inhibition) was observed in the
group treated with AGM 130 loaded PPG-cRGD combined with 5-FU. When 5-FU
was administrated alone, the anti-tumor effect was inferior to the group
treated with AGM 130 loaded PPG-cRGD alone.These results suggest that
intraperitoneal administration of AGM 130 loaded PPG-cRGD inhibits tumor
progression in a mouse colon cancer. Thus, AGM 130, a cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors may provide a new therapeutic approach in the treatment
of colon cancer.

