Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of SEC24D decreases exosome release of the tumor
suppressor miR-605 in renal cell carcinoma


Background: MicroRNA 605 (miR-605) has been recently reported as a
putative tumor suppressor and its overexpression decreases tumor cell
proliferation, migration and clonogenicity. To date, the role of miR-605
in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has not been investigated. We recently
showed the decrease of circulating miR-605 in serum of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC) patients who responded to the treatment with the
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor vorinostat, and the VEGF blocker
bevacizumab. The current study was designed to investigate the expression
of miR-605 and understand the mechanism(s) responsible the extracellular
release of miR-605 using RCC cells. Methods: 786-0 cells were treated
with and without vorinostat for 24h and condition media were collected,
briefly centrifuged to settle the cells and debris, and processed to
isolate exosomes using the ExoQuick exosome isolation kit (Systems
Biology, CA). Purified exosomes and 786-0 cells were used to isolate RNA
and further prepared cDNA to utilize for quantitative RT-PCR analysis.
Expression of miR-605 in exosomes and cells was determined by
Quantitative RT-PCR using TaqMan MicroRNA Assays with miR-605 primers
obtained from Applied Biosystems, NY. To determine the role of secretory
protein 24 family member D (SEC24D), a catalytic component of coat
protein complex (COPII) involved in the secretory pathway, 786-0 cells
treated with vorinostat were used to determine SEC24D expression by
QRT-PCR and Western blot analysis. TCGA data was used to determine
correlation of SEC24D expression clear cell renal cell carcinoma patients
survival. Results: Vorinostat treatment resulted in a significant
decrease of miR-605 expression in exosomes and increase (100 fold) of
intracellular expression. Furthermore, the increased intracellular
miR-605 was associated with the inhibition of SEC24D mRNA and protein
expression in 786-0 cells treated with vorinostat. Cancer Genomic data
analysis of c-Bioportal from MSKCC of TCGA revealed the overall poor
survival of ccRCC patients with alteration of SEC24D. Conclusion: Taken
together, our preliminary data suggest that the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat
inhibits SEC24D and exosome mediated extracellular secretion of miR-605
in RCC cells. These results suggest that vorinostat treatment retained
intracellular miR-605 that target genes involved in cell survival and
proliferation in RCC. Further studies will evaluate circulating miR-605
as a predictive biomarker to determine the efficacy of vorinostat in
ongoing trials with RCC patients.

