Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel function of the RAI2 protein in genomic integrity of breast
cancer cells


We have recently identified the RAI2 protein as putative
metastasis-suppressor related to dedifferentiation, early occurring bone
metastasis formation, and survival of hormone dependent breast
carcinomas. Nevertheless, low RAI2 expression is also predictive for poor
patient outcome in hormone independent tumors and is furthermore
associated with mutation of p53 in primary breast tumors. Thus, besides
sustaining luminal differentiation, RAI2 might possess a general function
as tumor suppressor that is, as indicated by association with p53 status,
possibly related to maintenance of genomic stability.In order to
characterize its potential role in genomic integrity, we screened lysates
from RAI2 depleted MCF-7 and KPL-1 breast cancer cell lines with
phosphorylation-specific antibody arrays. Additionally, we analyzed
changes in expression of cell cycle related genes and proteins by qPCR
and Western Blot analysis. We also conducted cytogenetic assays to
investigate whether RAI2 depletion affects chromosomal stability and
mitotic progression. Finally, we evaluated a possible association of RAI2
expression with aneuploidy in published expression data sets from breast
cancer patients.As revealed by antibody array analysis, RAI2 depletion
causes activation of p53 protein in MCF-7 and KPL-1 breast cancer cells,
which was accompanied by a significant increase of senescent cells in the
corresponding cell populations. Furthermore RAI2 depletion causes
downregulation of several key factors of G2/M transition, like Aurora
kinases A and B as well as Cyclins A2, B1 and B2. Concomitantly, we found
in RAI2-depleted cell cultures reduction of mitotic index, increase of
unattached chromosomes in metaphase and lagging chromosomes and during
anaphase. This finding was further approved by an increase of numerical
aberrations in RAI2 knockdown cells. Finally, we could show an
association between low RAI2 expression and higher level of chromosomal
instability in primary tumors from breast cancer patients.In conclusion,
we found that loss of RAI2 function is associated with decreased mitotic
fidelity. Thus, besides sustaining differentiation in hormone dependent
breast tumor, RAI2 also acts as general tumor suppressor that maintains
genomic integrity.Reference: Werner S et al., Cancer Discovery. 2015
May;5(5):506-19

