Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel non-secosteroidal VDR agonist, VDRM2, inhibits prostate
tumor growth


The role of vitamin D signaling in prostate cancer is controversial. Some
studies find an inverse correlation between levels of vitamin D
metabolites and PCa risk, but others do not. The active metabolite
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D), a ligand for the vitamin D receptor
(VDR), inhibits the growth of PCa cells in vitro. 1,25D or less calcemic
analogs also inhibit growth in some pre-clinical models, but clinical
trials have been disappointing. A majority of prostate cancers contain a
genomic rearrangement that links the androgen and 1,25D regulated TMPRSS2
promoter to the coding region of an ETS transcription factor, typically
ERG, termed T/E. VCaP cells are the only commonly used cell line that
contains the T/E fusion. We have shown previously that VDR agonists
inhibit VCaP cell growth in vitro despite inducing T/E. However, EB1089,
a 1,25D analog, which inhibited growth of LNCaP xenografts, had no effect
on VCaP xenografts. VDR and ERG cooperate to hyper-induce the vitamin D
metabolizing enzyme, CYP24A1. Thus, T/E may limit VDR signaling through
inactivation of 1,25D. To counteract the induction of CYP24A1 in VCaP
cells, we tested a novel non-secosteroidal VDR agonist, VDRM2, developed
by Eli Lilly & Co. VDRM2 inhibits LNCaP and VCaP cell growth and is
resistant to metabolism. Using a subcutaneous VCaP xenograft model, we
saw a significant reduction in tumor volume and tumor mass in mice
treated with 3 ug/kg of VDRM2 compared to vehicle treated animals. We
have shown for the first time a VDR agonist inhibits growth of a T/E
expressing prostate cancer cell line in vivo and we achieved this effect
without causing hypercalcemia as indicated through serum calcium levels.
To gain a better understanding of the differences in biology of 1,25D and
VDRM2 as well as VDR actions in T/E and non-T/E expressing cells, we used
next generation sequencing (RNA-Seq). We compared gene expression in
proliferating LNCaP and VCaP cells treated with concentrations of 1,25D
and VDRM2 that resulted in similar levels of CYP24A1 gene induction. We
had previously found that downregulation of c-Myc was a key factor in VDR
mediated growth inhibition. As predicted, we observed significant
downregulation of genes enriched in both the Myc and E2F pathways
indicating our dataset recapitulates our current understanding of VDR
actions in prostate cancer. There was substantial overlap between the
1,25D and VDRM2 mediated genes in each cell line, but substantial
differences between the two cell lines, some of which is likely due to
induction of T/E and its downstream effects in VCaP cells. Our study
demonstrates a positive role for the use of VDR agonists in the treatment
of T/E containing prostate cancer.

