Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DFMO targets cancer stem cells in neuroblastoma


Background: Difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) has shown promise in recent
clinical trials as a therapeutic agent in treating neuroblastoma (NB).
High-risk NB patients have an approximately 50% relapse rate, after which
survival rate drops to lower than 10%. By targeting the cancer stem cells
(CSC) we could decrease relapse rate in high-risk patients and improve
long-term survival. DFMO is known to inhibit ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC) impeding key polyamine biosynthesis as well as the LIN28/Let7
pathway and disrupting the glycolytic metabolism pathways both of which
have been shown to be important in CSC models. We propose that DFMO may
be an effective treatment against neuroblastoma CSCs.Methods: BE(2)C and
SMS-KCNR NB cell lines were studied. Limiting dilution assays of
xenograft studies were performed. Untreated, 10-day 5mM DFMO-pretreated,
or 20-day 5mM DFMO-pretreated cells were injected into mice between
10-5000 cells/mouse and followed for tumor formation. Xenograft Be2C mice
were treated with either vehicle or 2%DFMO in drinking water and
harvested at 7-14 days for tumor analysis. Tumors and cell cultures of
untreated and DFMO-treated cells were analyzed by RT-qPCR, Western Blot
analysis, and GeneChip gene expression analysis measuring levels of ODC1,
LIN28B, mirLet7, MYCN, SLC2A4 (a glucose transporter), and CSC markers
such as CXCR4, POU5F1, NANOG, SOX2, and KLF4. Riboflavin induced
autofluorescence (AF) was used to identify CSC. This method detected
cells after a 24-hour bath in 30M riboflavin and excitement at 488nm in a
MoFlo cell sorter at the University of Michigan Flow Core, after which
cells are sorted into AF- and AF+ sub-populations for imaging,
neurosphere assays with or without DFMO, RT-qPCR and Western Blot
analysis. Knock-down of ODC1 is achieved by siRNA transfection via
Lipofectamine in cells and analyzed by RT-qPCR, Western Blot, and
neurosphere assays with or without DFMO.Results: Pretreatment with DFMO
in BE(2)C and SMS-KCNR cells in vitro and in vivo inhibits tumor
formation in neurosphere assays and in limiting dilution xenograft models
respectively. Tumors harvested from xenografts show a decrease in
expression of CSC biomarkers and neurosphere formation capability in
those treated with DFMO. AF+ cells showed an increase in stem cell marker
expression and increase neurosphere formation relative to AF- cells,
identifying them as cancer stem cells. In addition, AF+ cells are more
sensitive to DFMO treatment with a greater decrease in neurosphere
formation. Cells transfected with ODC siRNA or subjected to DFMO show a
reduction in CSC biomarker RNA and protein and a decrease in neurospheres
formation.Conclusion: These results suggest that DFMO targets the CSC
subpopulation in neuroblastoma, disrupting cell growth pathways and
inhibiting tumor formation. This concept is under further investigation
in a Phase II clinical trial to prevent relapse in high risk
neuroblastoma patients.

