Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progestin enrichment of the cancer stem cell-like pool provides
novel therapeutic targets for hormone-dependent human breast cancer


Clinical trials in post-menopausal women show that combined hormone
replacement therapy (HRT), containing both estrogen (E) and a progestin
(P) such as medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), is associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer compared with E alone (JNCI, 2000,
92:328). We previously showed that both natural and synthetic P
accelerate tumor development in vivo, a process that is blocked by
anti-progestins (Can Res 2007; 67:9929). Furthermore, P also increases
lymph node metastasis (Menopause 2010; 17:1040), leading us to
hypothesize that P-induced tumor growth and metastasis may be mediated by
an enrichment of the pool of cancer stem cell (CSC)-like cells. This
increases the proliferative and metastatic potential of already existing
tumors. CSCs are a small and highly tumorigenic cell population present
in most tumors, which have self-renewal properties. In tumors of the
breast, the CSC subpopulation has a phenotypic signature that is CD24
/low, CD44 high and aldehyde dehydrogenase-positive (ALDH+) (Cell Stem
Cell, 2007; 1:555). Using flow cytometry to measure CD44 density under a
variety of experimental conditions we sought to determine whether P
influences expression of CSC markers in P-responsive human breast tumors
that grow in vivo. Following exposure of T47-D cells for 24 h with
physiological levels (10 nM) of natural and synthetic P, CD44 protein
expression was increased considerably. Compared with controls, induction
of CD44 increased 10-fold in response to MPA (Control 5.9%, MPA 60.7%).
Alternative steroid hormones failed to induce CD44 in tumor cells. This
phenotypic shift was blocked by the anti-progestin RU-486, indicating
that the process is mediated via progesterone receptors (PR). Cells
treated with P formed mammospheres more easily than their non-treated
counterparts, and a subset of the cell population with induced CD44 high
also demonstrated high ALDH enzyme activity. RT-PCR analysis showed that
MPA specifically induced CD44v3 and CD44v6 transcripts. Importantly, a
variety of synthetic P similarly induced CD44 protein expression. Based
on our observations we contend that exposure of breast cancer cells to
synthetic P, such as MPA, may lead to an enrichment of the CSC-like pool,
supporting the development of P-accelerated tumors in vivo. These
findings also suggest that a novel means by which to combat P-dependent
tumor growth might be through blockade of CD44 functions in the pool of
stem cell-like cells. This could be achieved by immunotherapeutic means,
using tissue selective antiprogestins, or through a combination approach
involving both immunotherapy against CD44 and small molecule targeting of
PR.Supported in part by COR award from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, and by generous gifts from donors of Ellis Fischel Cancer
Center, University of Missouri.

