Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disclosing the Hippo signaling networks in castration-resistant
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer often evolves as a metastatic castration-resistant
disease, which is lethal. Despite recent advances, the molecular
mechanisms contributing to this lethal disease are largely unknown. Our
initial studies have indicated that the loss-of-function of the
STK4-encoded MST1 protein kinase, a key component of the Hippo tumor
suppressor pathway, may play a prominent role in the etiology of prostate
cancer progression. Here, we establish cytoplasmic-, membrane- or
nuclear-localized MST1 cell models to elucidate a possible mode of
actions by which MST1 control the disease progression. We show that
membrane or nuclear MST1 confers superior growth inhibitory effects on
castration-resistant prostate cancer cells ex vivo and in vivo in
comparison with cytoplasmic MST1, though they express the similar levels
of MST1 protein. Consistently, a number of differentially expressed genes
(2-fold with FDR 0.05) regulated by membrane or nuclear MST1 protein are
much greater than cytoplasmic MST1, as assessed by RNA-sequencing and
bioinformatics analysis. Functional annotation clustering reveals that
genes affected by cytoplasmic MST1 protein are mostly associated with
cell-cell interactions and membrane trafficking. However, expression of
genes altered by membrane or nuclear MST1 involves much broader cellular
biology that includes cell signaling, steroid biogenesis, lipid and
cholesterol metabolisms, and developmental processes. In addition,
Ingenuity Pathway analysis indicates that several genes effected by
ectopic MST1 protein the defined cell location interact with androgen
receptor pathway signaling, a critical regulator of prostate cancer
pathogenesis. The results of this study suggest that the Hippo pathway
signaling restricts prostate cancer progression by modulating the array
of signaling networks, indicating important therapeutic implications for
human disease.

