Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the histone deacetylase HDAC 8 in mediating BRAF/MEK
inhibitor metastatic dissemination and resistance


BRAF/MEK inhibitor resistance frequently results in increased
phosphorylation of EphA2 at S897, which increases the invasive potential
of melanoma cells in a ligand-independent manner. Through use of an
unbiased phosphoproteomic screen, we identified HDAC phosphorylation as
also being increased following the acquisition of BRAF/MEK inhibitor
resistance. Treatment with the pan-HDAC inhibitor LBH 589 inhibited EphA2
phosphorylation at S897 and reduced tumor invasion, indicating a role for
HDACs in the regulation of the resistance-associated metastatic
phenotype. A comparison of HDAC protein levels in matched BRAF inhibitor
sensitive/resistant cell lines showed that HDAC6, HDAC8, and HDAC11
protein levels were more highly expressed in BRAF resistant cell lines
with HDAC8 being upregulated in 5 of 6 cell line pairs. shRNA knockdown
of HDAC8 in the BRAF/MEK inhibitor resistant cell line WM164RR resulted
in a decreased in pEphA2 as well as a decrease in pAKT at S473, which is
known to directly bind to and phosphorylate EphA2 at S897. Reduced
expression of HDAC8 in WM164RR cells resulted in a decrease in the
invasive potential of the resistant phenotype as well as a
resensitization of these cells to the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib. HDAC8
overexpression in drug nave cells led to increased melanoma cell invasion
in a 3D spheroid and a matrigel invasion model. Overexpression of HDAC8
was also found to decrease the level of apoptosis following BRAF
inhibitor treatment and was associated with increased number of clones in
a colony formation assay. Conversely, knocking down HDAC8 with shRNA led
to an increase in vemurafenib-mediated apoptosis. Mechanistically, it was
found that HDAC8 overexpression increased the speed of adaptive MAPK
signaling following BRAF inhibition and that this in turn limited the
expression of pro-apoptotic BIM. Overall, these results indicate a dual
role for HDAC8 in mediating BRAF/MEK inhibitor resistance and metastatic
dissemination. Increased levels of HDAC8 caused an increase in invasion
as well as a decrease in vemurafenib-induced apoptosis in BRAF inhibitor
sensitive cell lines. Our studies suggest that selective HDAC8 inhibition
may be one strategy to limit adaptation to both BRAF and BRAF/MEK
inhibitor therapy.

