Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of ARN509 and docetaxel, alone or in combination, to
castration demonstrates improved efficacy and heterogeneity of molecular
response in prostate cancer patient-derived xenografts


Results from clinical and preclinical investigations suggest potential
survival benefits from more aggressive early treatment of some patients.
Our objective was to evaluate in vivo the efficacy of adding docetaxel
(DOC) or ARN509, alone or in combination, to primary androgen ablation
and to investigate the associated molecular response and resistance.We
used hormone-sensitive LuCaP patient-derived prostate cancer xenografts
(PDXs) models 35, 77, and 147 that all express AR but differ
significantly in responses to castration (CX) and exhibit diverse
molecular characteristics. Tumors were grown in intact mice and when
established, mice were randomized for CX alone or CX with DOC or ARN-509,
or their combination. Tumor volume (TV), and serum PSA responses were
monitored. Tumors were harvested 5 days post-treatment (d5) and at end of
study (EOS) for analyses.Our results show differential efficacy of the
treatments, mimicking the heterogeneity of clinical response. LuCaP 77
progression was inhibited by CX and the additional treatments (TXs)
further inhibited TV, with the most decreased TV and PSA detected in the
combination group. When compared to CX, CX combined with ARN509
demonstrated the most significantly improved survival benefit (10w vs
16.5w median survival; HR = 0.2, pResults from clinical and preclinical
investigations suggest potential survival benefits from more aggressive
early treatment of some patients. Our objective was to evaluate in vivo
the efficacy of adding docetaxel (DOC) or ARN509, alone or in
combination, to primary androgen ablation and to investigate the
associated molecular response and resistance.We used hormone-sensitive
LuCaP patient-derived prostate cancer xenografts (PDXs) models 35, 77,
and 147 that all express AR but differ significantly in responses to
castration (CX) and exhibit diverse molecular characteristics. Tumors
were grown in intact mice and when established, mice were randomized for
CX alone or CX with DOC or ARN-509, or their combination. Tumor volume
(TV), and serum PSA responses were monitored. Tumors were harvested 5
days post-treatment (d5) and at end of study (EOS) for analyses.Our
results show differential efficacy of the treatments, mimicking the
heterogeneity of clinical response. LuCaP 77 progression was inhibited by
CX and the additional treatments (TXs) further inhibited TV, with the
most decreased TV and PSA detected in the combination group. When
compared to CX, CX combined with ARN509 demonstrated the most
significantly improved survival benefit (10w vs 16.5w median survival; HR
= 0.2, p<0.001), while CX combined with DOC resulted in a smaller
survival benefit (10w vs 12.5w, median survival HR = 0.5 p = 0.036). The
combination TX did not result in improved survival due to negative health
side effects that resulted in early sacrifice. LuCaP 147 exhibited
similar responses to CX as LuCaP 77 but only small additional inhibition
of TV with the combination TXs and no significant survival improvements
over CX alone. LuCaP 35 was the most responsive to CX and the additional
treatments did not enhance the TV inhibition, decreases in serum PSA or
survival.Preliminary IHC analyses of the early response (d5 tumors) did
not show significant decrease in AR or GR in any of the PDXs but decrease
in PSA indicated the efficacy of androgen suppression. Decreased
proliferation (Ki67) was detected in LuCaP 77 and LuCaP 147 after CX and
more pronounced decreases in the combination vs CX groups in LuCaP 77 and
ARN509 and the combination vs CX in LuCaP 147 with no difference detected
in LuCaP 35. Analyses of early gene expression responses at d5 by qPCR
revealed changes specifically associated with single and combination
treatment with ARN509 in LuCaP 77 for both AR-regulated genes (FKBP5,
PCNA, and AKR1C3) and proliferation-associated genes (UBE2C3 and NUSAP1).
Further analyses of the responses and alteration of genes and proteins
associated with AR signaling, proliferation and drug resistance at d5 and
EOS are ongoing.

