Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel radiation-induced targeted immunotherapy
strategy through oligonucleotide aptamer conjugation


Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) produce dramatic anti-tumor responses in
multiple solid tumors. Unfortunately, systemic administration can result
in end organ retention and dose-limiting toxicities. Radiotherapy (RT) is
a standard-of-care treatment modality that induces direct tumor cell kill
through DNA damage. While studies assessing the synergy of RT-induced
tumor cell kill with mAbs are ongoing, an additional unexploited effect
of RT is the induction of stress response products in the tumor
microenvironment, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Oligonucleotide aptamers are short pieces of nucleic acid that exhibit
little to no immunogenicity compared to mAbs, making them ideal delivery
vehicles for therapeutic mAbs. The purpose of this study was to assess
the feasibility of a novel strategy for targeted tumor delivery of
existing immunotherapeutic mAbs through conjugation to ligands that bind
to radiation induced products.An antibody recognizing the costimulatory
molecule 41BB was covalently modified with a 21-mer ssDNA oligonucleotide
linker sequence that serves as an anchor site for the VEGF aptamer
synthesized with a 3 extension. Annealing of complementary strands formed
a 41BB mAb-VEGF aptamer conjugate. First, VEGF aptamer conjugation to
modified 41BB mAb was verified by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
analysis which revealed the expected size shift of the 41BB mAb-VEGF
aptamer conjugate versus the unannealed controls. Conjugation was then
verified using flow cytometry. Recombinant mouse 41BB-Fc was immobilized
on Protein A Dynabeads and 41BB mAb conjugated with 5 biotinylated VEGF
aptamer. 41BB mAb-VEGF aptamer conjugate retention on Dynabeads was
confirmed by using streptavidin-PE 5 biotin of aptamer attached to mAb in
conjugate binding epitope target.Functionality of 41BB mAb-VEGF aptamer
conjugate was confirmed in vitro using a CD8+ T cell costimulation assay.
CD8+ T cells were isolated from 8 week old female C57BL6/J splenocytes,
and exposed to sub-optimal levels of CD3 mAb. 41BB mAb-VEGF aptamer
conjugate, unconjugated 41BB mAb and isotype control were added to
activated cells. Elevated levels of interferon gamma were observed and
equivalent in conjugated and unconjugated 41BB mAbs. These results
indicate that conjugation of 41BB mAb-VEGF aptamer is feasible and that
conjugation does not affect 41BB mAb functionality. Use of this novel
targeting approach to improve the therapeutic index of immunotherapeutic
mAbs requires validation in murine tumor models.

