Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accelerating prediction of tumor vulnerabilities using
next-generation cancer models


The mapping of cancer genomes is rapidly approaching completion. The
genomic information encoded by individual patients tumors should, in
principle, provide a guide for predicting dependencies, but our ability
to do so is suboptimal. The challenge stems from the absence of clinical
data relating genotypes with dependencies since most cancer mutations are
rare and our arsenal of cancer drugs is incomplete. If it was possible to
build a preclinical cancer dependency map at a scale that captured the
genomic diversity of cancer (for instance, models of all genotypes tested
for genetic and small-molecule dependencies), it should be feasible to
improve dependency predictions. New technologies (e.g. CRISPR/Cas9
libraries) make such an effort now feasible. However, we lack a
sufficient diversity of cancer models derived directly from patient
samples to reflect the genetic diversity of cancer and the ability to
systematically create functional data for each cancer patient to expand
the map.In an attempt to overcome these obstacles, we have established an
industry-scale pipeline to generate new cancer models directly from
patient samples, a Cancer Cell Line Factory. We have processed over 620
samples from 400 patients across 16 cancer types through this pipeline
with a 25% success rate overall. To optimize conditions for each tumor
type, we have systematically compared published cell line generation
methods with standard approaches and captured all information with a data
management system that will enhance the ability to predict optimal ex
vivo propagation conditions for future samples. In all, we report the
successful derivation of over 100 new genomically confirmed cancer and
normal cell lines, including a series of unique pediatric cancer models
derived from rare tumors.We hypothesized that novel patient-derived
cultures could be used to enhance dependency predictions. To test this
hypothesis, we tested dependencies of 65 of these novel cultures against
an identical set of 440 small molecules that were previously tested
against 860 existing cancer cell lines. Our results suggest that
dependency data generated with novel cell cultures is potentially
backwards-compatible with existing small molecule dependency datasets.
Finally, we demonstrate proof-of-concept that such new models can
successfully used in CRISPR-Cas9 screens and integrate results with small
molecule sensitivities to uncover CDK4 and XPO1 dependencies in a rare
pediatric undifferentiated sarcoma. In aggregate, these proof-of-concept
studies demarcate a path by which pre-clinical dependency maps may
enhance clinical dependency predictions from genomic data alone.

