Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased expression of ABCB1/MDR1 could be associated with
alectinib resistance in ALK-rearranged lung cancer cells


Alectinib, a second-generation anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
inhibitor, has shown promising activity in ALK-rearranged non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). The mechanisms of drug resistance to alectinib have
been still unclear. To explore whether overexpression of ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporters might provide a potential mechanism of
alectinib resistance in lung cancer, we established alectinib-resistant
cell lines from NCI-H2228 and primary ALK-rearranged cells and evaluated
the expression of ABC transporters.We established ALK-rearranged NSCLC
cell lines (KTOR 1, 2, and 3) from tumor cells in pleural effusion
obtained from 3 patients with alectinib nave ALK-rearranged NSCLC. In the
2 of 3 patients, tumor cells in pleural effusion were also obtained when
disease progression was observed during alectinib treatment (KTOR1-RE and
KTOR2-RE). Expression profiling of ABC transporters using quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) revealed that the
expression of ABCB1 was significantly increased in KTOR1-RE and KTOR2-RE
compared with the parental cells (4.6 and 10.8 folds), but not other ABC
transporters. Then, alectinib-resistant NCI-H2228 cell lines (H2228-AR)
were established by exposing the parental cells to stepwise-increasing
alectinib up to 5M for 10 months. We found that the ABCB1/MDR1 expression
in H2228-AR cells were significantly increased (2.09-16.6 folds) compared
with the parental cells using qRT-PCR and immunoblotting. Then, we
examined the alternation of alectinib cytotoxicity by inhibition of
ABCB1. Knockdown of ABCB1 expression using small interfering RNA and
inhibition of ABCB1 by verapamil enhanced alectinib cytotoxicity in
H2228-AR cells. Next, the levels of ABCB1 expression after short-term
alectinib exposure were examined in NCI-H2228 and the three alectinib
nave ALK-rearranged NSCLC primary cell lines (KTOR 1, 2, and 3). In all
the four ALK-rearranged cell lines, exposure to 100 nM alectinib for 72
hours induced increased expression of ABCB1 compared with control
medium.These data suggested that increased expression of ABCB1/MDR1 might
be, in part, responsible acquired resistance and sensitivity to alectinib
in ALK-rearranged NSCLC cells.

