Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxicity with hydroxamic acid HDACis in combination with
antimetabolites is highly sequence dependent in solid tumor cells


Used alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutics, the
antimetabolites 2, 2-difluoro-2-deoxycytidine (gemcitabine, dFdCyd), and
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)/fluorodeoxyuridine (FdUrd) comprise the mainstay of
treatment for gastrointestinal malignancies, such as pancreatic and
colorectal cancer. Gemcitabine with cisplatin is also first-line therapy
for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). While these treatments can
prolong survival, many patients still relapse and there is need for
improvement to current therapies. Cytotoxicity elicited by dFdCyd and
5-FU/FdUrd is influenced by drug metabolism/activation, DNA repair
proteins, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACi) target histone deacetylases, which regulate gene
expression through deacetylation of lysine residues on histones and some
non-histone proteins. HDACis have been shown to increase expression of
p21 and increase apoptosis which could enhance cytotoxicity with
antimetabolites. The success of HDACis, including vorinostat and
panobinostat, in the treatment of hematologic malignancies has encouraged
their use in solid tumors. However, results from clinical trials in
patients treated with HDACis alone or with other drugs, including
antimetabolites have been mixed and the mechanism(s) underlying
successful therapy with HDACis is largely unknown. In the present
studies, we used solid tumor cell lines that represent tumors commonly
treated with antimetabolites; A549 (NSCLC) and PANC1 (pancreatic cancer)
cells, and HT29 (colon cancer) cells to investigate the effect of an
HDACi with either dFdCyd or FdUrd, respectively, and we measured
clonogenic survival. The data demonstrate that cytotoxicity with an HDACi
and an antimetabolite is highly sequence dependent; vorinostat added
concurrently with dFdCyd or FdUrd or prior to either antimetabolite
resulted in antagonistic cytotoxicity, whereas the addition of the
antimetabolite followed by HDACi was additive/synergistic with dFdCyd.
Cytotoxicity with panobinostat and antimetabolites was also sequence
dependent. Cell cycle distribution studies revealed the accumulation of
cells in G1 and G2/M following HDACi addition (90% of cells), thus
rendering S-phase specific dFdCyd less cytotoxic upon its subsequent
addition. Similarly, concurrent addition of HDACi and dFdCyd produced
less S-phase accumulation than observed with dFdCyd alone. These data
demonstrate that administration of the HDACis and antimetabolites must be
sequenced appropriately so that cell cycle effects complement rather than
antagonize drug mechanisms.

