Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation of WDR77-mediated interaction between androgen receptor
and p53 uncovers novel treatment strategy for prostate cancer


The 30,000 prostate cancer (CaP) deaths in the United States annually are
due to failure of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). ADT prevents
ligand-activation of androgen receptor (AR), which is the main target for
treatment of non-organ-confined CaP. ADT fails while CaP remains
dependent on AR. Recent NextGen sequencing approaches on ADT-recurrent
CaP specimens have confirmed AR amplification, and emergence of
gain-of-function AR mutations and forms of AR that do not require
ligand-activation. The same sequencing studies also identified a striking
enrichment in gain-of-function p53 mutations during ADT. AR and p53 have
been recognized as the 2 major genomic drivers of lethal CaP progression,
do not interact directly and are not targeted efficiently for therapy in
ADT-recurrent CaP. Recently, using a customized gene expression
oligoarray, we defined the contribution of 18 clinically relevant
coregulators to androgen regulation of 452 AR target genes. Coregulator
contribution to AR action was highly gene-specific and context-dependent.
Selectivity in dependence of AR target genes on individual coregulators
was reflected in the composition of associated AR binding sites, as well
as in CaP cell biology and clinical CaP progression that was controlled
by these AR target genes. The existence of diverse
AR-coregulator-transcription factor (TF) transcriptional codes was
evidenced by WDR77-dependent interaction between AR and p53. In this
novel AR-, p53- and WDR77-dependent transcriptional mechanism, the
coregulator WDR77 physically and functionally bridged the action of AR
and p53. WDR77 controlled selectively androgen regulation of 96 AR target
genes that are associated with aggressive CaP and that mediate cell
death, DNA replication, recombination and repair. Using Cistrome project
tools, binding motifs for p53 were found close to AR binding sites in
WDR77-dependent AR target genes, and ChIP validated androgen-dependent
recruitment of p53 and WDR77 to those genomic regions. Genome-wide gene
expression profiling confirmed significant overlap (n = 262) in p53- and
WDR77-dependent androgen-responsive genes in CaP cells.
Co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian-2-hybrid assays demonstrated p53 and
WDR77 interaction, and delineated the p53-WDR77 interacting domains. In
conclusion, WDR77-dependent interaction between AR and p53 provides the
rationale for a novel CaP treatment strategy, namely disruption of
functional interaction(s) between AR and TFs, such as p53, that control
the CaP biology responsible for lethal disease progression.

