Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-scale genetic knockout screen identifies modifiers of EGFR
dependence in non-small cell lung cancer cells


Non-small cell lung cancers with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
gene mutations can exhibit a strong dependence on its signaling for
growth and survival. They are also sensitive to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), which provide superior clinical benefits to
conventional chemotherapy. However, despite initial response, most
patients experience relapse with resistant tumors within a year. This
study aims to identify modifiers of dependence on mutant EGFR signaling
and the mechanisms by which they do so in order to improve therapeutic
strategies and outcomes.We first performed a genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9
genetic knockout screen. In this system, gene silencing occurs by
site-specific double-strand-breaks induced by the Cas9 nuclease that is
localized to its target by a single-guide RNA (sgRNA). The error-prone
repair pathway introduces insertion/deletion mutations leading to
frameshifts or premature stop codons. We constructed a pooled sgRNA
library targeting more than 18,000 protein-coding human genes with
multiple sgRNA vectors. The cell line HCC827 was used in our screen as it
is EGFR-mutant and sensitive to EGFR TKIs. We transduced HCC827 lung
cancer cells with the pooled sgRNA library and cultured them in the
presence of Erlotinib, an EGFR TKI, or DMSO control for 17 days. At the
end of the treatment period we identified sgRNAs that were enriched in
Erlotinib-treated groups over control groups, indicating genes whose
loss-of-function confer TKI resistance. We applied the RNAi gene
enrichment ranking (RIGER) algorithm to identify gene hits with
enrichment of multiple sgRNAs.Top-ranked candidates include previously
confirmed genes PTEN, NF1, NF2, TSC1, and TSC2, validating this system as
a means to identify modifiers of EGFR dependence in HCC827 cells. A novel
candidate gene is the E3 ubiquitin ligase HUWE1. We showed that
suppression of HUWE1 by sgRNAs or inducible short hairpin RNA (shRNA) in
HCC827 cells re-activated AKT and ERK1/2 signaling pathways and increased
cell proliferation and survival in response to EGFR inhibition. These
findings were confirmed in vivo by implanting mouse xenografts of HCC827
cells expressing shHUWE1 and monitoring tumor development in response to
EGFR-TKI therapy. Tumors expressing HUWE1 led to durable tumor regression
throughout the treatment period but tumors with suppressed HUWE1
continued to grow into large tumors. Immunohistochemistry analysis of
excised tumors also revealed increased AKT and ERK1/2 signaling as well
as increased proliferation and decreased apoptosis.We have shown that
dependence on EGFR signaling can be decreased in EGFR-mutant lung cancer
cells through mechanisms that involve the activation of AKT and ERK1/2
signaling pathways. Ongoing studies involve identifying HUWE1
substrates/interactions that participate in tumor cell response to EGFR
inhibitors, revealing a novel mechanism of resistance to EGFR-targeted
therapy.

