Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) promotes metastatic
phenotype in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) is a transmembrane glycoprotein
that is overexpressed and highly tyrosine phosphorylated in multiple
cancer types including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), a highly
lethal disease. CDCP1 has been implicated in the promotion of metastases,
namely cancer cell migration, invasion, and resistance to anoikis. In
addition, prior studies in other cancer cell lines have shown that
hypoxia inducible factors (HIF-1 and HIF-2), which are key regulators of
metastasis, induce both expression of CDCP1 and phosphorylation at
tyrosine 734. The role of CDCP1 and the mechanisms that regulate CDCP1
still need further elucidation in PDAC.In this study, we demonstrated
that CDCP1 is highly expressed and tyrosine phosphorylated in PDAC cell
lines MiaPaCa2, PaTu89902, and Panc-1 cell lines compared to the
non-tumorigenic pancreatic ductal cell line HPNE. shRNA knockdown of
CDCP1 showed a reduction in the phosphorylation of Src and PKC-delta. To
determine whether HIF regulates CDCP1 in PDAC, we used PDAC cell lines
that stably express shRNAs targeting HIF-1 and HIF-2. Hypoxia induced an
increase in CDCP1 expression in a HIF-1-dependent fashion. Additionally,
CDCP1 knockdown in PaTu8902, a highly metastatic PDAC line, impaired
cancer cell invasion by transwell invasion assay but did not show
resistance to anoikis by soft agar assay. To validate our data in vivo,
we performed intra-pancreatic injection of shCDCP1 PaTu8902 cells and
scramble control transfected with GFP/luciferase into nude mice. Live
imaging demonstrated that 2 weeks after initial injection resulted in
decreased tumor establishment in mice injected with the shCDCP1 cell line
compared to control. We propose that CDCP1 expression and tyrosine
phosphorylation in PDAC is mediated by hypoxia inducible factors and that
CDCP1 confers invasive properties in vitro and may play a role in initial
tumor establishment in vivo. Based on these results, CDCP1 is a promising
novel target for PDAC.

