Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Reg proteins in human pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and acinar-to-ductal metaplasia


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most aggressive
cancer types, with a 5-year survival rate Pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most aggressive cancer types, with a
5-year survival rate <5%. Tumor specific biomarkers that can aid in early
detection and treatment monitoring are urgently needed in order to
improve the outcomes. Human Reg family proteins (Reg1A, Reg1B, Reg3A,
Reg3G and Reg4) are a group of calcium-dependent (C-type) lectins that
promote cell growth and respond to inflammatory stimulants. We examined
their associations with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). In
patients with PDAC, the serum levels of Reg1A and 1B were significantly
elevated (p = 0.0003 and 0.0018), which correlated with TNM stages of the
patients. By using immunohistochemistry (IHC), the expression of Reg1A,
Reg1B and Reg4 was observed in the malignant glandular epithelium of
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) and invasive PDAC. The
intensity of Reg1A and Reg1B staining positively correlated with the
histological grades of PanIN. The serum levels and tissue expression of
Reg1A and Reg1B were negatively correlated with the differentiation
grades of invasive PDAC. Additionally, patchy expression of Reg1A
andReg3A/G was also observed in areas with acinar-to-ductal metaplasia
(ADM) adjacent to cancer cells. Our data suggests that the changes in Reg
proteins were closely associated with the carcinogenesis of PDAC. Reg1A
and 1B proteins showed specificity for pancreatic ductal differentiation
and could be used as clinical markers for early detection of PDAC,
monitoring therapeutic response and predicting tumor recurrence after
therapy and tumor metastasis. The expression of Reg family proteins in
both ADM and PanIN cells supports the notion that ADM could be an
alternative mechanism of PDAC carcinogenesis.

