Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glypican-3 (GPC3) induces a mesenchymal-epithelial transition in
human breast cancer cells lines


Glypicans constitute a family of heparan sulphate proteoglycans which are
linked to the extracellular surface of the plasma membrane through a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor. Since GPC3 has been linked to
cancer, herein we generated and characterized a pre-clinical human breast
cancer cell model to evaluate the role of GPC3 in human mammary tumor
progression. GPC3 expression was blocked in MCF-7 cells
(poorly-metastatic, GPC3 +) by siRNA (generating MCF-7-shGPC3 sublines),
while it was overexpressed in MDA-MB231cells (metastatic, GPC3 -) by
viral infection (producing MDA-MB231-GPC3 sublines).We performed in vitro
and in vivo characterization of this model. GPC3 silenced MCF-7 cells
acquired F-actin stress fibers, enhanced their clonogenic ability (Colony
number 130 -shGPC3 vs. 37 -sh Negative Control (NC)) as well as their
migration (Wound coverage (%): 15 -shGPC3 vs. 2 -shNC), were less
susceptible to cell death induction (Cell death (%): 21.6 -shGPC3 vs. 34
-shNC), diminished the expression of the epithelial marker E-Cadherin
while acquired the mesenchymal marker N-Cadherin, and were more invasive
and metastatic in vivo. These cells exhibited an upregulation of the
EMT-transcription factor ZEB1, and the canonical Wnt/beta-Catenin
signaling pathway was activated.GPC3 overexpressing MDA-MB231 cells
misplaced their fibroblast-like appearance as well as their F-actin
stress fibers, repressed their clonogenicity (Colony number: 8 -GPC3 vs.
40 -vector) and migratory capacity (Wound coverage (%): 10 -GPC3 vs. 90
-vector), were more sensitive to death in starving condition (Cell death
(%) 30 -GPC3 vs. 6.5 -vector), got the ability to form E-Cadherin
dependent-spheroids, reexpressed E-Cadherin in cell-cell junctions and
downregulated the mesenchymal markers N-Cadherin and vimentin, while were
less invasive and metastatic in vivo. The expression of the E-Cadherin
repressor ZEB1 was diminished, as well as the activity of the canonical
Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling pathway. However, when canonical Wnt signaling
was activated by LiCl, the expression of E-Cadherin did not change.In
summary, we present in vitro and in vivo experimental evidence supporting
the hypothesis that GPC3 has a protective role of human breast cancer
progression by inducing mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET). The
canonical Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling inhibition would not be required for
MET process induced by GPC3.

