Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CD44v9+ colorectal cancer stem cells in the resistance
to cetuximab treatment


Recent studies found that conventional therapy combined with cetuximab
treatment (EGFR inhibitor) to treat metastatic colorectal cancer, had no
improvement of patient survival rate in some population. One of
possibilities might be cancer stem cells (CSCs) population resist to
cetuximab treatment and modulate metastasis, however, the detail
mechanism has not been addressed in colorectal cancer. Thus, our study is
to decipher the mechanism of resistance to cetuximab in CD44v9+ specific
colorectal cancer stem cells. First, to reveal clinical significance of
CD44v9, the tumor samples of colorectal cancer patients were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry to evaluate CD44v9 expression status in patients. To
further investigate the biological mechanism, single cell analysis in
CD44v9+ population of HT29 cells was performed with Fluidigm Biomark HD
system. The results showed that 67% patients had highly expressed CD44v9
with lower survival rate. In vitro studies showed that when HT29 cells
were in 5uM cetuximab treatment for 48 hours, CD44v9, Oct4, CD133, CD24,
Lgr5, CSCs markers, were up-regulated in RNA level. Furthermore,
CD44v9+/Oct4+ cancer cell population was increased but CD44v9+/pEGFR+
cancer cells were eliminated according to immunofluorescence results. The
results of single cell analysis demonstrated that CD44v9+/Oct4+ cancer
cells highly expressed proliferation markers consistently with cetuximab
treatment. Trans-well migration results showed that CD44v9+/Oct4+ cancer
cells migrated collectively via mediating E-cadherin dynamics.
Furthermore, in clinical outcome, CD44v9 and E-cadherin co-expression
were associated with recurrence and metastasis and decreased survival
rate significantly. In conclusion, cetuximab failed to target
CD44v9+/Oct4+ cancer cells, which characterized as cancer stem cells and
might modulate collective cell migration. This finding suggested that new
therapeutic strategy to against CSCs would be the potential clinical
treatment in colon cancer.

