Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of whole genome amplification methods on single and
pooled cells for comparative genomic hybridization array analysis


Background: Because blood can be easily sampled repeatedly over the
course of disease, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) offer an opportunity to
measure phenotypic changes during treatment permitting adjustments to
therapy as cancer evolves and/or develops resistance. Since cancer
therapeutics are often selected based upon molecular information,
reliable, high quality methods for whole genome amplification (WGA) are
required for single and small pools of CTCs. Here we compared REPLI-g
(QIAGEN) and PicoPLEX (Rubicon) WGA methods using picked model CTCs
(SKBR3 cells) employing the AccuCyte-CyteFinder-CytePicker system
(RareCyte) and subsequent molecular analysis by array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH).Methods: We compared aCGH performed on WGA products
from single and pooled SKBR3 cells processed with the typical AccuCyte
protocol, or an alternative protocol using live cells in suspension. For
the typical AccuCyte protocol, isolated buffy coat was spread and dried
onto microscope slides, fixed and antibody stained (EpCAM, cytokeratin,
CD45) on an automated instrument. Alternatively, pure, live SKBR3 cells
were stained in suspension for EpCAM and Her2, and then placed into well
slides. Slides were imaged using the CyteFinder digital fluorescence
scanning microscope. Fixed SKBR cells were identified by positive
nuclear, EpCAM, and CK staining, and negative CD45 staining. Live cells
were identified by positive EpCAM/Her2 staining. Cells were picked into
PCR tubes using the CytePicker module. DNA from individual or pools of
cells (2, 3, 5, or 10) was amplified using either the REPLI-g or PicoPLEX
WGA kits and processed for aCGH using Genetisure arrays (Agilent). WGA
products were hybridized against matched WGA controls from normal male
genomic DNA.Results: aCGH profiles for pools of 10 cells using both WGA
methods were very similar to unamplified SKBR3 genomic DNA. Signal to
noise (S:N) was significantly higher with the REPLI-g amplified DNA
compared to PicoPLEX, but single cells did not show similar profiles of
genomic aberrations to unamplified genomic DNA until at least 3 cells
were pooled before amplification. In contrast, single cells amplified
using PicoPLEX demonstrated genomic aberrations consistent with
unamplified genomic DNA. Fixation did not appear to adversely affect
PicoPLEX WGA performance, but DNA from fixed cells could not be amplified
with REPLI-g.Conclusions: Diagnostic decisions can potentially be made
from molecular data derived from small numbers of CTCs requiring WGA
methods that provide accurate results in downstream analysis. WGA methods
should be selected based upon the molecular data required. In this study,
higher S:N indicate that REPLI-g may be more sensitive for finding
smaller genomic changes than PicoPLEX, however PicoPLEX generates more
consistent data with single fixed cells.

