Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Four new brain tumor entities emerge from molecular classification
of CNS-PNETs


CNS-primitive neuroectodermal tumors (CNS PNETs) are highly aggressive,
poorly differentiated embryonal tumors occurring predominantly in young
children but also affecting adolescents and adults. Histological
diagnosis is complicated by morphological heterogeneity and divergent
differentiation. Recent studies suggest the existence of molecular
subgroups of CNS-PNETs sharing biological characteristics with other CNS
tumors. To investigate this we have analyzed 323 fresh-frozen or
paraffin-embedded institutionally diagnosed CNS-PNETs using DNA
methylation and expression arrays. Data were compared to 211 reference
cases of other pediatric and adult brain tumors representing more than 20
well-known entities.DNA methylation and gene expression patterns showed
that a significant proportion of CNS PNETs display molecular profiles
indistinguishable from those of various other well defined CNS tumor
entities. Hallmark genetic alterations for each of these well-defined
entities, such as amplification of 19q13.42, mutations in IDH1 or H3F3A,
mutations/deletions of the SMARCB1 locus, or RELA fusions, were
frequently detected among the reclassified cases. From the remaining
fraction of CNS PNETs we have identified four new CNS tumor entities,
each associated with a unique recurrent genetic alteration and distinct
histopathological and clinical features. Based on these findings we
designated these four new entities as CNS neuroblastoma with FOXR2
activation (CNS NB FOXR2), CNS Ewing sarcoma family tumor with CIC
alteration (CNS EFT CIC), CNS high grade neuroepithelial tumor with MN1
alteration (CNS HGNET MN1), and CNS high grade neuroepithelial tumor with
BCOR alteration (CNS HGNET BCOR).Our findings reinforce the importance of
incorporating molecular information into the next revision of the WHO
classification of CNS tumors, and warrant a replacement of the term CNS
PNET with biologically specific designations. Our study provides an
innovative framework for improving diagnostic accuracy and
prognostication in malignant CNS tumors. The approach is amenable to
retrospective analyses of patients treated with current regimens and will
facilitate the design of more meaningful clinical trials for patients
with malignant brain tumors.

