Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IHC and RT-PCR assays for detection of cancer antigen NY-ESO-1 in
human tissues


Introduction: NY-ESO-1 is a cancer testis antigen frequently expressed in
a broad range of tumors: lung, breast, ovarian, bladder, liver cancer,
melanoma, sarcoma and myeloma. CDX-1401, a fully human monoclonal
antibody linked to full length NY-ESO-1, binds to dendritic cell (DC)
receptor DEC-205 to stimulate NY-ESO-1 specific CD4 and CD8 responses.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) assays were
developed to determine NY-ESO-1 expression in human tumors and normal
adjacent tissues (NAT). A qRT-PCR assay for the detection of LAGE-1, a
cancer testis antigen with significant DNA homology to NY-ESO-1, was also
developed but no commercially specific antibody was available for
IHC.Methods: Formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tumors and NAT were
procured from a commercial source or obtained from Mosaic Laboratories;
split anonymized samples were analyzed for NY-ESO-1 by IHC at Mosaic and
for NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1 by qRT-PCR at MolecularMD (OR) under IRB-approved
protocols allowing in vitro analysis of remnant human samples. The study
included: 18 each melanoma and ovarian cancers; 13 each colorectal (CRC),
head & neck (H&N), and non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC); and 38 NAT.
HT1080 fibrosarcoma and SKOV3 ovarian cancer cell lines (ATCC, VA) and
normal testis were used as controls. The qRT-PCR assays were validated
using in vitro transcribed RNA on NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1 kits provided by
Life Technologies and the NY-ESO-1 IHC was developed using a mouse
monoclonal antibody (Sigma, MO).Results: The NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1 qRT-PCR
assays had a linear range of 100-1,000,000 copies/reaction with limit of
detection between 1-10 copies. An excess of LAGE-1 copies did not impact
the specificity of the NY-ESO-1 assay and vice-versa. NY-ESO-1 protein
was detected by IHC and NY-ESO-1 transcripts and LAGE-1 transcripts were
detected in 9 (12%), 12 (16%) and 16 (21.3%), respectively, of the 75
tumor tissues while only 2 of the 38 normal samples were positive for
LAGE-1. When stromal staining was considered in addition to epithelial
staining, 16 (21.3%) tumor samples were positive by IHC. NY-ESO-1 protein
was more prevalent in NSCLC (38%), ovarian cancer (11%) and melanoma
(11%) vs. other tumor types. Positive staining by IHC was achieved in
tumor tissues shown positive for NY-ESO-1 and negative for LAGE-1
transcripts. In general, tumor tissues obtained from Mosaic were of
better quality, as assessed by the pathologist, and more positive than
commercially procured samples.Conclusions: Two qRT-PCR assays were
developed to specifically quantify NY-ESO-1 or LAGE-1 mRNA without cross
reaction. The antibody used in IHC assay seemed specific to NY-ESO-1.
Inadequate sample quality impacted target prevalence. Implementing these
assays in clinical trials may aid in prospectively identifying patients
with NY-ESO-1 positive malignancies who could derive benefit from
investigational NY-ESO-1 vaccines designed to induce anti-tumor immunity,
such as CDX-1401.

