Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin and anti-CD70 therapy: Ideal partners in crime against
NSCLC


Introduction:Upon interaction of CD70 with its receptor CD27, the NFB
pathway is activated, leading to proliferation and survival. Therefore,
CD70 expression is tightly regulated and only transiently expressed on
cells of the lymphoid lineage. Constitutive expression of CD70 by tumor
cells can facilitate immune evasion by increasing the amount of
suppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs), inducing T cell apoptosis and
skewing T cells towards T cell exhaustion. Previously, we have detected
CD70 positivity in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) specimens,
comprising patients that lack other targeted treatment options. This CD70
expression can be exploited by CD70-targeting antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC)-inducing antibodies. Furthermore, anti-CD70 therapy
has the exciting potential to enhance antitumor immune responses by
blocking Treg proliferation. In this study, we have focused on the
combination of anti-CD70 therapy with chemotherapeutic agents, to
increase tumor cytotoxicity.Material and Methods:The cytotoxic effect of
cisplatin was evaluated on a panel of five NSCLC cell lines (CRL-2868,
CRL-5908, CRL-5883, LUDLU-1, A549), differing in their genetic
aberrations, histological subtype and expression of CD70. Based on these
cytotoxicity experiments 3.5M, 7M and 13M were considered low, medium and
high concentrations of cisplatin respectively. Using flow cytometry, we
tested the effects of cisplatin on the expression of membranous CD70 at
different time points (1h, 6h, 24h, 48h). Next, we evaluated whether an
induction in CD70 expression could increase the ADCC potential of
anti-CD70 therapy using the xCELLigence RTCA technology. Finally, we
assessed the immune stimulatory potential of this combination strategy by
analysis of Treg proliferation as well as cytokine
production.Results:Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated the highest
induction of CD70 expression, 24 hours after treatment with 7M cisplatin,
reaching significance in 4/5 cell lines. Next, we assessed whether this
increase in CD70 expression could intensify the ADCC effect of anti-CD70
therapy. CRL-5883, a CD70- cell line bearing no response to anti-CD70
monotherapy, showed a significant inhibition of proliferation after
sequential administration of cisplatin and anti-CD70 therapy. Also, in
A549 (weak CD70+) and CRL-5908 (strong CD70+), the combination of
anti-CD70 therapy and cisplatin resulted in a significant decrease in
cell survival compared to monotherapy. Also our immune data point towards
a favorable effect of the combination.Conclusion: Our preliminary data
show that the combination of anti-CD70 therapy with medium doses of
cisplatin significantly increases tumor specific cytotoxicity of the
drug, compared to single treatment regimens. This combination strategy
has the potential to reduce drug-related side effects and improve general
outcome of NSCLC, still the most lethal type of cancer worldwide.

