Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer proteogenomics landscape defines subtype specific
protein level regulations and reveals proteins coded by pseudogenic loci


The advancement of mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics has been
tremendous in recent years and is expected to continue due to the rapid
developments in instrument technology and bioinformatic analysis. These
methods have enabled us to discover predictive protein markers for
anti-estrogen treatment of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer 1, 2.
Recently proteogenomics has emerged as an exciting area, combining
proteomics with genomics and transcriptomics. We have published a
proteogenomics workflow which can be used to discover new protein coding
loci via an unbiased 6 reading frame translation (6-FT) search even in
well-annotated higher eukaryotes such as human and mouse3. Herein we
present a quantitative proteomics and proteogenomics analysis, using our
high resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) aided proteogenomics
method3,4, on breast tumors obtained from five breast cancer subtypes.
Protein products from 12645 genes are identified and roughly 10000
proteins are quantified across the entire cohort of 45 breast cancer
tissues. The resulting quantitative proteome landscape recapitulates the
PAM50 subtypes. The breast cancer proteome defines clusters indicative of
stroma, immune response, basal, adipocyte, proliferation, and steroid
response related components. Additionally, a proteogenomics search of the
6-FT of the entire human genome reveals novel pseudogenic protein coding
regions (n = 150) as well as peptides derived from lncRNA (n = 79).
Finally, customized databases including variant peptides derived from
SNPs, mutations, and splice junction peptides are used to analyze protein
level events related to variants. This proteogenomics analysis for both
new open reading frames and sequence variants reveals novel proteins
expressed in a tumor specific manner in several studied individuals, with
some being related to known sub-types. Taken together, this study reveals
the proteome profiles are related to transcriptomics, copy number, and
metabolic activity in specific tumors, proving our proteogenomics
workflow provides novel information on the breast cancer molecular
landscape.1. Johansson, H.J. et al. Proteomics profiling identify CAPS as
a potential predictive marker of tamoxifen resistance in estrogen
receptor positive breast cancer. Clinical proteomics 12, 8 (2015).2.
Johansson, H.J. et al. Retinoic acid receptor alpha is associated with
tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. Nat Commun 4, 2175 (2013).3.
Branca, R.M. et al. HiRIEF LC-MS enables deep proteome coverage and
unbiased proteogenomics. Nature methods 11, 59-62 (2014).4. Boekel J,
et.al. Multi-omic data analysis using Galaxy. Nature Biotechnol. 2015 Feb
6;33(2):137-9.

