Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive gene panel for precise diagnosis and treatment of
childhood cancer


We have created and are validating a targeted gene panel that utilizes
20ng of FFPE DNA and 10 ng of FFPE RNA in a simple, 3-tube Ion AmpliSeq
assay suitable for sequencing on the Ion Torrent platform with rapid turn
around time (We have created and are validating a targeted gene panel
that utilizes 20ng of FFPE DNA and 10 ng of FFPE RNA in a simple, 3-tube
Ion AmpliSeq assay suitable for sequencing on the Ion Torrent platform
with rapid turn around time (<3 days in lab) and automated report
generation that is designed specifically to improve pediatric cancer
diagnosis, identify prognostic features, and detect genomic alterations
(including mutations, insertions, deletions, gene amplification, and RNA
expression levels) that match current targeted therapeutic targets. The
core content is identical to the Oncomine Comprehensive Assay as employed
by the NCI MATCH program. In addition, a total of 128 genes known to be
genomically altered in pediatric cancer are interrogated (either hotspots
or coding exons), 21 genes frequently amplified in pediatric cancer, and
157 gene fusions (including over 1,500 variants) unique to these tumors
are included. Unique to this panel are 22 pharmacogenomic gene
polymorphisms that influence cytotoxic drug metabolism, to guide
patient-specific dosing. Content was chosen to cover all common pediatric
malignancies, including pediatric leukemia (ALL, AML, and multiple
variants within each), lymphoma, brain tumors, neuroblastoma, and
sarcomas, by a working group composed of pediatric oncologists and
pathologists. Specific genomic alterations were identified from a
comprehensive search of the pediatric cancer literature by the panel and
categorized by level of evidence (FDA approved drug, open clinical trial,
or peer-reviewed literature identifying a feature in a pediatric cancer).
This panel includes 45 of the 51 gene targets identified by the COG TAP
committee for pediatric cancer specific gene target-therapeutic agent
matching. In contrast to the NCI MATCH program, which currently employs
the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine and Ion 318 Chip, this panel is
intended for use on the newly available Ion S5 platform, due to its
significantly enlarged content. Verification of individual feature
identification by orthogonal assays (Sanger sequencing, PCR, FISH, SNP
arrays) is in process. The assay will be released initially as an LDP,
with intended updated content as new features and therapeutics are
identified. Unlike current panels for specific features like single gene
mutations or known gene translocations, this panel is intended to detect
all currently known genomic alterations with level I, II, or III evidence
in pediatric cancer, as well as the ability to detect new gene mutations
and fusion variants (subject to secondary assay validation). Also unique
is the ability to measure gene amplification and RNA expression levels in
one comprehensive panel starting with 30 ng or less of nucleic acid
extracted from routine clinical FFPE specimens. This is the only
comprehensive gene panel for pediatric cancer that encompasses
diagnostic, prognostic, pharmacogenomic, and therapeutic targets in one
assay.

