Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting autophagy to enhance paclitaxel sensitivity in
esophageal carcinoma


Esophageal cancer is one of the malignancies threatening human health
with high incidence and a very low 5-year survival rate with poor
outcomes in the developing countries. Chemotherapy has been played
indispensable roles while companied with more and more chemoresistance
and side effects. Numerous studies have shown that autophagy may play
specific role as one of the drug resistance mechanisms through promoting
cancer cell survival via self-digestion. Therefore targeting autophagy
might be another promising approach of therapeutics in
cancer.Paclitaxel(PTX) is widely used for malignant tumors treatment
through inducing apoptosis and autophagy. More findings discovered that
chemoresistance is still a major hurdle for PTX due to cytoprotective
autophagy. In order to investigate whether targeting autophagy could
confer the sensitivity of PTX in esophageal carcinoma, chloroquine (CQ)
was applied as an autophagy inhibitor to study the esophageal carcinoma
cells EC109 co-treated with PTX in vitro and explore the potential
molecular mechanisms.Firstly, CQ and PTX were used separately and also
combined to treat EC109 cells at different dosages and time points, and
the MTT results showed that CQ could contribute to the suppressive effect
of PTX on the growth and proliferation of EC109 cells. Meanwhile the
migration and invasion abilities of EC109 were significantly inhibited by
co-treatment of PTX and CQ comparing with PTX only through scratch test
and cell invasion Transwell chamber test, moreover the combination
treatment dramatically suppressed the colony formation on soft
agar.Further investigation showed that mTOR pathway was activated in CQ
or PTX exposure, which resulted in phosphorylated mTOR(p-mTOR)
down-regulation, followed by the decline of phosphorylated p70S6K
(p-p70S6K) and phosphorylated p-4EBP1, and the autophagy marker LC3I/II
conversion and p62 elevated eventually, which indicated that autophagy
was mediated in PTX or CQ treatment in EC109 cells. On the other hand,
GFP-LC3 was transfected into EC109 cells to observe the LC3 translocation
status after CQ or PTX treatment, which usually be regarded as the
morphological maker of autophagy, and the results confirmed the findings
in Western Blot. Most importantly, the combination treatment of CQ and
PTX resulted in synergistic consequences. For further understanding the
mTOR pathway was initiated in CQ or PTX mediated autophagy in this study,
we used lentiviral shRNA embedding mTOR to knockdown the expression of
mTOR first and then studied the signaling pathway changes after CQ and
PTX co-treatment, and we found a decrease trend of LC3-II/ I ratio and
p62 also compared with the competent mTOR control. From these results, we
confirmed that autophagy would benefit the survival of EC109 cells, and
our findings demonstrated that targeting of autophagy using CQ could be
an effective and potential strategy to improve PTX treatment outcomes in
the management of esophageal carcinoma.

