Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating novel 4-aminoquinoline inhibitors of NQO2 in ovarian
cancer


Introduction:NRH quinone oxidoreductase 2 (NQO2) is one of the mammalian
enzymes responsible for the two-electron reduction of quinones to
hydroquinones. NQO2 can use a variety of dihydronicotinamide analogues as
co-factors. In particular, the co-factor, EP0152R has been used in Phase
I clinical trials to support evaluation of the NQO2-mediated reductive
activation of CB1954. As well as being a prodrug-activating enzyme, there
is evidence to show that NQO2 may be involved in cancer progression as a
consequence of its ability to act as a nanny protein, alter cyclin D
expression and modulate the activity of NF-B. Thus, we have synthesized a
series of novel 4-aminoquinolines to study their ability to inhibit NQO2
in ovarian cancer cells (OVCs). We then propose to compare the results of
pharmacological inhibition with those obtained by genetic down-regulation
of NQO2 level.Methods:NQO2 level in a panel of OVC cell lines was
determined by using western blot analysis and Cytochrome C based
spectrophotometric enzyme activity assay.Novel compounds have been
synthesized and assessed for their inhibitory potency against recombinant
human NQO2 (rhNQO2), using DCPIP spectrophotometric assay.MTT
cytotoxicity assay was utilized for several purposes: Firstly, to
determine the toxicity of known and novel NQO2 inhibitors in the SKOV3
cell line; and secondly, to evaluate the sensitivity of OVC cell lines to
CB1954 in the presence of EP0152R, and subsequently measure the
intracellular NQO2 inhibitory potency of novel compounds, by combining
them with CB1954 and EP0152R.Results and conclusion:In the OVCs, NQO2
protein level and enzymatic activity showed an excellent correlation;
however, expression and activity differed widely among the OVC cell
lines. The NQO2 levels were highest in SKOV3 and lowest in the TOV112D
cell lines.The sensitivity of OVCs to CB1954 was significantly increased
when combined with EP0152R; supporting the notion that NQO2 mediates the
toxicity of CB1954. This was confirmed when a strong correlation was
observed between the cellular NQO2 activity and the responsiveness of the
OVC cell lines to CB1954. Further, overexpressing NQO2 in TOV112D cells
resulted in a significant enhancing of its responsiveness to treatment
with CB1954.The novel 4-aminoquinolines inhibited the activity of
recombinant NQO2 when used in the nano-molar range. The inherent
cytotoxicity of the inhibitors (as measured by the IC50 following 24 and
96 hours exposure to SKOV3 cells) ranged between 1.7 to >100M. There was
no relationship between toxicity and the ability of the compounds to
inhibit the activity of rhNQO2. However, some of these compounds showed
functional activity as NQO2 inhibitors in cells; this was revealed by
their ability to inhibit the toxicity of CB1954. Several compounds were
able to do this at sub-M, non-toxic concentrations and therefore they may
be able to act as molecular probes for the (multi-) functional activity
of NQO2 in cells.

