Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproductive and hormonal factors in relation to lung cancer among
Nepali women


Of the 1.8 million global incident lung cancer cases estimated in 2012,
approximately 58% occurred in less developed regions (LDRs). Studies
conducted in more developed regions suggest potential gender differences
in lung cancer risk, whereby women may be more susceptible to the
carcinogenic effects of tobacco. However, studies of reproductive and
hormonal factors and lung cancer among women have been inconsistent and
to date, no prior study has assessed these relationships among Nepali
women. Using data from a hospital-based case-control study conducted in
B. P. Koirala Memorial Cancer Hospital (Nepal, 2009-2012), relationships
between reproductive and hormonal factors and lung cancer were examined
among women aged 23-85 years. Lung cancer cases (n = 268) were
frequency-matched to controls (n = 226), on the basis of age (5 years),
ethnicity and residential area. Controls were selected from visitors of
non-lung cancer patients within the same hospital. Participants completed
an interviewer-administered questionnaire and provided detailed
information on demographics, medical history, smoking history, and
reproductive and hormonal factors. The main exposures in this analysis
included menopausal status, age at menarche, age at menopause, menstrual
duration, gravidity, and age at first live-birth. Odds ratios (ORs) and
95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using multivariable
logistic regression. Final models include adjustment for key confounders
including age and smoking status. Among postmenopausal women, those with
a younger age at menopause (Of the 1.8 million global incident lung
cancer cases estimated in 2012, approximately 58% occurred in less
developed regions (LDRs). Studies conducted in more developed regions
suggest potential gender differences in lung cancer risk, whereby women
may be more susceptible to the carcinogenic effects of tobacco. However,
studies of reproductive and hormonal factors and lung cancer among women
have been inconsistent and to date, no prior study has assessed these
relationships among Nepali women. Using data from a hospital-based
case-control study conducted in B. P. Koirala Memorial Cancer Hospital
(Nepal, 2009-2012), relationships between reproductive and hormonal
factors and lung cancer were examined among women aged 23-85 years. Lung
cancer cases (n = 268) were frequency-matched to controls (n = 226), on
the basis of age (5 years), ethnicity and residential area. Controls were
selected from visitors of non-lung cancer patients within the same
hospital. Participants completed an interviewer-administered
questionnaire and provided detailed information on demographics, medical
history, smoking history, and reproductive and hormonal factors. The main
exposures in this analysis included menopausal status, age at menarche,
age at menopause, menstrual duration, gravidity, and age at first
live-birth. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were
estimated using multivariable logistic regression. Final models include
adjustment for key confounders including age and smoking status. Among
postmenopausal women, those with a younger age at menopause (<45years;
45-49years) had an increased odds of lung cancer compared to those with
an older (50years, referent) age at menopause (OR = 2.14, 95%CI = 1.09,
4.17; OR = 1.93, 95%CI = 1.07, 3.51, respectively), after adjusting for
age and cumulative active smoking (CAS). No statistically significant
associations were observed with the other exposures examined. Ongoing
analyses include stratification by key factors including CAS years.
Further research is needed to corroborate and expand on these findings in
order to better understand hormonal risk factors for lung cancer among
Nepali women.

