Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC201 sensitivity profiling indicates pronounced sensitivity in
lymphoid, prostate, colon and brain tumors


ONC201 is a first-in-class small molecule inducer of the integrated
stress response that is currently in phase II clinical trials in select
advanced cancers and exhibits a benign safety profile and promising early
clinical results. The efficacy of this novel agent has been demonstrated
in a variety of preclinical advanced cancer models in multiple
indications with an exceptional safety profile that has translated well
to the clinic. To better characterize the differential sensitivity of
tumor cells to ONC201 we performed in vitro efficacy assays in the
Genomic of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer collection of cell lines (>1,000
cell lines), in addition to profiling in NCI60 panel. Sensitivity
profiling was assessed by cell viability assays using dose responses
curves at concentrations up to 20uM and at 72 hours post-treatment.
Ranking the sensitivity dataset by tumor type revealed that lymphoma,
colon, prostate and brain cancers were highly responsive to ONC201. The
strongest predictor of sensitivity to ONC201 was tumor type, with
lymphoma being the strong predictor. Within lymphomas, diffuse
histiocytic lymphoma was the most sensitive subtype. Mutations that are
frequent in lymphoma were not associated with ONC201 sensitivity.Recent
mechanistic studies have implicated the ER stress response in the early
stage mechanism of ONC201 that triggers its downstream antitumor effects.
The mutation-agnostic efficacy that is pronounced in lymphomas, prostate,
colon, and brain cancers is in accordance with the recent findings that
ONC201 induces the integrated stress response through a novel target to
trigger is downstream late apoptotic effects. Cancers of the prostate and
brain (glioblastoma multiforme) are among some of the solid tumors that
are susceptible to induction of apoptosis via the integrated stress
response, as they have relatively high basal activation of this pathway
due to ER stress. Confirmatory studies revealed that brain cancer cell
lines and ex vivo samples indeed possess pronounced sensitivity with
nanomolar GI50s, unlike most other tumor types, which is particularly
encouraging given the systemic concentrations observed in the
first-in-man study. Together, these studies suggest specific advanced
cancer indications, such as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and
glioblastoma as promising lead indications for this novel agent that are
being evaluated in phase II clinical trials.

