Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of MYCN-driven neuroblastoma malignant phenotype by
telomerase-targeted tumor suppressor p53 transactivation


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a primary malignant tumor in the
peripheral sympathetic nervous system. High-risk group of NB has an
unfavorable clinical course, even after treatment with current
chemotherapy regimens and aggressive surgical resection. Therefore, a
novel therapeutic strategy is needed for the treatment of high-risk group
of NB. Recent accumulating evidences in whole-genome sequencing analysis
have shown that human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) gene
rearrangement and MYCN gene amplification are predictive biomarkers for
the high-risk group of NB, in which massive transcriptional activation of
hTERT mRNA was frequently observed. We recently developed two types of
hTERT-driven oncolytic adenoviruses, OBP-301 and OBP-702, in which the
hTERT promoter drives the expression of the viral E1A and E1B genes for
tumor-specific virus replication, and OBP-702 further expresses tumor
suppressor p53 protein. In this study, we investigated whether OBP-301
and OBP-702 inhibit cell viability and MYCN protein expression in human
NB cells with different MYCN status.Methods: We used 3 human NB cell
lines with or without MYCN amplification, including IMR-32
(MYCN-amplified), LA-N-5 (MYCN-amplified), SK-N-SH (MYCN-not amplified).
The antitumor effects of OBP-301, OBP-702, and Ad-p53, a
replication-defective adenovirus expressing p53 gene, were evaluated
using XTT assay. Virus-induced apoptosis and MYCN suppression were
analyzed by Western blot analysis.Results: OBP-301, OBP-702, and Ad-p53
suppressed the viability of all 3 NB cell lines, whereas OBP-702 showed
the most profound anti-tumor effect especially in MYCN-amplified NB
cells. OBP-702 induced higher p53 expression than Ad-p53, resulting in
the p53-mediated apoptotic cell death. Although MYCN expression in NB
cells with MYCN amplification was downregulated after infection with all
types of adenoviruses, the inhibitory effect of OBP-702 was the strongest
among these adenoviruses.Conclusions: These results suggest that a
hTERT-driven oncolytic adenovirus OBP-702 is a promising antitumor agent
to induce profound apoptotic cell death through p53 transactivation and
MYCN suppression in human NB cells with or without MYCN amplification. In
vivo experiments are under way to investigate the antitumor effect of
OBP-702 against xenograft NB tumors.

