Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-resolution microbiome profiling and meta-analysis yields
insight into microbial consortia associated with colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) continues to be the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths globally. While multiple environmental factors are
associated with incidence of CRC, multiple studies have reported that CRC
is frequently linked with an altered colonic microbiota both in terms of
taxonomic composition as well as structural organization. However,
differences in study design and analysis methodologies among CRC
microbiome profiling studies have generated inconsistent findings. To
identify bacterial taxa consistently associated with CRC, we applied a
uniform microbiome analysis methodology to sequence datasets followed by
meta-analysis.Raw 16S rRNA amplicon sequence datasets from 12 studies
including two new Malaysian cohorts were collected and analyzed using the
Resphera Insight high-resolution taxonomic assignment protocol. Taxonomic
abundances within each dataset were then assessed for significant
enrichment or depletion in colorectal carcinoma samples versus controls.
Alpha diversity and differences in predicted functional capacity were
assessed utilizing QIIME and PICRUSt, respectively.Several bacterial
species were consistently enriched in colorectal carcinoma samples
relative to healthy controls including Fusobacterium nucleatum,
Fusobacterium necrophorum, Leptotrichia trevisanii, Bacteroides fragilis,
Parvimonas micra, Peptostreptococcus stomatis, and Gemella morbillorum.
In contrast to other studies that have generally described Fusobacteria
as enriched in CRC relative to controls, we identified multiple
fusobacterial members that were often not strongly linked with CRC
including Fusobacterium varium and Cetobacterium somerae. Evaluating
functional predictions inferred from taxonomic composition, we observed
consistent enrichment of specific KEGG categories in CRC including
glycosyltransferases and carbohydrate digestion and absorption.Applying a
uniform high-resolution analysis protocol for microbiome profiling
enabled detection of specific species that were strongly associated with
CRC across multiple studies. These findings demonstrate that higher level
analyses (e.g. those at the genus or family level) may be insufficient
for detection of indicator taxa in some populations.

