Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intravenous delivery of Erlotinib-loaded PLA-PEG nanoparticles for
treatment of GB


Amplification, overexpression, and mutation of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) gene represent common genetic signature
abnormalities (>50%) in primary glioblastomas (GBs) that arise de novo.
Although activated EGFR signaling represents the most common genetic
abnormality in GB, targeted therapeutics against EGFR, such as Erlotinib
and Gefitinib, have found very limited clinical success mainly because of
restricted access to the tumor cells behind the blood brain barrier.
Nanoparticles, such as those composed of poly(lactic acid)-poly(glycolic
acid) (PLA-PEG), may be capable of overcoming delivery barriers to expand
the armamentarium of drugs useful against GB. PLA-PEG is one of only two
polymer NP formulations in phase II clinical trial for intravenous
administration (NCT01812746). In this study, we tested the ability of
Erlotinib-loaded PLA-PEG nanoparticles to inhibit the EGFR signaling
pathway in short-term cultures of GB patient derived xenograft (PDX)
models. We also tested the ability of systemically administered PLA-PEG
nanoparticles to deliver Erlotinib payload to intracranial GB PDX cells
by pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis. Potency of Erlotinib-loaded PLA-PEG was
determined in four PDX models (GBM6, GBM12, GBM39, and GBM59) with known
EGFR and PTEN status using immunoblot analysis and CellTiterGlo assay.
Our results demonstrate that Erlotinib PLA-PEG inhibits EGFR signaling in
all PDX models tested with potency equal to free Erlotininb (EC50 range
4.9 - 16.8 M). Pharmacokinetic measurements were done in plasma and brain
tissue samples (tumor-bearing hemisphere and contralateral hemisphere
were analyzed separately) collected from intracranial GBM12 tumor bearing
mice at 5 min, 1 hr, 6hr, and 24 hr after intravenous (IV) dose of free
Erlotinib at 7.5 mg/Kg and Erlotininb PLA-PEG at 13.125 mg/Kg.
PLA-PEG-mediated brain penetration (AUCplasm:AUCBrain) of Erlotinib is
7.5%. Using orthotopic PDX implants, perivascular/intratumoral
penetration by PLA-PEG is being measured. Additional improvements in
PLA-PEG to heighten uptake into brain, as well as tumor-specific
targeting and enriched payload density will foster improved clinical
utility of EGFR targeted therapies against GB. Supported by a grant from
the Ben & Catherine Ivy Foundation.

