Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of chemopreventive agents from licorice (Glycyrrhiza
Uralensis)


Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) provides a rich resource of potential
chemoprevention agents; however, the complexity arise from its
multi-components and multi-targets nature hindered in-depth
investigations and translations. Licorice is one of the most commonly
utilized TCM herbal medicine which possesses many pharmacological
activities including cancer prevention. We isolated over 120
licorice-derived compounds and systemically screened these compounds
using cellular and molecular models including cytotoxicity, nitric oxide
production, NF-B and ARE luciferase reporters, and other
models.Isoangustone A (IAA) is an isoprenyled isoflavonoid which has been
reported to induce apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in prostate cancer
cells, and it was identified as a NF-B inhibitor in our assays. IAA
significantly inhibited NF-B signaling in SW480 colorectal adenocarcinoma
cells, and decreased the expression of Cox-2 and iNOS. Overexpression of
constitutively activated IKK potently stimulated NF-B signaling and
reversed IAA-mediated inhibition. Oral administration of IAA
significantly inhibited dextran sodium sulfate-induced NF-B signaling and
the expression of Cox-2 and iNOS in mouse colon tissue, and alleviated
symptoms of colitis without observable acute toxicity.IAA and similar
compounds also induced autophagy in various cancer cells, and inhibition
of autophagy significant reversed IAA-induced cell death, suggesting the
existence of autophagic cell death. IAA caused cleavage and aggregation
of LC-3 accompanied with p62 degradation, and typical autophagic
morphology was observed by transmission electronic microscopy.
Overexpression of dominant negative AMPK or treatment with AMPK inhibitor
demonstrated that activation of AMPK was important for IAA-induced
autophagy, while inhibition of Akt was not. Further studies suggest that
metabolic stresses is essential for the pharmacological activities of
IAA, and primary molecular target were identified. Notably, IAA
significantly inhibited tumor growth in nude mice xenograft model.These
results suggest that IAA is potentially an anti-inflammatory bowel
disease and anti- colorectal cancer agent. Based on the structural
similarity, several other compounds were found to possess even stronger
anti-inflammation, pro-apoptotic and autophagy-inducing activities. The
present work discovered several promising chemopreventive compounds from
licorice that deserve future study, and provides an example of study on
TCM in chemoprevention.Several other compounds were identified as
Nrf2/ARE signaling modulators or apoptosis/autophagy inducers and further
investigated.The present works were supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 81272468, 81472657).

