Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutive omega-3 fatty acid production in fat-1 transgenic
mice protects against UVB-induced skin inflammation and carcinogenesis


Exposure to solar radiation, especially ultraviolet B (UVB), is the most
prevalent cause of skin photocarcinogenesis. Omega-6 (-6) and omega-3
(-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are known to have opposite
effects on the inflammatory and carcinogenesis processes. Generally, -6
PUFAs promote inflammation and tumor development, whereas -3 PUFAs
possess anti-inflammatory as well as antioxidative activity and enhance
host immune response. In the present study, we investigated the
protective effects of -3 PUFAs on UVB-induced skin inflammation and
carcinogenesis using fat-1 transgenic mice harboring -3 desaturase gene
capable of converting -6 to -3 PUFAs. The -3/-6 PUFA ratio was
significantly higher in the dorsal skin of fat-1 mice than that in the
wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice. In comparison to WT animals, fat-1 mice
expressed heme oxygenase-1 and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase-1 and their
mRNA transcripts to a greater extent, which was attributable to the
elevated activation of nuclear factor erythroid-related factor-2 (Nrf2)
responsible for upregulation of cytoprotective and stress-responsive
proteins. Upon single exposure to UVB (500 mJ/cm2) irradiation, fat1 mice
exhibited a significantly lower degree of skin inflammation and
phototoxicity and the expression of the pro-inflammatory enzyme,
cyclooxygenases-2 (COX-2) as compared to those observed in WT mouse skin.
The protection of fat-1 mice from UVB-induced skin inflammation was
associated with decreased phosphorylation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), one of the major redox-sensitive
transcription factors, whose overactivation is implicated in the
pathogenesis of inflammation and subsequent development of skin cancer.
To determine whether the elevated -3 PUFA level also protects against
skin papillomagenesis, hairless fat-1/ albino and fat-1+/ albino mice
were generated by cross-breeding of male fat-1+/ transgenic mice with
female SKH-1 hairless albino mice. After repeated UVB irradiation (180
mJ/cm2) thrice a week for 23 weeks, the incidence and the multiplicity of
papillomas were markedly reduced in the fat-1+/ albino group as compared
to the fat-1/ albino group. Moreover, the expression of COX-2 and
activation of STAT3 in papillomas from fat-1+/ albino mice were
significantly lower than those found in UVB-irradiated fat-1/ albino
mice. Taken together, our results indicate that functional fat-1
potentiates cellular defense against UVB-induced skin inflammation and
tumor development through elevation of Nrf2-mediated upregulation of
cytoprotective gene expression.

