Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel mouse model to study image-guided
radiation-induced gastrointestinal injury and its application in
pre-clinical research


Radiotherapy is a major treatment modality typically used in conjunction
with surgery and/or chemotherapy in treating a variety of cancers. While
effective in controlling or eliminating localized tumors or preventing
recurrence, radiation does induce a host of normal tissue toxicities.
Gastrointestinal (GI) side effects from radiation treatment are very
common; often this limits the dose of radiation that can be delivered to
GI tumors and thereby its effectiveness. Thus, the discovery and clinical
implementation of the use of bowel radioprotectors and mitigators could
have significant clinical impact.The purpose of this study was to develop
a novel method of inflicting localized radiation-induced GI damage in
order to establish a more physiological model of damage and aid the
development of radioprotectors. Current models, while useful in
elucidating the pathophysiological characteristics of broad field
radiation, are hampered by complex surgical procedures (exteriorizing the
rat intestine and then irradiating the herniated loop of bowel) which can
introduce confounding factors such as infection, inflammation and
fibrosis or involve whole abdominal irradiation, recapitulating a
pathophysiology that is not relevant to clinical practice.Here we
surgically glued a 2mm diameter radiopaque marker made of bismuth
subcarbonate onto the surface of the mouse (C57BL/6) jejunum to serve as
a target for radiation treatment. One-week post-surgery the mice were
imaged with cone-beam CT to locate the marker, and irradiated with 12Gy
on the marker using the Small Animal Radiation Research Platform (SARRP)
using a 55mm collimator. Mice were sacrificed at various time points
post-RT and intestinal tissue directly under, adjacent to, and distal to
the marker were collected to assess both morphological and molecular
features of radiation-induced damage and inflammation. These included
levels of -H2AX, multiple cytokines, EdU incorporation, TUNEL assay and
intestinal stem cell marker analysis.Our findings suggest that our
image-guided radiation injury mouse model is feasible since we observed a
high survival rate post-surgery (approx. 90%). DNA damage, cell-cycle
arrest, intestinal crypt apoptosis and inflammation were all
significantly higher in the irradiated mice and confined to the
immediately irradiated or adjacent area. However, IR-induced damage at
12Gy over 5mm appeared to be transient, as we observed regeneration of
the majority of crypts at later time points post- IR. We are currently
extending these findings with higher doses of radiation in the presence
and absence of clinically used radioprotectors such as curcumin. Our
model constitutes a new tool to rapidly evaluate multiple biological
markers of DNA damage in the mouse intestine and we believe it will be
valuable in future screens for radiation response modifiers and the study
of molecular aspects of IR damage.

