Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mobile app for health related quality of life and symptom
assessment in patients with primary brain tumors in an outpatient
oncology clinic


Purpose: Primary brain tumors, and their treatments, can have a
significant impact on patient quality of life due to altered mentation,
mood changes, memory loss, and neurologic deficits. It has therefore been
suggested that patient related outcomes need to be included as endpoints
for treatment efficacy. The objective of this project was to develop and
evaluate a mobile application (GlioNCI), in reporting health-related
quality of life measures and symptom scoring in patients with primary
brain tumors treated and followed in an outpatient oncology
clinic.Experimental Procedures and Results: Apple's Xcode Integrated
Development Environment (IDE) was used to develop GlioNCI using the Swift
programming language. The parameters and scores chosen had previously
been validated in primary CNS tumors. Medication and steroid use is
captured at each encounter, as are seizure characteristics, frequency and
management. Health related quality of life questionnaires included
portions of the EORTC QLQ-C30, and EORTC QLQ-BN20, and MD Anderson
Symptom Inventory Brain Tumor Module, which have been validated in
patients with cancer and primary CNS tumors respectively. Patients
symptoms and effects on function are collected with the Activities of
Daily Living scale, and the Instrumental Activities of Daily Living
Scale. Mood and mental state were addressed using the Hospital Anxiety
and Depression Scale. Separate questionnaires for different encounters
and time points in outpatient treatment were included to assess care
provider, as well as patient related measures, allowing for flexibility
of the app to the needs of both. A mobile app was developed to collect,
and archive in a database, input and feedback from both patients and care
providers in oncology clinics.Conclusion: The creation of a patient
centered quality of life and symptom assessment mobile app, following
patients with primary brain tumors over their course of treatment and in
follow-up is feasible. Pilot testing and patient evaluation of the
application in an oncology clinic will be used to validate GlioNCI as a
tool in outpatient clinics.

