Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF upregulation mediates growth retardation in EGFR T790M mutant
non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction:A subset of non-small cell lung cancer is driven by
activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). The
majority of EGFR-driven lung cancers respond to EGFR kinase inhibitors
gefitinib and erlotinib, although the clinical efficacy these inhibitors
is limited by the development of drug resistance. A secondary missense
mutation encoding EGFR T790M is the most prevalent resistance mechanism
observed in patients, accounting for nearly 60% of relapse following
gefitinib or erlotinib treatment. Although the T790M mutation enhances
EGFR kinase activity, T790M harboring tumors exhibit indolent growth and
are associated with favorable prognosis compared to tumors that acquire
alternative mechanisms of drug resistance. The mechanism(s) underlying
the indolent growth mediated by EGFR T790M are not well
characterized.Methods:To identify the factor(s) mediating T790M
associated growth retardation, we characterized T790M amplified drug
resistant cells. EGFR mutant parental lung cancer cell lines PC9 and
H3255 were selected through sequential treatment with gefitinib and the
irreversible EGFR inhibitor dacomitinib. The resulting drug resistant
cells, PC9DR and H3255DR, harbored amplified EGFR T790M and exhibited
marked growth retardation. These T790M amplified models were
characterized to identify factors conferring indolent growth. T790M
expressing patient tumor samples were also analyzed to validate T790M
associated changes.Results:Ectopic overexpression of EGFR T790M induced
growth retardation in EGFR inhibitor-nave cells. Incubation of parental
PC9 cells in media conditioned on PC9DR cells was sufficient to slow PC9
growth rates, suggesting that a secreted factor was responsible for the
growth retardation observed in the T790M amplified cells. A Luminex assay
of PC9DR cells revealed upregulation of transforming growth factor beta 2
(TGF2), which was confirmed at the transcript level by qPCR. Treatment of
parental PC9 cells with recombinant TGF was sufficient to induce slowed
growth, while inhibition of TGF signaling using a TGF receptor inhibitor
rescued growth rates in T790M amplified cell lines. Finally, T790M
harboring patient tumor samples showed a trend of TGF2 transcript
upregulation.Conclusions:We have demonstrated that TGF2 is upregulated in
EGFR T790M amplified lung cancer cells, and is sufficient to elicit T790M
associated growth retardation. The correlation between TGF expression and
indolent growth of T790M expressing tumors identifies TGF as a potential
biomarker to predict patient prognosis and outcome.

