Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the calpain pathway in early response and acquired
resistance to radiation in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive, malignant brain tumor that is
highly heterogeneous and often develops resistance to conventional
chemotherapy and radiation treatments. The median survival time of GBM
patients is 12-15 months despite aggressive treatment modalities, and
there is an urgent need for the development of novel treatment
strategies. The goal of this study is to identify novel mechanisms of
radioresistance in GBM through mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic
profiling, with the objective that more effective therapies can be
rationally developed in the future. We and others have previously
reported that GBMs are characterized by deregulated signaling pathways
that control critical cellular processes including survival, migration,
and proliferation. Very little is known about acquired resistance
mechanisms to radiation, specifically how radiation alters protein
phosphorylation patterns in tumors on a global level, or how
radiation-induced changes in protein phosphorylation contribute to
treatment resistance. In order to identify radiation-induced changes in
protein phosphorylation, we performed phosphoproteomic profiling of 6 GBM
cell lines and 1 normal human astrocyte cell line both before and after
radiation treatment in 3 independent experiments. Specifically, cells
were collected before treatment and at 2 time-points following a 10 Gy
radiation treatment. Following protein isolation and phosphopeptide
enrichment, global phosphoproteomic analysis was performed by mass
spectrometry. Relative quantitation and statistical analysis were
performed to determine fold changes in phosphorylation at both
post-radiation time-points. An average of 3,971 phosphopeptides mapping
to 1,649 phosphoproteins were quantified for each independent experiment,
and a total of 621 phosphoproteins were quantified across all 3 datasets.
We identified a major component of the calpain signaling pathway that
consistently shows an increase in phosphorylation following radiation
treatment in GBM cell lines. The post-radiation increase in
phosphorylation was confirmed in 2 independent experiments and observed
across all 6 GBM cell lines. This is the first study linking the calpain
signaling pathway to radiation response in GBM. Mechanistic studies using
phosphomimetic and nonphosphorylatable mutants of the protein of interest
will determine the effect of phosphorylation on calpain activity and
radiation resistance. Results of this work will contribute to our
understanding of how GBM tumors become resistant to radiation therapy,
and may identify a novel target to overcome radiation resistance in GBM.

