Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DIRAS1 and DIRAS2 are novel ovarian cancer tumor suppressors that
regulate cell growth, motility and autophagy


DIRAS3 (also known as ARHI; Aplasia Ras Homolog Member I) is a potent
tumor suppressor that has been well characterized for its role in ovarian
cancer and autophagy. DIRAS3 is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor
gene that encodes a 26kDa GTPase which shares 60% homology to Ras and
Rap. DIRAS3 is downregulated in many tumor types including ovarian
cancer. DIRAS3 is downregulated by multiple mechanisms including loss of
heterozygosity, transcriptional regulation by E2F1 and E2F4,
hypermethylation of the second allele, and regulation by miRNAs 221 and
222. Re-expression of DIRAS3 at physiologic levels inhibits cancer cell
growth, reduces motility, induces autophagy and promotes tumor dormancy.
The mechanisms by which DIRAS3 induce autophagic cell death in vitro and
tumor dormancy in vivo have been well characterized by previous work in
our laboratory demonstrating that DIRAS3 is required for the induction of
autophagy, and that upon inhibition of autophagy you can prevent
outgrowth of dormant ovarian cancer cells in vivo. Interestingly, mice do
not have DIRAS3 as it was lost during evolutionary rearrangement of
murine chromosomes 3 and 6 nearly 60 million years ago, yet murine cells
can still undergo autophagy. The DIRAS family members, DIRAS1 and DIRAS2
share 50-60% homology with DIRAS3 and are found in the murine genome.
These 22kDa GTPases differ from DIRAS3 by the truncation of their
N-terminal extension. Although DIRAS1 and DIRAS2 have not previously been
characterized in ovarian cancer, TCGA analysis suggests that higher mRNA
expression of these genes results in a survival advantage for patients
with high grade serous ovarian cancer. In this study we demonstrate that
re-expression of DIRAS1 and DIRAS2 inhibit ovarian cancer cell growth in
vitro and induce autophagy in both human and murine cells. DIRAS1 and
DIRAS2 are required for murine autophagy induced by rapamycin or amino
acid starvation. Overexpression of DIRAS1 and DIRAS2 inhibits cancer cell
growth and motility, and results in the inhibition of both the PI3K and
Ras/MAPK signaling pathways. Thus DIRAS1 and DIRAS2 provide many of the
functions of DIRAS3 in normal and malignant murine cells.

