Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming primary ibrutinib resistance in mantle cell lymphoma


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare and incurable subtype of B-cell
lymphoma. In a phase II study of ibrutinib in MCL patients, most of the
patients responded and had long durable remissions; however, 22.7% of
patients were considered to be non-responsive to ibrutinib, and an
additional 22/110 patients displayed initial positive responses to
ibrutinib but also experienced disease progression within 12 months of
treatment, with both responses classified as primary ibrutinib resistant.
Therefore, understanding the mechanisms mediating primary ibrutinib
resistance may identify new prognostic and predictive markers and
potential therapeutic targets.Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) plays an
important role in B-cell development, activation, and differentiation.
Upon B-cell receptor (BCR) activation, BTK is phosphorylated and
activated by SYK. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) is recruited to the
BCR, and the induction of these signaling activities leads to the
downstream activation of multiple effector proteins, including nuclear
factor-kB (NF-kB), AKT, RAS, mTOR and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK). BTK and PI3K have been shown to function independently to mediate
BCR signaling, suggesting that PI3K signaling activities may underlie
ibrutinib resistance independently of BTK. PI3K has also been associated
with primary ibrutinib resistance. To further elucidate the mechanisms
underlying ibrutinib resistance, we conferred primary ibrutinib
resistance using both MCL cell lines and MCL-bearing patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) mouse models and used whole exome sequencing (WES) and
reverse phase protein analysis (RPPA) to identify any genetic and
expression changes associated with primary ibrutinib resistance. WES did
not reveal any mutations in BTK or within the proximal BCR pathway,
consistent with WES data on primary ibrutinib resistant MCL cases. RPPA
analysis showed a significant increase in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR/MCL-1
compensatory pathway component levels in ibrutinib-resistant cell lines
when compared with their parental cells as well as ibrutinib-resistant
PDXs. To determine whether inhibiting these pathways would overcome
primary ibrutinib resistance, we tested various therapeutic combinations
targeting these pathways. Ibrutinib plus the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib,
the AKT inhibitor ACP-319, the mTOR inhibitors AZD8055 or BEZ235 as well
as the proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib inhibited tumor growth in vitro
and in vivo in the PDX mouse models, demonstrating that targeting these
alternative pathways may overcome ibrutinib resistance. This work
strongly suggests that targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR/MCL-1 compensatory
pathway successfully inhibits the viability of ibrutinib-resistant MCL
tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo and identified potential therapies
that can be used to treat ibrutinib-resistant patients in clinical
practice.

