Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of novel t(12;17)(p12;p13) in
treatment-refractory/relapsed acute myeloid leukemia by anchored
multiplex PCR(AMP)-based next-generation sequencing


Gene fusions are an important class of mutations and have been shown to
drive many genetic diseases. While several technologies can be used to
detect fusions, anchored multiplex PCR (AMP) next generation sequencing
(NGS)-based detection offers the advantages of novel fusion detection and
the ability to multiplex multitudinous genes. Here we report application
of this technology in the evaluation of a 56-year-old man diagnosed with
AML (2013). He was treated initially with Vidaza and later with CLAG-M
induction (2014) with complete response and consolidation CLA (2015). He
relapsed (4/2015) and was reinduced with 7+3 (Ida). He relapsed again and
was reinduced with FCT but bone marrow biopsy showed persistent disease
(75% blasts). Karyotype showed 46, XY, t(12;17)(p12;p13)[20]. It was
postulated that ETV6 oncogene was involved based on 12p13 locus. The
partner gene was unknown in this patient with multiply
relapsed/refractory disease. AMP technology (Archer FusionPlex) confirmed
involvement of the expected ETV6. However, more importantly, employing
this technology lead to the discovery of a novel fusion partner, HIC1.
The identity of the novel fusion partners was supported by the
breakpoints originally observed by karyotype analysis. AMP promotes
discovery of novel fusions by targeting one (known) of two genes involved
in the fusion event. HIC1 regulates cellular growth and serves as a tumor
suppressor gene. Inactivation of HIC1 has been associated with aggressive
disease and poor survival in other cancer types. Interestingly, in vitro
restoration of gene function by 5-aza-dC resulted in decreased cell
proliferation and tumor aggressiveness in pancreatic cancer and head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma suggesting the prospect of a therapeutic
target. This discovery provides new insight into a possible leukemogenic
pathway in AML and potential for targeted therapy.

