Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity and metformin alter progression of triple negative breast
cancer


Background: Epidemiological studies from us and others have reported an
association of obesity with more aggressive breast tumors and >30% higher
risk of recurrence and mortality compared to normal weight patients. This
includes poorer outcomes for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), an
aggressive subtype with early recurrence and shorter survival. Metformin
is a leading frontline therapy for type 2 diabetes and its safety profile
is well documented. Laboratory and clinical studies including ours
suggest that metformin may have anti-tumor effects in breast cancer.
However, the nature and molecular mechanisms of these correlations are
poorly understood.Experimental design and methods: We used a PDX
(patient-derived xenograft) breast cancer model in diet-induced obese
mice to study how obesity promotes breast cancer growth and how metformin
antagonizes these effects. After feeding the mice with a high-fat diet
(HFD) vs. a control diet (CD), we transplanted a TNBC PDX into the
mammary fat pads. When tumors reached about 50 mm3, mice in HFD and CD
groups were randomly assigned to metformin treatment or no treatment.
Tumor volumes were measured bi-weekly, and blood, tumors, and organs were
collected after 4 weeks of treatment. Histological and
immunohistochemical staining, serum adipokines array and metabolomics and
lipidomics analyses were performed to examine potential
mechanisms.Results: HFD (obese) group compared to CD (lean) group was
associated with larger tumors, whereas metformin compared to no treatment
was associated with smaller tumors. A panel of adipokines and metabolites
was identified to be differentially expressed between the
groups.Conclusion: Our results suggest a growth promoting effect of
obesity in TNBC, while metformin appears to have the opposite effect. The
identification of adipokines and metabolites involved in these effects
will help us understand the mechanisms by which obesity and metformin
alter the progression of TNBC.

