Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploratory plasma proteomic analysis in a randomized cross-over
trial of aspirin among healthy individuals


Background: Long-term use of aspirin is associated with lower colorectal
cancer (CRC) incidence; however, the mechanism of the chemopreventive
effect of aspirin is not fully understood. Animal studies suggest that
COX-2, NFB signaling and Wnt/-catenin pathways may play a role, but no
clinical trials have systematically evaluated the biological response to
aspirin in healthy humans. Methods: We assessed the difference in plasma
protein levels after 60 days of regular dose aspirin (325 mg/day)
compared to placebo in a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled,
cross-over trial of 44 healthy non-smoking men and women, aged 21-45
years. Plasma proteomics was analyzed on an antibody microarray with
3,000 full-length antibodies, printed in triplicate. Moderated paired
t-test was performed on individual antibodies, and gene set analyses were
performed for KEGG and GO pathways. Results: Among the 3,387 antibodies,
significant differences in plasma protein levels were observed for 267
antibodies (pBackground: Long-term use of aspirin is associated with
lower colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence; however, the mechanism of the
chemopreventive effect of aspirin is not fully understood. Animal studies
suggest that COX-2, NFB signaling and Wnt/-catenin pathways may play a
role, but no clinical trials have systematically evaluated the biological
response to aspirin in healthy humans. Methods: We assessed the
difference in plasma protein levels after 60 days of regular dose aspirin
(325 mg/day) compared to placebo in a randomized, double-blinded,
placebo-controlled, cross-over trial of 44 healthy non-smoking men and
women, aged 21-45 years. Plasma proteomics was analyzed on an antibody
microarray with 3,000 full-length antibodies, printed in triplicate.
Moderated paired t-test was performed on individual antibodies, and gene
set analyses were performed for KEGG and GO pathways. Results: Among the
3,387 antibodies, significant differences in plasma protein levels were
observed for 267 antibodies (p<0.05), the most significant protein being
a transcription-factor regulator belonging to a steroid receptor family
and found to be differentially expressed in colon cancer cells. Other
significant proteins are involved in multiple oncogenic pathways related
to colon tumorigenesis. In the pathway analysis, 4 KEGG (among 138) and
69 GO (among 1,089) pathways were found to be significant (pBackground:
Long-term use of aspirin is associated with lower colorectal cancer (CRC)
incidence; however, the mechanism of the chemopreventive effect of
aspirin is not fully understood. Animal studies suggest that COX-2, NFB
signaling and Wnt/-catenin pathways may play a role, but no clinical
trials have systematically evaluated the biological response to aspirin
in healthy humans. Methods: We assessed the difference in plasma protein
levels after 60 days of regular dose aspirin (325 mg/day) compared to
placebo in a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, cross-over
trial of 44 healthy non-smoking men and women, aged 21-45 years. Plasma
proteomics was analyzed on an antibody microarray with 3,000 full-length
antibodies, printed in triplicate. Moderated paired t-test was performed
on individual antibodies, and gene set analyses were performed for KEGG
and GO pathways. Results: Among the 3,387 antibodies, significant
differences in plasma protein levels were observed for 267 antibodies
(p<0.05), the most significant protein being a transcription-factor
regulator belonging to a steroid receptor family and found to be
differentially expressed in colon cancer cells. Other significant
proteins are involved in multiple oncogenic pathways related to colon
tumorigenesis. In the pathway analysis, 4 KEGG (among 138) and 69 GO
(among 1,089) pathways were found to be significant (p<0.05), including
natural killer (NK) cell-mediated cytotoxicity, butanoate metabolism and
Wnt signaling pathways. Pathways that modulate cellular protein binding
to steroid receptors were also significantly different between aspirin
treatment and placebo (pBackground: Long-term use of aspirin is
associated with lower colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence; however, the
mechanism of the chemopreventive effect of aspirin is not fully
understood. Animal studies suggest that COX-2, NFB signaling and
Wnt/-catenin pathways may play a role, but no clinical trials have
systematically evaluated the biological response to aspirin in healthy
humans. Methods: We assessed the difference in plasma protein levels
after 60 days of regular dose aspirin (325 mg/day) compared to placebo in
a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial of 44
healthy non-smoking men and women, aged 21-45 years. Plasma proteomics
was analyzed on an antibody microarray with 3,000 full-length antibodies,
printed in triplicate. Moderated paired t-test was performed on
individual antibodies, and gene set analyses were performed for KEGG and
GO pathways. Results: Among the 3,387 antibodies, significant differences
in plasma protein levels were observed for 267 antibodies (p<0.05), the
most significant protein being a transcription-factor regulator belonging
to a steroid receptor family and found to be differentially expressed in
colon cancer cells. Other significant proteins are involved in multiple
oncogenic pathways related to colon tumorigenesis. In the pathway
analysis, 4 KEGG (among 138) and 69 GO (among 1,089) pathways were found
to be significant (p<0.05), including natural killer (NK) cell-mediated
cytotoxicity, butanoate metabolism and Wnt signaling pathways. Pathways
that modulate cellular protein binding to steroid receptors were also
significantly different between aspirin treatment and placebo (p<0.05).
None of the results remained statistically significant after correction
for multiple testing. Conclusion: Several proteins and pathways, which
have previously been reported as playing a role in colorectal
carcinogenesis in vitro were found to be differentially expressed after
aspirin treatment vs. placebo in healthy human subjects. This study
suggests several chemopreventive mechanisms of aspirin; however, larger,
confirmatory studies are needed.

