Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Rab11 and E-cadherin promotes collective cell
migration and indicates a poor prognosis in colorectal carcinoma


Collective cell migration, whereby the cell-cell contacts such as
E-cadherin are maintained during migration, has recently emerged, and the
detailed mechanisms of this process are still unclear. The present study
identified the role of Rab11 which functions in recycling endosome and
the relation to E-cadherin in colorectal carcinoma and clarified the
mechanism of Rab11 in the collective cell migration of cancer cells. The
relationships between the overexpression of Rab11 and E-cadherin and
survival were evaluated from colorectal carcinoma patients. A total of
107 patients with surgically resected colorectal carcinoma were enrolled
in immunohistochemical study. The relationships between the
overexpression of Rab11 and E-cadherin and survival were evaluated. GFP
tagged Rab11 or Rab11 shRNA was introduced into HT-29 colon cancer cells
for overexpression or knockdown. The interaction between E-cadherin and
Rab11 was determined by immunoprecipitation. Rac1 and matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) activities were evaluated as functional effectors
of collective cell migration. In the results, the expression of Rab11 and
E-cadherin was not correlated with the stages of cancer or lymph node
metastasis. However, the overall survival was poor in the group of 60
patients with duo-positive Rab11 and E-cadherin expression compared to
the group (47 patients) without duo-positive expression (p = 0.038). In
the cell biology assay, Rab11 was demonstrated through its physical
interaction with E-cadherin, and overexpression of Rab11 was found to
promote collective cell migration through the increased distribution of
E-cadherin, which enhanced cell-cell connections. In addition, Rac1
activation and MMP2 expression were up-regulated upon Rab11 expression.
This study demonstrated that Rab11and E-cadherin expression are poor
indicators of survival time in colorectal carcinoma, but that Rab11
overexpression may contribute to increased collective cell invasion in
colorectal carcinoma.

