Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Areca nut-induced JNK/ATF2/Jun axis regulates TGF-beta signaling
contributing to pre-cancerous oral submucous fibrosis


Oral Submucous Fibrosis (OSF) is an inflammatory, pre-cancerous condition
of the oral submucosa. It affects individuals with prolonged areca nut
chewing habit and therefore areca nut is regarded as the etiological
agent for OSF manifestation. Transforming Growth Factor beta is an
established promoter of cancer and fibrosis. Up-regulation of TGF- and
its target genes has also been reported in OSF. However, the underlying
mechanism for the regulation of TGF- by areca nut has not been
elucidated.The present study demonstrates that TGF- pathway is activated
in epithelial cells after two hour exposure to areca nut extract. Areca
nut increases TGF- transcript as well as protein and thereby the
downstream canonical Smad2/3 signaling. Pre-treatment with various
pathway inhibitors showed JNK pathway activation as a pre-requisite to
TGF- pathway activation by areca nut. Areca nut activated JNK pathway
within half an hour of treatment and this was reversed by atropine
treatment suggesting involvement of muscarinic acid receptor signaling.
Second messengers upstream to JNK activation and regulated by areca nut
were calcium/CAMKII and reactive oxygen species. Further, areca nut
treatment resulted in JNK dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 and c-Jun
transcription factors. These were found to bind TGF- promoter, as
revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. Expectedly,
knockdown of these transcription factors abrogated areca nut induced TGF-
pathway activation.Based on the data obtained a model is proposed to
elucidate activation of TGF- pathway by areca nut extract involving
activation of JNK and ATF2, c-Jun resulting in the over expression of
TGF- in epithelial cells which may contribute to the manifestation of
OSF. Thus, this study highlights ATF2/c-Jun as the critical nodes for
therapeutic intervention to prevent TGF- over production in OSF.Funding
by DST and CSIR is acknowledged.

