Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The presence and persistence of ERCC1 positive circulating tumor
cells predicts worse prognosis in primary ovarian cancer patients


Background: Resistance to platinum based chemotherapy in ovarian cancer
can only be assessed retrospectively during post-chemotherapy follow-up.
We recently showed that excision-repair cross-complementing rodent repair
deficiency complementation group 1 nuclease (ERCC1)-positive (+)
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) were an independent predictor for
progression free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and for
platinum-resistance in our ovarian cancer patients (pts). We now analyzed
whether the negative prognostic impact of CTCs was related to the
presence and persistence of ERCC1+ CTCs after platinum based
chemotherapy.Methods: 10 ml blood of 65 primary ovarian cancer pts before
and after chemotherapy were studied for CTCs by immunomagnetic enrichment
followed by multiplex RT-PCR to detect the transcripts EpCAM, MUC-1 and
Ca 125 (AdnaTest OvarianCancer; QIAGEN Hannover GmbH, Germany). A patient
was considered CTC+, if at least one of the three markers was detectable.
ERCC1 was analyzed in a separate approach by single plex PCR, -actin
served as an internal control and PCR-products were quantified on the
Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100.Results: CTCs were detected in 18/65 pts (28%)
before and in 13/65 pts (20%) after chemotherapy. A persistence of CTCs
was found in four pts, 14 pts were only positive before and nine pts only
after therapy whereas in 38 pts, no CTCs were detected at any time. Pts
with persisting CTCs had a significantly shorter PFS (p = 3.32E-05) and
OS (0.00018) while pts initially CTC-negative before but CTC+ after
therapy showed a reduced OS (p = 0.0039). ERCC1+CTCs were observed in
12/65 (18%) pts before and in 8/65 pts (12%) after therapy. A persistence
of ERCC1+CTCs was found in three pts, nine pts were only positive before,
five pts only after therapy whereas in 48 pts, no ERCC1+CTCs were
detected at any time. Pts with persisting ERCC1+CTCs had a significantly
shorter PFS (p = 0.032) and OS (0.0058) while pts initially
ERCC1-negative before but ERCC1+ after therapy showed a reduced OS (p =
0.039). Up to now, no association between clinically defined platinum
resistance and ERCC1-positivity was observed.Conclusion: The negative
prognostic impact of CTCs was related to the presence and persistence of
ERCC1+CTCs after therapy supporting the idea to implement ERCC1
expression in CTC analysis of ovarian cancer pts as a biomarker for
monitoring the disease to possibly change treatment in case of ERCC1
persistent CTCs.

