Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal origin of therapy-related myeloid neoplasms


Background: Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms (t-MNs) are secondary
malignancies that develop in patients (pts) treated with chemo-radiation
therapy (CRT). Patient-related risk factors for t-MN susceptibility is
unknown. Recent studies reported that canonical hematological driver
mutations (DMs) could be detected in peripheral blood (PB) from healthy
individuals or pts with solid tumors, a phenomenon referred to as clonal
hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP). We hypothesized that
there are canonical DMs likely important in t-MNs that pre-exist as
detectable CHIP in pts at time of diagnosis of their original
cancer.Methods: We sequenced 300 leukemia-relevant genes on diagnostic
bone marrow (BM) samples from 13 t-MN pts to detect DMs. We then assessed
the presence of the same DMs in the pts matched PB samples, which were
obtained after primary cancer diagnosis but before CRT.Results: Four pts
(31%) had t-AML and 9 (69%) had t-MDS. The median age at primary cancer
diagnosis and t-MN diagnosis was 62 years (y) (range: 25-74 y) and 66 y
(range: 28-77 y), respectively. The median latency time to t-MN
development was 3 y (range: 1-8 y).Targeted gene sequencing revealed 17
canonical DMs in 8 genes. At least one clonal DM was detected in each pt.
The most frequently detected mutation was TP53 mutations in 4 patients
(31%), followed by DNMT3A (N = 3, 23%), IDH2 (N = 2, 15%), TET2 (N = 2,
15%), and RUNX1 mutations in 2 (15%).Analysis of deep sequencing PB
sample revealed that DMs identical to those detected in t-MN BM were
detected in 7 of 13 pts (54%). For example, Case UID6982 had small cell
lung cancer and received concurrent CRT with carboplatin and etoposide.
He developed t-AML 3 y later and was found to have an IDH2 p. R140Q
mutation in the diagnostic BM with a VAF of 40%. His PB obtained before
CRT showed the same IDH2 p.R140Q mutation with a VAF of 14%.The most
common DM detected in paired PB samples was TP53 mutation in 3 cases,
followed by DNMT3A, TET2, IDH2, and RUNX1 mutation in 1 case each. Of
note, DMs that were subclonal in t-MN BM were not detected in the PB at
the time of primary cancer diagnosis. The median VAF of the detected
variants in the paired PB samples was 6% (range: 0.6-27%). We found no
significant differences between pts with and pts without evidence of CHIP
in terms of median age at primary cancer diagnosis or median latency time
to t-MN development.Conclusion: In this study we have demonstrated
evidence of detectable mutations in multiple canonical leukemia driver
genes at time of diagnosis and before therapy of primary cancer in pts
whose subsequent t-MN also harbored identical DMs. This work suggests
that a substantial fraction of t-MN pts likely exhibit CHIP with
detectable canonical mutations in a number of leukemia driver genes at
time of diagnosis for their primary cancer. Further, these data suggest
the potential to develop a risk stratification model based on presence of
CHIP with canonical DMs at the time of primary cancer diagnosis.

