Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genomic landscape of Kras mutant genetically engineered mouse
models of human cancers


Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM) of cancer are invaluable tools
for oncology research. They recapitulate critical aspects of tumor
etiology and allow for unique interrogation of tumor evolution and
maintenance. In addition, these models are poised for assessing
therapeutic drug efficacy and resistance mechanisms. Although these
models are widely used, the mutational landscape and transcriptional
profile of GEMMs have yet to be thoroughly characterized.In this study we
sought to investigate the precise genomic landscape of three
well-validated GEMMs representing two types of Kras mutant cancers,
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC). Using next generation sequencing techniques, we profiled an
adenovirally-induced Kras mutant NSCLC model (KrasLSL.G12D/+;p53frt/frt)
and two Kras mutant models of spontaneous PDAC: KPP
(KrasLSL.G12D/+;p16/p19fl/fl;Pdx1.Cre) and KPR
(KrasLSL.G12D/+;p16/p19fl/+;p53LSL.R270H/+;Pdx1.Cre). All three GEMMs
incorporate genomic aberrations that are documented to occur in the human
patient population. Additionally these models have been reported to
approximate histological and phenotypic aspects of their human
correlate.We carried out whole exome sequencing for each model (NSCLC n =
115; PDAC n = 73 and n = 40, respectively) to comprehensively
characterize the genomes. Interestingly, both intra and inter-tumoral
genomic heterogeneity was evident both within and amongst Kras mutant
tumor models. The models most significantly diverge with respect to copy
number alterations. The NSCLC model demonstrated whole chromosome 6 gain
and focal deletion on chromosome 9, in addition to other genomic
alterations. However, the KPP PDAC model tumors exhibited significant
focal amplification of mutant Kras in 75% (55/73) of cases. In
combination with RNA-seq data, we can show that these genomic alterations
correlate with divergent transcriptional signatures despite the shared
Kras mutation, especially in MAPK pathway signatures. This data suggests
tumors within these models have unique signaling pathway
dependencies.Finally, we compared the tumors resulting in the murine
models to that of Kras altered human tumors from TCGA at the genomic
level. The genomic landscapes of Kras mutant GEMMs and corresponding Kras
mutant patients share significant similarities. We identified mutations
in oncogenes and tumor suppressors, in addition to alterations in gene
copy number. Taken together, the results provide a clearer understanding
of the genomic landscape of these GEMMs and their relationship with human
patients. More importantly, these analyses will allow us to better
interpret results from previous and future experiments using these Kras
mutant GEMMs of cancer.

