Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDODA-Me augments the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents and
overcomes chemo-resistance in breast and lung cancer cells


Purpose: The purpose of this research is to determine the effects of the
combination of (CDODA-Me), a derivative of glycyrrhetinic acid with
chemotherapeutic agents like docetaxel (DTX) and Erlotinib (a TKI
inhibitor) to treat triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and TKI
resistant lung cancer.Methods: TNBC lines MDA-MB-231 MDA-MB-468 and DTX
resistant (MDA231) cells were treated in combination with CDODA-Me
(nontoxic dose of 2 M) and DTX. Wildtype (HCC827) and resistant
(Erlotinib resistant) lung cancer cells were treated with Erlotinib and
CDODA-Me. The cell viability of MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, Docetaxel
resistant (MDA231) cells and HCC 827 Erlotinib resistant (4 M) cells in
each treatment group was determined by crystal violet assay. Combination
index values were calculated by isobolographic analysis. Western blot
annalysis was used to investigate the influence of CDODA-Me combinations
on drug resistance and key apoptotic proteins such as bcl2, survivin,
SP1, SP3, and SP4. 2,7 -dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA) was used to
measure reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in all cell lines and
examined by flowcytometry.Results: Breast Cancer cells (MDA-MB-468 and
MDA-MB-231) showed increased cytotoxicity with a ten fold decrease in
IC50 concentration (0.3 M DTX and 0.03 M DTX in combination with 2 M
CDODA-Me). DTX resistant (MDA231) cells showed IC50 values comparable to
wildtype cells at 0.29 M DTX in combination with CDODA-Me. HCC827
(Erlotinib resistant) showed a three fold decrease in cytotoxicity (IC 50
values of 4.9 M and 16.9 M Erlotinib for the combination and Erlotinib
alone respectively). The combination treatment also showed higher
response in resistant cells with IC50 values comparable to wildtypes. The
expression of bcl2, survivin, specific transcription factors (like SP1,
SP3 and SP4) was downregulated in cells treated with CDODA-ME and DTX
combination compared to CDODA-ME alone, DTX alone and control cells.
Similar results were observed with CDODA-Me and Erlotinib combination in
HCC827 erlotonib resistant (4 M) cells. CDODA-Me alone treatment showed
ROS levels in HCC 827 (4 M) resistant cell lines were increased (8-fold)
significantly as compared to other breast cancer cells.Conclusion: In
conclusion, CDODA-Me inhibits growth of TNBC cells and Erlotinib
resistant lung cancer cells and downregulates the SP proteins and
anti-apoptotic proteins. Therefore, these results indicate that CDODA-Me
is a promising anticancer agent and can overcome resistance of
chemotherapeutic agents against breast and lung cancer.

