Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial mutations and gene expression analysis in colorectal
adenopolyps


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common diagnosed and cause of
cancer related deaths in both men and women in the United States.
Numerous studies have analyzed mitochondria DNA mutations in CRC and
other tumors. Results from these studies have detected high mutation
rates which may lead to mitochondrial deregulation and tumor progression.
Most CRCs develop from adenopolyps via the adenoma-carcinoma sequence.
Therefore, analysis of mitochondrial mutations and gene expression may
provide a mechanism for inhibition of this tumoral sequence in
individuals with a high risk of developing CRC. In the present study, PCR
based sequencing and reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)
were used to determine if mutations in mitochondrial encoded genes and
levels of expression of these genes could influence the progression of
the adenoma- carcinoma tumoral sequence. Genes analyzed included MT-RNR1,
MT-COI, MT-ATP6, MT- MT-CYB, and mitochondrial ND genes that are involved
in the normal metabolism of mitochondria. Measurements were made for 34
tissue sample pairs obtained from various types of colorectal adenomas
and corresponding normal surrounding tissues. Additionally, mitochondrial
complexes I (NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase) and III (CoQH2-cytochrome c
reductase) protein was analyzed. There was progressive differential
expression of mt-genes and complexes I and III proteins among the
colorectal tumor stages relative to their paired normal samples. The
level of complexes I and III were higher in tumor tissues relative to
normal surrounding tissues. Noticeably, the expression of MT-COI was
higher in late stage carcinomas among; all studied transcripts. We
detected 54 point mutations in one region ranging from 11871-11877. The
frequency of these mutations in all stages was as followed; 71.5% in
tubular adenoma, 57% tubulovillous, and 43% in villous and carcinoma. Our
results suggest that alterations in mt-gene expression play a role in the
transformation of the colorectal tumoral stages.

