Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Querying, viewing and analyzing colorectal cancer translational
research studies in tranSMART


All translational research projects basically share the same design,
which is correlating variation in disease phenotype to variation in
underlying biology. Typical questions to be addressed are: Which (out of
thousands) biomarkers predict good/bad outcome? and Which (out of
thousands) biomarkers predict whether a patient will benefit from a
particular therapy?. In line with this concept, many research teams have
generated large amounts of experimental molecular data from patient
samples, yet generally this information is inaccessible for examination
due to local storage of both (meta)data and the data processing workflows
used. Alternatively, data stored in central databases may only be
available for exploration and interpretation by data specialists,
provided that the processing workflow has been published and is
available. Thus, if data is not recorded and easily retrievable,
validation of obtained results (e.g. promising biomarkers) may be
virtually impossible. Additionally, it will be difficult to query
existing data sets to answer new questions, which may lead to experiments
being unnecessarily repeated and biological materials being wasted. In
the Netherlands, the Translational Research IT (TraIT) project initiated
by the Center for Translational Molecular Medicine (CTMM,
www.ctmm-trait.nl) aims to provide IT solutions to support translational
research from start to end, including sustainable management and analysis
of data. These data types involve the clinical, biomedical imaging,
biobanking, (molecular) experimental data domains and their associated
workflows. In addition to domain-specific solutions to manage these data
types, the processed or final data of these different domains will become
available in the data-integration platform tranSMART for querying,
visualization and analysis. To ensure sustainable data stewardship and
provide easy access to existing data for the CTMM colorectal cancer
project Decrease in Colorectal Cancer Death (DeCoDe), data has been made
available in tranSMART and more datasets are being added. The data
encompasses both clinical and (molecular) experimental data from
non-high-throughput molecular profiling (NHTMP) assays and array-based
profiling techniques.It is now possible with tranSMART to explore the
respective DeCoDe datasets and perform various analyses (survival,
Fisher-exact tests, ANOVA, aCGH tests etc.), without needing deep
bioinformatics expertise. Through metadata tags it is possible to trace
back raw or pre-processed data in other tools (e.g. clinical data in
OpenClinica, array-data in GEO, or histological images of tissue
microarrays). Data can be examined in more detail by domain experts using
tools they are familiar with or other tools provided by CTMM-TraIT. Thus,
existing rich data are made findable, accessible, interoperable and
reusable (FAIR) and source data can be traced back for customized
processing.

