Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic difference between multicentric carcinogenesis and
intrahepatic metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma


Multiple hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is categorized into 2 types;
multicentric hepatocarcinogenesis (MC) and intrahepatic metastasis (IM).
Although discrimination of the types of multiple HCC is of clinical
importance, it is quite difficult to determine it correctly even after
histological diagnosis. In order to classify multiple HCC into MC and IM,
we compared pairs of multiple HCC samples from 12 patients who were
clinically diagnosed MC, 6 patients with IM with regard to molecular
aberrations, and 2 patients with pairs of primary HCC and extrahepatic
metastasis such as adrenal grand and lung metastasis. Exome sequence
showed that 125 mutations (90.6%) per patient with IM were common, which
were consistent with the result of a pair of primary HCC and extrahepatic
metastasis. On the other hand, 138 somatic mutations per tumor, and no
common somatic mutations were identified in the 7 patients with MC.
Especially only a few passenger mutations were different between IM
specimens suggesting that IM pairs developed from the common ancestor. In
contrast, 5 patients who clinically diagnosed MC had common mutations
(41.7%), which indicates that pairs of HCC of these patients were
genetically IM. Notably, mutation signatures obtained from exome sequence
data of 2 nodules from the same patients with IM were similar, while
those from patients with MC were different by profiling analysis. On the
other hand, methylation profile shows that 2 HCC samples from the same
patients with MC as well as IM were classified into the same cluster; the
methylation status from the different ancestor is similar, and not
altered through carcinogenesis. Taken together, comparison of mutations
in a pair of HCCs makes it possible to classify multiple HCCs into MC and
IM, which is difficult to be correctly determined in clinical practice,
and is available to make treatment plans for multiple HCC patients.
Furthermore, methylation status of 2 nodules of MC from same patient were
similar, while those of mutation signatures were different, which
suggests that the epigenomic changes are the earlier event prior to the
genomic alterations.

