Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproductive hormone levels modulate doxorubicin induced
cardiomyopathy in female tumor-bearing spontaneously hypertensive rats


The anthracycline doxorubicin (dox) is known to cause cardiomyopathy, at
least in part, through the generation of excess reactive oxygen species
(ROS) in the mitochondria. Cardiomyocytes have higher concentrations of
mitochondria and lower concentrations of antioxidants, making them more
sensitive to excessive ROS. The incidence of dox induced cardiac stress
is greater in pre-pubescent and post-menopausal females compared to
age-matched males but lower in women of reproductive age. Previous
studies have associated gender and age differences in cardiosensitivity
with estrogen production. This is the first part of a two part study
investigating the role that reproductive hormones (estrogen and
progesterone) play in dox induced cardiotoxicity in female, tumor-bearing
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs). In this portion of the study our
aim was to evaluate the effect of hormone therapy on cardioprotection
from dox. Reproductively mature ovariectomized animals were implanted
with time-release pellets containing a carrier-matrix (vehicle),
17--estradiol (E2), progesterone (P4), Tamoxifen (Tam) or combinations
thereof. The animals were implanted with cells from an SHR-derived
syngeneic breast cancer cell line (SST-2). Tumor-bearing animals were
then treated with a single dose of saline or dox and monitored for 12
days. Daily vaginal cytologies were obtained to measure estrous cycle
status. Serum was collected throughout the study to correlate estrous
phase to E2 and P4 levels and evaluate serum protein cTnI as a biomarker
for cardiac injury. In all hormone groups, dox exhibited significant
anti-tumor activity and resulted in a net decrease in growth rate
compared to saline controls. After 12 days exposure, animals treated with
dox and implanted with Tam, Tam+E2 or vehicle pellets showed a
significant increase in cTnI, indicative of cardiac damage. Dox treated
animals with pellets containing E2, P4 or the combination showed a
significant decrease in cTnI, demonstrating potential cardioprotection
from reproductive hormone therapy. Furthermore, histopathology of cardiac
sections from dox-treated groups displayed lower cardiomyopathy scores in
animals that received E2, P4 or the combination of the two. We are
currently evaluating additional endpoints for cardiotoxicity and cellular
stress to assess the mechanism behind E2 and P4 cardioprotection from
chemotherapy. Overall, our findings suggest that the hormones estrogen
and progesterone reduce dox-induced cardiotoxicity.

