Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of copy number and miRNA profiling in triple
negative breast cancer of Latina women


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a clinically and molecularly
heterogeneous disease, which incidence and outcome vary among the
different ethnic and racial groups. These tumors are more commonly seen
in younger women of African and Latinas/Hispanic descents, usually
diagnosed at more advanced stages, with non-localized disease. Molecular
studies have shown differences in the biology of these tumors in Latinas
as key contributors for high mortality. The main objective of our study
was to identify a miRNA signature associated with TNBC of Latina patients
by integrating miRNA and array-CGH data. Archived paraffin samples of 32
TNBC and 25 non-TNBC cases from Latina patients, obtained from the
Clinical Hospital (UFPR) in Brazil, were profiled for miRNA and array-CGH
using the Nanostring and the Agilent SurePrint G3 Human array-CGH
platforms, respectively. The miRNA and array-CGH data, obtained in the
same samples, was directly integrated and combinatorial target predicted
algorithms in conjunction with functional and pathway annotation
enrichment systems were performed to identify the most relevant miRNAs
and their corresponding gene targets. Eight-nine miRNAs were observed
differentially expressed between the TNBC and non-TNBC lesions. Using
miRBase and MiRDB target prediction databases 3,378 miRNAs targets were
identified. After integration with array-CGH, a number of 15 miRNAs
presented concomitant DNA copy number and miRNA alterations, reducing the
number of targets to 1,242. Ingenuity pathway analysis identified the
most affected canonical pathways, including IL-8, TGF-beta, PI3K-AKT and
HER2 signaling pathways. Using our integration approach we were able to
identify a robust miRNA signature associated with TNBC of Latina patients
and to identify the potential molecular mechanism (s) that underline the
observed miRNA deregulation in these patients. This signature revealed
miRNAs and corresponding targets biologically relevant, involved in
critical cancer signaling pathways and gene networks. Once this signature
is functionally validated, its direct role in the aggressive clinical
phenotype of these tumors will be determined. In summary, the findings of
our study contributes to the identification of race/ethnic specific
molecular targets that can set the basis for new TNBC treatments and for
the future design of the most appropriate clinical trials and cancer
control interventions for Latina women.Funding:This project was supported
by the Georgetown University Center of Excellence in Regulatory Science
and Innovation (CERSI; U01FD004319), a collaborative effort between the
university and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to promote
regulatory science through innovative research and education. This
research does not necessarily reflect the views of the FDA.

