Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of honokiol on sialylation in breast cancer cells


Metastasis is a process in which malignant cells spread form the tumor of
origin and colonize at distant organs. One of the diagnostic markers of
metastatic progression is the overexpression of a transmembrane protein
called Mucin 1 (MUC1). High levels of MUC1 have been found in tumor
tissues, including breast cancer, and have been implicated in reduced
survival rate. After translation of the protein, carbohydrate groups are
attached to MUC1, a process called glycosylation. The resulting
glycocalyx, which serves as a protective layer on epithelial surfaces, is
involved in cell-cell interactions, signaling and metastasis.
Glycosylation patterns differ on MUC1 in normal breast tissue in
comparison with MUC1 in breast tumors. Not only do breast tumors have
simpler and fewer carbohydrate chains than MUC1 from normal breast
epithelial tissue, they also have increased levels of the carbohydrate
derivative, sialic acid. Altered addition of sialic acid (sialylation)
has been associated with cancer transformation and metastatic progression
of the disease. The enzyme, -2,3 sialyltransferase (ST3Gal I) which adds
the -2,3-linked sialic acids to MUC1 is increased in breast tumors and
has been correlated with poor prognosis. Shortening of the carbohydrates
units on MUC1 in breast tumors unmasks peptides that would otherwise be
covered by the carbohydrates in normal MUC1, and current studies seek to
identify antibodies that would directly target MUC1 on the cancer cells
and in turn prevent cancer metastasis. Plant derived natural product
honokiol is being studied for its anti-tumor activities. To assess the
effect of honokiol on ST3Gal I, we treated breast cancer cell lines,
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells with honokiol and analyzed its effect on
ST3Gal I mRNA and protein expression using RT-PCR and Western Blotting,
respectively. Honokiol suppressed ST3Gal I at the mRNA and protein level
in both cancer cell lines. To investigate specifically whether honokiol
reduces free sialic acid, we treated mammary carcinoma cells with
honokiol and using the Sialic Acid Kit, we observed reduction in sialic
acid in honokiol-treated mammary carcinoma cells. Future
immunoprecipitation studies are underway to investigate specifically
whether honokiol suppresses sialylation of MUC1. We propose that these
studies will lead to the understanding on how sialylation of MUC1 alters
the cellular signaling processes involved in the transformation of breast
cancer and eventually to the spread of the disease.

