Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch1 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
tumor-initiating capability in esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma


Introduction: Notch signaling may act as a tumor suppressor during the
development of squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs); yet, Notch activation
promotes tumor growth in a subset of SCC cells. The roles of Notch in the
pathogenesis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remain
elusive.Methods: Notch1 activation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) were determined in an esophageal epithelium-targeted cell-lineage
traceable (K5CreERT2-Rosa26tdTomatolsl) mouse model of ESCC induced by
4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4NQO), which was coupled with flow cytometry
and single cell-derived ESCC organoid formation assays. Tumor-initiating
capability was assessed in xenograft transplantation experiments with
TE11 human ESCC cells carrying either Crispr-Cas9-deleted Notch1 loci or
tetracycline-inducible expression of the activated form of Notch1 (ICN1).
Surgically resected primary tumors and adjacent normal mucosa from ESCC
patients (n = 152) were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for Notch1
activation and the EMT marker ZEB1.Results: 4NQO-treated mice developed
tdTomato-positive primary and metastatic ESCC tumors with EpCAM-negative
ESCC cells displaying traits compatible with EMT. Notch1 activation and
ZEB1 expression were co-localized in ESCC cells at the stromal interface,
a finding that was further recapitulated in ESCC tumor organoids.
Interestingly, Cre-mediated ex vivo Notch1 deletion in a single cell
suspension from Notch1loxP/loxP mouse-derived ESCC tumors decreased
organoid formation rate. TE11 xenograft tumors appeared to contain a
unique ESCC cell fraction containing EpCAM-negative cells, where ICN1
conferred tumorigenicity upon serial transplantation. This population
displayed upregulation of Notch1 target genes and the ESCC-lineage
survival factor/oncogene SOX2. Moreover, Notch1 deletion in TE11 not only
limited tumor formation, but also decreased EMT in culture. A subset of
ESCC patients (49/140, 33%) showed ICN1-positive ESCC cells with
concurrent ZEB1 expression at the tumor invasive front. The presence of
such ESCC cells was associated with poor 5-year survival (P = 0.001),
tumor depth (P = 0.01), lymphatic and venous invasion (P = 0.003) and
distant metastasis (P = 0.002). Moreover, such ICN1-expressing cells were
increased in ESCC patients (7/12, 58%) who received pre-surgical
neoadjuvant therapy.Conclusions: Cell-lineage tracing experiments
validate for the first time Notch1 activation and EMT in the 4NQO-induced
mouse model of ESCC. Analyses of single cell-derived ESCC tumor
organoids, xenograft and primary ESCC tumors reveal that Notch1
activation may be associated with tumor initiating capability, EMT and
chemotherapy resistance, implicating Notch1 activation in the
pathogenesis of ESCC and potentially other SCCs.

