Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pembrolizumab and ipilimumab reduce human RKO colon carcinoma
tumor growth in HLA matched CD34-NSG humanized mice


Over the past decade there has been an increasing demand for preclinical
models useful for evaluating the efficacy of checkpoint inhibition-based
cancer immunotherapies. The recently developed humanized mouse models
composed of various types of human immune cells has the potential to
recapitulate the human anti-tumor response modulated by checkpoint
inhibitors. Tumor cells may develop multiple mechanisms to evade immune
surveillance, including PD-L1 upregulation which suppresses T-cell
effector responses towards the tumor. In the present study, we evaluated
the efficacy of the checkpoint inhibitors pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1) and
ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4) in the human RKO colon carcinoma xenograft model
in CD34-NSG humanized mice. These mice were engrafted with human
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) that matched the HLA haplotype of the RKO
cells (HLA-A*01). Flow cytometry analysis confirmed high level of
expression of PD-L1 in RKO colon carcinoma cells. The results from this
study revealed that pembrolizumab and ipilimumab monotherapies
significantly inhibited tumor growth. Surprisingly, combination therapy
did not provide additive or synergistic effects and resulted in the same
level of efficacy as the individual regimens. In order to understand the
impact of these therapies on distinct immune cell populations, we
analyzed the distribution of CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes, Treg cells, NK
cells and B cells in peripheral blood, spleen and tumor samples from
tumor bearing humanized mice, via flow cytometry. We found that these
checkpoint inhibitors can enhance effector functions of CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells associated with increased expression of IFN-. A parallel study with
these checkpoint inhibitors carried out with humanized mice engrafted
with HSC of the same haplotype as the RKO cells but from a different
donor resulted in identical anti-tumor efficacy. In summary, these
studies validate the use of humanized mouse models to test the tumor
response to immune-checkpoint based therapies as it shows significant
anti-tumor growth as a result of pembrolizumab and ipilimumab
monotherapies associated with activation of T lymphocytes.

