Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A camptothecin-containing nanoparticle-drug conjugate combination
with DDR agents provides a novel approach to increasing therapeutic index


Topoisomerase I inhibitors are used as standard-of-care chemotherapy in
many types of cancer but are associated with significant toxicities.
There is potential to improve their efficacy further by combining with
inhibitors of the DNA damage response, such as the PARP inhibitor
olaparib. However, while preclinical data highlight the improved efficacy
of this combination, subsequent clinical trials have struggled due to
dose limiting myelotoxicity.CRLX101 is an investigational
nanoparticle-drug conjugate (NDC) containing the payload camptothecin
(the most potent topoisomerase I inhibitor known). This agent is
preferentially targeted to tumours and demonstrated a favourable toxicity
profile in the clinic.Here, we explored the molecular mechanism and
therapeutic potential of combining CRLX101 with either olaparib or the
WEE1 inhibitor AZD1775, by testing both efficacy and safety in
preclinical models. In vitro studies using NCI-H417a SCLC cells
demonstrated that combination with both olaparib and AZD1775 potentiated
the efficacy of CRLX101 although by different mechanisms. Cellular
analyses revealed that CRLX101 treatment alone predominantly activated
ATM-mediated DNA damage response and resulted in late S/G2 cell cycle
arrest. Combination with a PARP inhibitor further enhanced the
CRLX101-induced DNA damage response and prolonged cell cycle arrest in
late S/G2 phase. In contrast, WEE1 inhibition abrogated late S/G2 cell
cycle arrest induced by CRLX101, resulting in aberrant mitotic entry and
enhanced cell death.Our in vivo studies using wild type Wistar rat model
showed that CRLX101, olaparib and AZD1775, are well tolerated as single
agents. However, concurrent combination of CRLX101 with either olaparib
or AZD1775 resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in haematological
parameters. We investigated sequenced schedules and demonstrated that at
a 24h delay between the CRLX101 and olaparib mitigates much of the
combined bone marrow toxicity, while improving the efficacy above CRLX101
alone in xenograft tumours from NCI-H417a cells.Collectively, these
preclinical data demonstrate increased anti-tumour efficacy of CRLX101
when combined with DDR inhibitors. The combination schedule for CRLX101
and olaparib identified in our preclinical models as providing an
increased therapeutic index has been used to develop protocols to test
this combination in a relapsed (2nd line) SCLC human clinical trial (in
collaboration with NCI).

