Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of STAT3 in pediatric sarcoma cell lines


Signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) is a
transcription factor that plays a major role in embryonic development,
cell growth, differentiation and apoptosis. STAT3 becomes activated in
the cytosol via phosphorylation at tyrosine-705 by JAK-1/2 kinases, in
response to stimulation of either cytokine receptors or receptor tyrosine
kinases. Phospho-STAT3 forms dimers, which then translocate into the
nucleus to function as a transcription factor. Various pro-survival and
anti-apoptotic genes including VEGF, Bcl-xL, Bcl-2 and survivin have been
identified as STAT3 gene targets. Constitutive activation of STAT3 is
observed in various cancers including breast, lung, pancreatic cancers
and sarcomas. Since our studies indicate that STAT3 is upregulated in a
number of pediatric sarcomas as well, we set out to understand the
functional significance of STAT3 activation in these tumors in the
context of tumor cell proliferation, survival, migration and resistance
to apoptosis.High basal expression levels of phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) were
detected in a number of rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma and
osteosarcoma xenografts and cell lines. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) was capable
of inducing STAT3 (Tyr705) phosphorylation in these cell lines in a
time-dependent manner. On the other hand, stimulation with insulin-like
growth factors-1 and 2 or IGF-1/2 resulted only in a weak induction in
STAT3 phosphorylation during early timepoints. Treatment with a potent
JAK-1/2 inhibitor, ruxolitinib suggested that STAT3 phosphorylation in
these cell lines is dependent on JAK-1/2 activities.To understand the
role of STAT3 in tumorigenesis, STAT3 was either knocked down using
siRNAs or STAT3 phosphorylation was attenuated using ruxolitinib in
sarcoma cell lines that express constitutively activated STAT3. Neither
complete knockdown of STAT3, nor inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation by
ruxolitinib inhibited proliferation or decreased survival. These results
indicate that activation of STAT3 may not have a significant role in
tumor cell proliferation and survival under culture conditions. However,
STAT3 inhibition resulted in decreased cell migration implicating STAT3
in regulation of tumor cell migration and invasion.Overall, our data
demonstrates a role for STAT3 activation in sarcoma cell migration and
invasion and we speculate that targeting STAT3 might serve as a useful
therapeutic approach to control tumor invasion and metastasis. Supported
by USPHS grant CA165995.

