Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PLK1 induces growth arrest and apoptosis in
tumorigenic OS cells


Osteosarcoma (OS) remains a significant therapeutic challenge. At first
diagnosis, patients without signs of cancer beyond the primary tumor show
a 5-year survival rate of 60-80%; however, this falls to 20% in patients
with evidence of metastatic disease. Toward development of treatments
with greater therapeutic efficacy, we have been investigating the nature
of intratumoral heterogeneity in OS. We have found that subpopulations of
cells from primary OS biopsies are selectively capable of activating an
exogenous reporter construct comprised of the human Oct4 promoter linked
to the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP). These Oct4/GFP+ cells are >100
times tumorigenic than GFP- cells from within the same tumor when
injected into NSG mice.Our objective in this study was to investigate the
effects of Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) among heterogeneous cell populations
within individual OS tumors. PLK1 is a serine/threonine-specific kinase
that plays an important role in mitosis and the maintenance of genomic
stability. While PLK inhibition has previously been shown to reduce tumor
growth in OS cell lines, drug resistance and modest clinical efficacy
have been reported in several studies.Microarray analysis revealed an
upregulation of PLK1 of more than 1.7-fold in the Oct4/GFP+ cells
relative to the GFP- population in all three OS cell lines tested, OS156,
OS521 and OS28 (p value = 0.05). We next investigated the effects of the
PLK inhibitors, BI2536 and BI6727, to determine the sensitivity of drug
inhibition between 6 OS cell lines and among subpopulations within each
tumor. IC50s showed that OS521, OS220 and OS28 OS cell lines were more
resistant to the inhibitors than OS156, DCS0313 and D2712. Strikingly,
all the Oct4/GFP+ populations of the tumors were more sensitive to drug
treatment compared to GFP- cells. Cell cycle analysis showed that high
doses (>0.5 M) of either of the inhibitors induced apoptosis whereas low
doses (Osteosarcoma (OS) remains a significant therapeutic challenge. At
first diagnosis, patients without signs of cancer beyond the primary
tumor show a 5-year survival rate of 60-80%; however, this falls to 20%
in patients with evidence of metastatic disease. Toward development of
treatments with greater therapeutic efficacy, we have been investigating
the nature of intratumoral heterogeneity in OS. We have found that
subpopulations of cells from primary OS biopsies are selectively capable
of activating an exogenous reporter construct comprised of the human Oct4
promoter linked to the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP). These Oct4/GFP+
cells are >100 times tumorigenic than GFP- cells from within the same
tumor when injected into NSG mice.Our objective in this study was to
investigate the effects of Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) among heterogeneous
cell populations within individual OS tumors. PLK1 is a
serine/threonine-specific kinase that plays an important role in mitosis
and the maintenance of genomic stability. While PLK inhibition has
previously been shown to reduce tumor growth in OS cell lines, drug
resistance and modest clinical efficacy have been reported in several
studies.Microarray analysis revealed an upregulation of PLK1 of more than
1.7-fold in the Oct4/GFP+ cells relative to the GFP- population in all
three OS cell lines tested, OS156, OS521 and OS28 (p value = 0.05). We
next investigated the effects of the PLK inhibitors, BI2536 and BI6727,
to determine the sensitivity of drug inhibition between 6 OS cell lines
and among subpopulations within each tumor. IC50s showed that OS521,
OS220 and OS28 OS cell lines were more resistant to the inhibitors than
OS156, DCS0313 and D2712. Strikingly, all the Oct4/GFP+ populations of
the tumors were more sensitive to drug treatment compared to GFP- cells.
Cell cycle analysis showed that high doses (>0.5 M) of either of the
inhibitors induced apoptosis whereas low doses (<10 nM) induced G1
arrest. Within tumors, proliferation, clonability and migration were
reduced in the GFP+ cell population relative to GFP- cells at doses of 10
nM. Consistent with these in vitro findings, tumor cell growth of
Oct4/GFP+ pretreated cells injected in NSG mice was inhibited (by 50%) at
a low dose of 10 nM (p = 0.005)These findings offer evidence of the
differential drug resistance as a consequence not only of the individual
patient efficacy but also of the Oct4/GFP+ and GFP- populations from the
same tumor, confirming that the intratumoral heterogeneity is a major
obstacle for the treatment of OS, as the presence of minor populations
that are insensitive to therapy can lead to disease relapse. Future
studies will be conducted to understand what makes tumors resistant or
vulnerable to PLK1 inhibition.

