Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between osteoprotegerin (OPG), fatty acid synthase
(FASN), and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in breast cancer: implications in
carcinogenesis


The cross-talk between malignant and nonmalignant cells in the tumor
microenvironment, as maneuvered by cytokines/chemokines, drives breast
cancer progression. We demonstrated that OPG is expressed and secreted at
very high levels from the highly invasive breast cancer cell lines
SUM149PT and SUM1315MO2 as compared to human normal mammary epithelial
HMEC cells (1). OPG was involved in modulating aneuploidy, cell
proliferation, and angiogenesis in breast cancer (1). Mass spectrometry
analysis performed in this study revealed OPG interacts with fatty acid
synthase (FASN), which is a key enzyme of the fatty acid biosynthetic
pathway in breast cancer cells. Further, electron microscopy,
immunofluorescence, and fluorescence quantitation assay highlighted the
presence of a large number of lipid bodies (lipid droplets) in SUM149PT
and SUM1315MO2 cells in comparison to HMEC. We recently showed
upregulation of COX-2 inflammatory pathway and its metabolite PGE2
secretion in SUM149PT and SUM1315MO2 breast cancer cells (2).
Interestingly, human breast cancer tissue samples displayed high
expression of OPG, PGE2 and FASN. Immunofluorescence staining exposed the
co-existence of COX-2 and FASN in the lipid bodies of breast cancer
cells. We reasoned that there might be cross-talk between OPG, FASN, and
COX-2 that sustains the inflammatory pathways in breast cancer. Here, we
identified cis-acting elements involved in the transcriptional regulation
of COX-2 and FASN by recombinant human OPG (rhOPG). Treatment with FASN
inhibitor C75 decreased the number of lipid body/cell, downregulated
phosphorylation of ERK, GSK3, and induced apoptosis by caspase-3 and
caspapse-9 activation. Collectively, the novel biological cross-talk
between OPG, FASN, and COX-2 advocates for combinatorial drug treatment
to block these players of carcinogenesis as a promising therapeutic to
target highly invasive breast cancer.References:1. Goswami, S., &
Sharma-Walia, N. (2015). Osteoprotegerin secreted by inflammatory and
invasive breast cancer cells induces aneuploidy, cell proliferation and
angiogenesis. BMC. http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2407/15/9352.
Chandran, K., Goswami, S., & Sharma-Walia, N. (2015). Implications of a
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR) ligand clofibrate
in breast cancer. Oncotarget, 5.
http://www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/index.php?journal =
oncotarget&page = article&op = view&path%5B%5D = 6402

