Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GP350 containing exosomes as DNA vaccine carriers


Background: Plasmid DNA vaccination is a safe and economical vaccine
modality that has been demonstrated to elicit cellular and humoral
immunity in preclinical models and human clinical trials. We have
previously shown that enriched mature naive B cells, and not myeloid/DC
lineages, are capable of expanding Ag specific CD8 T cells in vivo in
mice, and in vitro with human cells. In this study, we sought a means to
directly deliver plasmid DNA to B cells as a means to specifically
activate this antigen-presenting cell type.Methods: Exosomes were
isolated from EBV+ lymphoblastic cell lines (LCL) and from HEK293T cells
that had been transfected to express the EBV protein GP350. Plasmid DNA
was labeled with a fluorescent peptide nucleic acid (PNA) probe for
detection by imaging and conventional cytometry. Exosomes were
transfected with fluorescently labeled plasmid DNA and incubated with
either human CD21 transgenic mouse splenocytes or human PBMC and assayed
for uptake and activation by FACS. Plasmid DNA transfected exosomes were
coincubated with human PBMC and evaluated for their ability to expand
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells by different methods.Results: EBV LCL and
HEK293T derived exosomes were successfully transfected with plasmid DNA
as verified by image assisted flow cytometry. Transient transfection of
HEK293T cells with plasmids encoding a transgene led to release of
exosomes containing the transgene product. EBV LCL and HEK 293T-GP350
derived exosomes increased delivery of plasmid DNA to both human B
lymphocytes and transgenic hCD21 mouse B lymphocytes, when compared to
naked DNA alone, in an hCD21 dependent fashion. At 24h, plasmid DNA
containing B lymphocytes exhibited increased activation and upregulation
of CD80/86 costimulatory molecules. Further, human B lymphocytes treated
with exosome-plasmid DNA complexes led to antigen mRNA production and
expansion of Ag specific CD8 T cells without the need for APC subset
enrichment. Studies comparing the immunogenicity of GP350-exosome
mediated delivery versus naked DNA delivery are underway in different
mouse models.Conclusion: GP350 containing exosomes can successfully
increase delivery of plasmid DNA to B lymphocytes even in the presence of
other phagocytic cells like macrophages or dendritic cells. This led to
detectable antigen production and expansion of cognate Ag specific CD8 T
cell expansion without the need for B cell enrichment. Studies examining
in vivo immunogenicity of exosomal plasmid DNA delivery are underway, but
results to date suggest this approach may be a simple method to boost
vaccine efficacy through increased delivery of DNA directly to relevant
antigen-presenting B cells.

