Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Value of next generation sequencing in a diagnostically
challenging case of hematologic malignancy


Background: Traditionally, the diagnosis of hematologic malignancies
relied on morphological, immunological along with cytogenetic evaluation
of bone marrow and peripheral blood. However, these methods sometimes
yield non-diagnosis, diagnostic ambiguity or discordance. The advent of
next generation sequencing (NGS) can be of help in such settings. Here,
we describe our experience of using NGS data in guidance to diagnose and
treat an indeterminate case of hematologic malignancy.Case: A 77-year old
female presented to the clinic with worsening dyspnea on exertion with
pancytopenia (white blood cells 1.25109/L hemoglobin 7.6g/dL platelet
22109/L). Her bone marrow examination showed hypercellular marrow
morphologically suggesting acute myeloid leukemia (AML) M4 by
French-American British classification, but blast count of only 6.9%. The
conventional karyotyping showed 46, XX [20]. Fluorescence in situ panel,
including PML-RARA, RUNX1T1-RUNX1, CBFB, KMT2A, MECOM, were all negative,
and so were the results of HemaVision. Direct sequencing and PCR for
FLT-3 ITD and TLD and KIT sequencing for exon 9, 11, 13, 17 results were
all negative. In order to reconcile the discrepancies between
morphological and cytogenetic diagnosis, NGS was performed.Method: The
DNA from bone marrow collected at the time of diagnosis was analyzed
using whole exome sequencing (WES). Saliva DNA collected at the time of
remission was used matched normal sample. Somatic mutations were
determined by MuTect. For structure variation analysis, insertion size
was calculated by CollectInsertSizeMetrics module of Picard package and
Pindel to call SVs. Gene to gene network analysis was done using STRING
database.Discussion: We identified 13 somatically mutated non-synonymous
small nucleotide variants with WES. These included NBPF1/8/9, PBRM1,
DDX60L, VPS52, TIMM23B, KIF26A, MYO1E, KRTAP9-8, CRELD2, FOXO4 and TNMD.
Through gene to gene networking, we recognized FOXO gene in relation to
AKT pathway and JUN signaling. Since FOXO4 amplification appears in 0.5%
of AML cases and AKT/FOXO and JNK/c-JUN plays a pivotal role in myeloid
leukemia, we recognized this as possible driver mutation. Moreover,
fragment analysis with direct sequencing recognized NPM1 gene exon12
c.860_863dupTCTG. NGS data revealed NPM1 1 copy repeat (2 bp insertion).
Based on the NGS data, the patient received low dose cytarabine
(20mg/m2/day for 14 days), as in elderly AML patients. She responded
surprisingly well, and after 3 cycles of chemotherapy, her hemogram was
almost normalized (WBC 3.02109/L Hb 10.4g/dL platelet 180109/L). She is
currently being followed up without any further interventions.Conclusion:
Our data highlights the importance of molecular diagnosis based on NGS
when confronted with diagnostic challenges in hematology. Efforts to
effectively incorporate NGS data in real-world clinical settings should
be encouraged to realize the goals of tailored medicine.

