Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosylation of the TNFR1 death receptor controls cell fate


Activation of the TNFR1 death receptor by TNF can induce cell survival or
cell death signaling, however, the mechanisms regulating this TNFR1
signaling switch are poorly understood. TNF-induced apoptosis is reported
to require higher-order clustering and internalization of activated
TNFR1, whereas surface retention of the activated receptor has been shown
to promote survival signaling mediated by NFB and MAPKs. Studies from our
group have identified a novel glycosylation-dependent mechanism that
controls this signaling switch. Specifically, we have found that TNFR1
localization and activity are regulated by the addition of a distinct
sugar, an 2-6 linked sialic acid, by the enzyme ST6Gal-I, a Golgi
sialyltransferase whose expression is upregulated in many cancer types.
The sialylation effect on TNFR1 was examined in epithelial and monocytic
cancer cell lines with forced overexpression or knockdown of ST6Gal-I, as
well as in primary monocytes obtained from mice with ST6Gal-I knock-in or
knockout. Data from these models indicate that 2-6 sialylation of TNFR1
blocks TNF-induced apoptosis, and the suggested mechanism underlying this
inhibition of apoptosis is the sialylation-driven inhibition of TNFR1
oligomerization and internalization, as observed through immunoblotting,
immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry. Considering sialylated TNFR1 is
retained on the plasma membrane following activation, we hypothesize that
ST6Gal-I functions to not only block TNFR1-mediated cell death but also
divert the cell's activity to favor survival. Supporting this hypothesis,
cells with elevated levels of ST6Gal-I exhibit heightened expression and
activation of many pro-survival factors, such as NFB, MAPKs and AKT, in
addition to decreased activation of caspase-3. Since levels of ST6Gal-I
are elevated in multiple tumor cell populations, our group proposes that
ST6Gal-I protects tumor cells against TNF-induced apoptosis within the
inflammatory tumor microenvironment. As preliminary support for this
concept, peritoneal ascites fluid was collected from ovarian cancer (OC)
patients, and the acellular, cytokine-rich fraction was incubated with OC
cell lines with or without forced ST6Gal-I expression. Expression of
ST6Gal-I conferred strong protection against cell death induced by
soluble ascites. Based on these collective findings, we postulate that
sialylation of TNFR1 by ST6Gal-I diverts the cellular response to TNF
from apoptosis to survival, providing a mechanism by which tumor cells
can evade immune cell killing.

