Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Employing the epigenetic field effect to detect prostate cancer in
biopsy-negative patients


Purpose: Prostate cancer (PCa) is typically multifocal supporting the
principle that molecular alterations can occur in histologically normal
tissues in patients that have cancer. We have recently demonstrated using
DNA methylation microarrays that epigenetic differences define a
widespread field defect in the normal prostate tissue from men with
cancer. The purpose of this study is to determine whether a novel panel
of DNA methylation markers can predict the presence of PCa using fresh
and paraffin-embedded histologically normal biopsy cores from multiple
medical sites.Materials and Methods: Encode HG18 DNA methylation arrays,
containing 385,000 probes tiling the biologically significant pilot
regions of the human genome, were used to identify methylation
alterations between NTA and TA tissues. Bisulfite Pyrosequencing
confirmed alterations at numerous loci. Methylation was assessed using
quantitative pyrosequencing in a training set consisting of 65 non-tumor
associated (NTA) and tumor associated (TA) prostate tissues. A multiplex
model was generated using multivariate logistic regression and externally
validated in a blinded fashion using a set of 47 NTA and TA biopsy
specimens from an external institution.Results: The methylation field
defect was not significantly different between adjacent and distant
tissues from tumor foci indicating this was not a peritumor effect. DNA
methylation was analyzed in a subset of significant loci in NTA and TA
tissues. Robust methylation differences were observed for all genes at
all CpGs assayed (pPurpose: Prostate cancer (PCa) is typically multifocal
supporting the principle that molecular alterations can occur in
histologically normal tissues in patients that have cancer. We have
recently demonstrated using DNA methylation microarrays that epigenetic
differences define a widespread field defect in the normal prostate
tissue from men with cancer. The purpose of this study is to determine
whether a novel panel of DNA methylation markers can predict the presence
of PCa using fresh and paraffin-embedded histologically normal biopsy
cores from multiple medical sites.Materials and Methods: Encode HG18 DNA
methylation arrays, containing 385,000 probes tiling the biologically
significant pilot regions of the human genome, were used to identify
methylation alterations between NTA and TA tissues. Bisulfite
Pyrosequencing confirmed alterations at numerous loci. Methylation was
assessed using quantitative pyrosequencing in a training set consisting
of 65 non-tumor associated (NTA) and tumor associated (TA) prostate
tissues. A multiplex model was generated using multivariate logistic
regression and externally validated in a blinded fashion using a set of
47 NTA and TA biopsy specimens from an external institution.Results: The
methylation field defect was not significantly different between adjacent
and distant tissues from tumor foci indicating this was not a peritumor
effect. DNA methylation was analyzed in a subset of significant loci in
NTA and TA tissues. Robust methylation differences were observed for all
genes at all CpGs assayed (p<0.0001) in the 47 fresh-frozen specimens.
Regression models incorporating individual genes (EVX1, CAV1, and FGF1)
and a gene panel (EVX1 and FGF1) discriminated between NTA and TA tissues
in the original training set (AUC 0.796-0.898, pPurpose: Prostate cancer
(PCa) is typically multifocal supporting the principle that molecular
alterations can occur in histologically normal tissues in patients that
have cancer. We have recently demonstrated using DNA methylation
microarrays that epigenetic differences define a widespread field defect
in the normal prostate tissue from men with cancer. The purpose of this
study is to determine whether a novel panel of DNA methylation markers
can predict the presence of PCa using fresh and paraffin-embedded
histologically normal biopsy cores from multiple medical sites.Materials
and Methods: Encode HG18 DNA methylation arrays, containing 385,000
probes tiling the biologically significant pilot regions of the human
genome, were used to identify methylation alterations between NTA and TA
tissues. Bisulfite Pyrosequencing confirmed alterations at numerous loci.
Methylation was assessed using quantitative pyrosequencing in a training
set consisting of 65 non-tumor associated (NTA) and tumor associated (TA)
prostate tissues. A multiplex model was generated using multivariate
logistic regression and externally validated in a blinded fashion using a
set of 47 NTA and TA biopsy specimens from an external
institution.Results: The methylation field defect was not significantly
different between adjacent and distant tissues from tumor foci indicating
this was not a peritumor effect. DNA methylation was analyzed in a subset
of significant loci in NTA and TA tissues. Robust methylation differences
were observed for all genes at all CpGs assayed (p<0.0001) in the 47
fresh-frozen specimens. Regression models incorporating individual genes
(EVX1, CAV1, and FGF1) and a gene panel (EVX1 and FGF1) discriminated
between NTA and TA tissues in the original training set (AUC 0.796-0.898,
p<0.001). Upon external validation, uniplex models incorporating EVX1,
CAV1, or FGF1 discriminated between TA and NTA biopsy-negative specimens
with an AUC of 0.702, 0.696, and 0.658, respectively (pPurpose: Prostate
cancer (PCa) is typically multifocal supporting the principle that
molecular alterations can occur in histologically normal tissues in
patients that have cancer. We have recently demonstrated using DNA
methylation microarrays that epigenetic differences define a widespread
field defect in the normal prostate tissue from men with cancer. The
purpose of this study is to determine whether a novel panel of DNA
methylation markers can predict the presence of PCa using fresh and
paraffin-embedded histologically normal biopsy cores from multiple
medical sites.Materials and Methods: Encode HG18 DNA methylation arrays,
containing 385,000 probes tiling the biologically significant pilot
regions of the human genome, were used to identify methylation
alterations between NTA and TA tissues. Bisulfite Pyrosequencing
confirmed alterations at numerous loci. Methylation was assessed using
quantitative pyrosequencing in a training set consisting of 65 non-tumor
associated (NTA) and tumor associated (TA) prostate tissues. A multiplex
model was generated using multivariate logistic regression and externally
validated in a blinded fashion using a set of 47 NTA and TA biopsy
specimens from an external institution.Results: The methylation field
defect was not significantly different between adjacent and distant
tissues from tumor foci indicating this was not a peritumor effect. DNA
methylation was analyzed in a subset of significant loci in NTA and TA
tissues. Robust methylation differences were observed for all genes at
all CpGs assayed (p<0.0001) in the 47 fresh-frozen specimens. Regression
models incorporating individual genes (EVX1, CAV1, and FGF1) and a gene
panel (EVX1 and FGF1) discriminated between NTA and TA tissues in the
original training set (AUC 0.796-0.898, p<0.001). Upon external
validation, uniplex models incorporating EVX1, CAV1, or FGF1
discriminated between TA and NTA biopsy-negative specimens with an AUC of
0.702, 0.696, and 0.658, respectively (p<0.05). Furthermore, a multiplex
panel (EVX1 and FGF1) identified PCa patients with an AUC of 0.774 (p =
0.001) and had a negative predictive value of 0.909. Further results will
be reported from an ongoing multicenter trial involving 160 FFPE
specimens.Conclusions: A widespread epigenetic field defect can be
utilized to detect the existence of PCa in patients with histologically
negative biopsies. This assay is unique in that it detects alterations in
non-tumor cells at distance from tumor foci. With further validation,
this marker panel (EVX1 and FGF1) has the potential to decrease the need
for repeated prostate biopsies, a costly procedure associated with pain
and complications.

