Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Outstanding preclinical efficacy of a novel
maytansinoid-antibody-drug conjugate targeting LAMP1 in patient-derived
xenograft solid tumors


Lysosome-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1) is involved in the
maintenance of lysosome membrane integrity and phagolysosome formation.
LAMP1 shows very limited expression at the cell surface in normal tissues
while, a moderate to high expression was found in a number of solid
tumors. We generated SAR428926, an antibody drug conjugate (ADC)
comprising an anti-LAMP1 humanized monoclonal antibody conjugated via a
cleavable SPDB linker, to the maytansinoid derivative DM4, a tubulin
interfering molecule.Here we report the annotation of LAMP1 expression in
a large panel of human tumors and correlate it to the in vivo efficacy of
SAR428926 in a panel of over 50 human patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
solid tumors.Indications of interest were identified by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) conducted on a large panel of frozen tumor
samples using the murine version of the therapeutic anti-human LAMP1
antibody. The prevalence of tumor samples with positive membrane staining
was 49% in breast invasive lobular or ductal carcinoma, and in particular
in a TNBC subset (87%), 25% in gastric adenocarcinoma, 52% in
colon/rectum adenocarcinoma, 22% in lung adenocarcinoma, 20% in lung
squamous cell carcinoma, 25% in prostate adenocarcinoma and 31% in ovary
adenocarcinoma.In vivo efficacy of SAR428926 was evaluated in PDX models
engrafted subcutaneously into immunocompromised SCID mice. PDX models
retain the molecular diversity, cellular heterogeneity, and histology
typically seen in patient tumors and offer a distinct advantage over cell
line models. The PDX models used in the study, which include colon,
breast, lung, prostate, gastric and ovarian cancer, were selected by IHC
based on LAMP1 expression levels distribution and the frequency of LAMP1
membrane positive cells, which varied between 5% and 100% of the tumor
cells, allowing coverage of a wide variety of cases.Outstanding efficacy
with complete regressions was observed at 5 mg/kg iv single
administration, a dose that gives an exposure tolerated in toxicology
species. Efficacy was also observed at lower doses of 2.5 mg/kg and 1.25
mg/kg after single administration. Our results show that while the
presence of the antigen is required as there is no efficacy in
LAMP1-negative PDX, there is no linear correlation between the level of
antigen expression and the antitumor activity across the panel of PDX
tested. In addition to membrane LAMP1 expression, a key driver for
efficacy was the intrinsic sensitivity of the PDX models to DM4.These
results highlight the potential of ADCs that target human cancers
expressing membrane LAMP1 at the surface of tumor cells. These
encouraging preclinical data have prompted us to initiate IND-enabling
studies with the goal to progress anti LAMP1-ADC to the clinic in
patients with solid tumors expressing LAMP1 at the cell surface. The
phase I study started in October 2015.

