Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of EphA2 as a therapeutic target for redirected T-cell
killing by DART bispecific molecules


Introduction: EphA2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase that plays a critical
role in cancer progression through both ligand-dependent and independent
mechanisms. The broad overexpression in tumors but limited normal tissue
expression of EphA2 makes it an attractive therapeutic target amenable
for redirected T-cell killing via an EphA2 x CD3 Dual-Affinity
Re-Targeting (DART) molecules designed to co-engage cytotoxic T cells
with EphA2 expressing tumor cells.Methods: Anti-EphA2 monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) were identified by target-specific screening of a
library generated by whole-cell immunization with proprietary cancer cell
lines, including models of cancer stem cells. The binding and signaling
properties of the antibodies were characterized by ELISA, SPR, flow
cytometry and phosphorylation assays. Receptor binding regions were
determined by ELISA based competition assays and by utilizing human-mouse
chimeric EphA2 molecules. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on
frozen normal and tumor tissues. In vitro functional studies were
performed with various cancer as well as transfected cell lines, and
primary human T cells or PBMCs. In vivo activity was evaluated in
xenograft models in immune deficient mice.Results: EphA2 mAbs
encompassing diversity in binding kinetics and effects on receptor
phosphorylation were classified in 5 discrete binding groups. The
majority interacted with the N-terminal ligand-binding domain of EphA2
and most mAbs within that group interfered with ligand binding. The
majority of mAbs displayed little IHC reactivity with normal tissue,
while strong staining of cancer tissues was observed, including colon,
lung, pancreas, ovary, bladder and breast cancers. Seven mAbs recognizing
independent epitopes were selected for conversion into EphA2 x CD3 DART
molecules that showed a range of potency in redirecting T cells to kill
EphA2-expressing target cells. A lead EphA2 x CD3 DART molecule was
selected based on potency and cross-reactivity with the cynomolgus monkey
ortholog; this lead was engineered with a human Fc domain to confer an
extended circulating half-life. The resulting Fc-bearing EphA2 x CD3 DART
molecule demonstrated in vivo anti-tumor activity at doses as low as 20
mcg/kg in NOD/SCID/IL-2 gamma chain null mice co-implanted with activated
human T cells and MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells.Conclusion: EphA2 is a
potential cancer target for redirected T-cell killing applications
independent of ligand mediated mechanisms. Further preclinical assessment
of EphA2 x CD3 DART molecules as a strategy for targeting
EphA2-expressing malignancies is warranted.

