Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment of AXL-high/ MITF-low melanoma cells in the presence of
MAPK inhibitors in vitro


BRAF and MEK inhibitors have become a standard of care for patients with
metastatic BRAF mutant (V600) melanoma. Despite their success, 10- 20% of
patients exhibit intrinsic resistance and fail to respond to treatment.
Recently, distinct transcriptional profiles have been associated with
sensitivity to these drugs with intrinsically resistant melanomas
exhibiting an AXL-high/ MITF-low phenotype (1). Using melanoma cell lines
from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia with matched gene expression data,
we confirmed that AXL-high/ MITF-low cell lines had increased resistance
to both BRAF (Dabrafenib) and MEK (Trametinib) inhibitors, either singly
or in combination. Using flow cytometry with an AXL antibody, we observed
that AXL-high/ MITF-low resistant cell lines frequently exhibited a high
percentage of AXL+ cells (90%) while AXL-low/ MITF-high sensitive cell
lines showed the opposite (5%). We hypothesized that the small percentage
of AXL+ cells in the sensitive cell lines may be responsible for
mechanisms of adaptive or acquired resistance (a feature that is
frequently observed with the use of BRAF and MEK inhibitors in vitro and
in the clinic). To explore this, we cultured sensitive cell lines in
vitro for 5 days in the presence of combined Dabrafenib and Trametinib
(DT) and performed flow cytometry to determine if there was a change in
the percentage of AXL+ cells. All sensitive cell lines exhibited an
enrichment of AXL+ cells with increasing concentrations of DT (maximum
increase compared to DMSO control across individual cell lines ranged
from 10% to 85%). It is unknown whether this phenomenon could be
explained by a clonal selection or plastic epigenetic reprogramming
process and as such, we are currently performing experiments to determine
this. Looking to the future, identifying potential dependencies of
AXL-low/ MITF-high melanomas will deepen our understanding of the biology
supporting this resistant state and provide a platform for the design of
future clinical intervention strategies in this subset of patients.1)
Konieczkowski et al. 2014. Cancer Discovery. A melanoma cell state
distinction influences sensitivity to MAPK pathway inhibitors.
4(7):816-27.

