Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The analysis of the genomic evolution of squamous cell carcinoma
of the lung


Background:Genomic tumor heterogeneity is one reason for recurrence and
resistance to cancer therapy. It is still not known what leads to the
relapse or the emergence of metastasis in individual patients. To
contribute to answer this question, we investigated the evolutionary
patterns in squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (SCC) in 10 patients with
multiple matched tumors (primary vs recurrence/metastasis).Methods:To
identify the genomic profile, frozen tissues from SCC patients were
subjected to multiparameter ploidy profiling (MPP). Tumor populations
were sorted based on ploidy (DNA-content using DAPI) and p40 was used to
control for diploid tumor populations. Subsequent genomic profiling by
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and targeted massive
parallel sequencing (Ion Torrent Comprehensive Cancer Panel with an
all-exon coverage of 409 cancer genes) was applied.Results:The usage of
MPP enabled the determination of the clonal composition of the SCC and
define genomic characteristics. Due to flow sorting the tumor populations
were effectively isolated and existence of distinct clonal populations
was indicated. Aneuploid and diploid tumors were successfully revealed
using the additional marker p40. Therefore, the absence of non-malignant
cells increased the precision in the genomic analysesConclusion:The study
uncovered the composition of human SCC in the sense of different clonal
populations, which harbor private genomic aberrations and mutations
confirmed by aCGH and NGS. Even if our data is still preliminary we
provide evidence that applying MPP increases the precision of aCGH and
sequencing analysis. Genomic analyses of sorted pure tumor population
allows to reconstruct the clonal evolution and facilitates the
understanding of tumor heterogeneity and their evolutionary pattern,
which could have potentially an impact on therapeutic response or
metastasis development.

