Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A complex 3D model of glioblastoma for patient-specific drug
response profiling


Approximately 70,000 new cases of brain tumors will be diagnosed this
year with glioblastoma (GBM) accounting for about 17% of those cases.
Unfortunately the median survival for patients with GBM is only 14.6
months due to the complexity of the tumor, the pattern of diffuse spread
within the brain, and the lack of effective therapeutic options. Complex
in vitro tumor models developed in 3D better mimic in vivo biology, and,
when utilizing patient-derived cells, may offer robust platforms for new
drug development and patient-specific drug response profiling. We have
previously shown this to be true with both breast and ovarian cancer and
we have adopted this approach to modelling GBM ex vivo. We hypothesize
that primary derived GBM tissues and stem cells cultured in complex 3D
microenvironments can recapitulate the intra-tumor heterogeneity and drug
resistance similar to that found in the clinical. To this end, we have
developed 3D models of GBM that incorporate tumor cells, endothelial
cells, and macrophages within a complex extracellular matrix and cultured
them for up to 2 weeks under perfusion flow. We have created these models
using both cell lines and primary patient cells and these 3D tissues have
been analyzed for changes in viability (PrestoBlue and PicoGreen), marker
expression (flow cytometry, Luminex, and protein arrays), macrophage
differentiation and invasion (flow cytometry, multiphoton microscopy, and
IHC), and methylation patterns (ChIP on chip arrays and methylation
specific PCR). Initial optimization work using cell lines has revealed
that culturing with endothelial cells and/or macrophages has an effect
upon proliferation dependent upon the differentiation state of the
macrophages. Additionally, co-culture conditions affect protein secretion
and phosphorylation along with patterns of gene methylation. We have also
examined how changes in the tumor microenvironment affect these different
metrics by examining the role of hypoxic growth conditions. Work using
patient cells isolated from primary glioblastoma has focused upon drug
response dependent upon the tumor microenvironment and the presence of
cancer stem cells utilizing a neurosphere generation assay. We have
demonstrated temozolamide resistance in tumors with early relapse after
initial chemo-radiation, and sensitivity to EGFR inhibitor afatanib in
tumors with EGFR amplication, suggesting clinical and molecular
correlation or our ex vivo 3D drug response profiling using patient
derived GBM models. Taken together, our data support the further
development and use of complex, 3D co-cultures to better mimic GBM in a
patient-specific manner. These models are currently being considered for
preclinical assessment of novel therapies, including chimeric antigen
receptor T cells, and may be a useful adjunct in precision medicine
applications to improve patient outcomes.

