Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADP- dependent glucokinase enhances hypoxia- inducible factor-
target gene transactivation through modulation of ROS levels in hypoxic
human cancer cells


ADP- dependent glucokinase (ADPGK) is a glycolytic enzyme catalyzing the
reaction of glucoseglucose 6-P by using ADP instead of ATP. ADPGK is
remarkably conserved across various phyla from archaea to humans. Despite
an important role priming glycolysis in conditions of metabolic stress in
extremophile organisms, human ADPGK does not contribute to glycolysis.
Recent work shows that ADPGK is essential for ROS generation during
T-cell activation. Intriguingly, ADPGK protein levels are upregulated
across a panel of cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Hereby we
hypothesized that the increase of cellular ROS in response to mild (1%
O2) hypoxia is dependent on ADPGK therefore contributing to the
stabilization of hypoxia- inducible factor (HIF)-1, a central regulator
of the transcriptional response of cancer cells to hypoxia.We achieved
ADPGK loss-of-function (LOF) utilizing lentiviral shRNA- mediated
knockdown (>75%) in HCT-116 and HT-29 (colon); or H460 (lung) cancer cell
lines. Intracellular ROS levels under hypoxia (1% O2) were analyzed by
CM-H2DCFDA fluorescence and flow cytometry. Protein levels of HIF-1 (and
-2), and selected HIF- targets were assessed by immunoblot assays. HIF-1
(and -2) transcriptional activity was measured through a RT-qPCR array
developed in house targeting 84 hypoxia- responsive transcripts in
HCT-116 cells exposed to 20, 10, 5, 1, .2 and ADP- dependent glucokinase
(ADPGK) is a glycolytic enzyme catalyzing the reaction of glucoseglucose
6-P by using ADP instead of ATP. ADPGK is remarkably conserved across
various phyla from archaea to humans. Despite an important role priming
glycolysis in conditions of metabolic stress in extremophile organisms,
human ADPGK does not contribute to glycolysis. Recent work shows that
ADPGK is essential for ROS generation during T-cell activation.
Intriguingly, ADPGK protein levels are upregulated across a panel of
cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Hereby we hypothesized that the
increase of cellular ROS in response to mild (1% O2) hypoxia is dependent
on ADPGK therefore contributing to the stabilization of hypoxia-
inducible factor (HIF)-1, a central regulator of the transcriptional
response of cancer cells to hypoxia.We achieved ADPGK loss-of-function
(LOF) utilizing lentiviral shRNA- mediated knockdown (>75%) in HCT-116
and HT-29 (colon); or H460 (lung) cancer cell lines. Intracellular ROS
levels under hypoxia (1% O2) were analyzed by CM-H2DCFDA fluorescence and
flow cytometry. Protein levels of HIF-1 (and -2), and selected HIF-
targets were assessed by immunoblot assays. HIF-1 (and -2)
transcriptional activity was measured through a RT-qPCR array developed
in house targeting 84 hypoxia- responsive transcripts in HCT-116 cells
exposed to 20, 10, 5, 1, .2 and <.02% O2 for 24 h. Baseline non-hypoxic
oxygen consumption and glycolytic activities were measured in real-time
with an automated bioanalyzer (Seahorse Biosciences) whereas 3D spheroid
growth assays and HCT-116 xenografts were used to assess the effect of
ADPGK LOF on tumor mass.ADPGK LOF decreased ROS and HIF-1 (-and 2)
protein levels in a cell type- and O2- dependent manner in HCT-116, HT-29
and H460 cells. Results from our RT-qPCR array show a blunted
transcriptional response to hypoxia with maximal inhibition at .2% O2 (15
mmHg). Immunoblots confirmed a striking impairment of CA9 hypoxic
induction in addition to a significant decrease of the HIF- targets
IGFBP3, ERO-1 and DDIT4. 3D spheroid assays showed a significant growth
rate increase after ADPGK knockdown. Addition of the antioxidant
N-Ac-Cysteine during the spheroid formation phase mimicked the effect of
ADPGK LOF in control cells whereas it further enhanced cell growth in
ADPGK knockdown. However, baseline O2 consumption and glycolysis were not
affected. Consistently with results of 3D spheroid assays, we observed
enhanced tumor growth of HCT-116 xenografts bearing ADPGK LOF.Our work
uncovers a hitherto unknown function of ADPGK in cancer cells whereby it
enhances ROS- dependent HIF-1 (and -2) hypoxic stabilization and
transactivation therefore limiting tumor growth. Further work will be
focused on the mitochondrial origin of ADPGK- dependent hypoxic ROS
generation as suggested by previous studies in primary T-lymphocytes.

