Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-12 deficiency increases modulation of epigenetic
regulators and silencing of tumor suppressor genes in UVB-exposed mouse
skin and skin tumors


Ultraviolet (UV) radiation has variety of deleterious effects on
mammalian skin, and triggers several causative factors such as DNA
damage, inflammation, immune suppression and genetic and epigenetic
alterations which leads to the development of skin cancer. Earlier, we
have shown that the deficiency of interleukin (IL)-12, an
immunoregulatory cytokine, enhances photocarcinogenesis in mice through
inhibition of repair of damaged DNA. In further studies we have tried to
explore and examine the effect of IL-12 on epigenetic regulators in
UV-exposed skin and UV-induced skin tumors using IL-12 knock out (IL-12
KO) mice as an in vivo animal model. The exposure of IL-12 KO mice with
UVB (200 mJ/cm2) radiation resulted in higher levels of DNA methylation,
DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) activity, Ten-eleven translocations (TETs),
a family of methylcytosine dioxygenase, histone deacetylases (HDAC), and
lower levels of histone acetylase (HAT) activity than their wild type
counterparts. To verify that IL-12 deficiency is associated with DNA
hypermethylation and higher HDAC activity in UVB exposed skin, IL-12-KO
mice were treated with endotoxin-free murine rIL-12 (50 ng/mouse/100 l
PBS; subcutaneous injection) 3 h before UVB exposure. Our results
indicate that significant reduction in the levels of global DNA
methylation, Dnmt and HDAC activity were observed compared with
non-rIL-12 treated mice. Conversely, UVB exposed IL-12 wild type mice
were treated with anti-IL-12 antibody (500 ng/mouse/100 l PBS;
subcutaneous injection). This treatment resulted in increased levels of
DNA methylation, Dnmt and HDAC activities. These observations were also
noted and compared between skin tumors from IL-12 KO mice and their wild
type counterparts. To further explore the role of IL-12 deficiency on
epigenetic modification-mediated photocarcinogenesis, we determined its
effect on methylated and unmethylated levels of tumor suppressor genes,
such as p16INK4a and RASSF1A, in UV-exposed skin and UV-induced skin
tumors. It was observed that the levels of methylated tumor suppressor
genes were higher in IL-12 KO mice skin than their wild type
counterparts. Together, these findings indicate that IL-12 deficiency
promotes: (i) DNA hypermethylation, (ii) HDAC activity and (iii)
silencing of tumor suppressor genes in UV exposed mice and that makes the
mice more susceptible to UV radiation-induced skin cancer risk. Together,
these observations suggest that augmentation of IL-12 should be
considered as a strategy for the prevention and treatment of UV
radiation-induced skin cancer risk.

