Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial intervention with natural compounds induces key
metabolic modulations for prostate cancer prevention and treatment


Prostate cancer is one of the three most relevant cancer types in men,
and it ranks second in death rate and first in newly diagnosed cancer
cases according to the US cancer statistics 2015. In recent years, the
impact of nutrition on cancer prevention has been increasingly
recognized. Accordingly the study of natural compounds for cancer
prevention and treatment has drawn attention, mainly for the low toxicity
to normal tissues.In this study, a natural compound library of 140
compounds was screened on cultured mouse prostate tumor cells from HiMyc
mice (HMVP-2 cells), and ATP and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
bioluminescence measurements were performed. Based on ATP and ROS
results, three hits, ursolic acid (UA), curcumin (CURC) and resveratrol
(RES) were selected for more in depth metabolomic and lipidomic analyses.
High-resolution liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) and
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) were applied for large scale
untargeted metabolic and lipidomic profiling of intra and extracellular
prostate cancer extracts after treatment with the three drugs and their
combinations at different time points. We next performed an in vivo study
on an allograft mouse model of prostate cancer by injecting HMVP-2
spheroids into FVB/N mice.After 12 hours of treatment, 115 metabolites in
KEGG database and 12 classes of lipids (664 features) were included in
the study. Principal component analysis (PCA) showed that the combination
of UA and CURC exerts the most profound metabolic perturbation in HMVP2
cells compared to the individual treatment or the combination of other
selected hits. Further data mining showed that the CURC+UA had a
synergistic effect on cell metabolism by altering metabolic pathways
associated with alanine, aspartate, proline and glutamate metabolism.
Moreover, key intermediates in glycerophospholipid and ceramide
metabolism were highly perturbed in CURC +UA indicating a relevant
response of lipid mechanism to treatment with the combination of these
agents. The in vivo mouse model produces palpable tumors within 10-14
days post injection. Dietary administration of CURC+UA and UA+RES showed
significant inhibition of tumor growth compared to the administration of
the individual compounds, with CURC+UA yielding the most effective
combination.In summary, amongst the 140 screened compounds, CURC, UA and
RES exerted the most prominent metabolic effects on prostate cancers
cells, and the combined CURC+UA treatment showed a synergistic effect on
cell metabolism and significantly affected key metabolic pathways active
in mitochondria, most likely via lipid metabolisms.

