Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of HGF concentrations on c-Met inhibition investigation


Tumor cells frequently harbor abnormalities in signaling pathways,
leading to increased migration, invasion, survival, angiogenesis, and
proliferation. C-Met is a receptor tyrosine kinase critical for
embryogenesis and liver repair, and protein levels are often elevated in
a large variety of tumors. C-Met is activated by the endogenous ligand
Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF). HGF is produced by mesenchymal cells and
stimulates the c-Met protein, leading to a variety of downstream
signaling pathways that result in increased migration, proliferation,
survival, and angiogenesis.While many tumor cells express the c-Met
receptor, a number of tumor types, including glioblastoma and
osteosarcoma, have been observed to co-express both HGF and c-Met. The
purpose of the current study was to measure tumor cell HGF secretion in
vitro, to determine HGF concentrations in vivo, and study how HGF
concentrations affect tumor cell response to c-Met inhibition. Over forty
cell lines were investigated for HGF secretion via ELISA of conditioned
media. The small molecule c-Met inhibitor BMS-777607 was used to
interrupt the c-Met axis in a select number of tumor cell lines. C3H/HeJ,
nude, and Balb/c mice, were measured for serum levels of HGF.Data
obtained using ELISA of conditioned media show that about one quarter of
the cell lines tested secreted HGF. Cell lines tested include, but are
not limited to, glioblastoma, prostate, breast, fibrosarcoma, and
osteosarcoma. Migration assays were performed on several of these cell
lines to determine sensitivity to BMS-777607. HGF-secreting cell lines,
including the KHT, U87, U118, and OS156, are sensitive to BMS-777607 at
0.1, 1, and 10 M. Non-HGF-secreting cell lines, such as PC-3 and
MDA-MB-231, are insensitive to BMS-777607 at the same concentrations. A
migration assay was performed with the PC-3 cells, with cells exposed to
0.1, 1, and 10 uM BMS-777607 while in the presence of 0, 5, 10, and 25
ng/mL HGF. These cells are not sensitive to the c-Met inhibitor at low
concentrations of HGF, yet become sensitive at higher concentrations.
These results indicate that sensitivity to c-Met inhibition may be
dependent on both HGF-secretion status and levels of exogenous HGF.
Furthermore, our findings suggest that in vitro investigations of c-Met
inhibition should be done at physiologically relevant HGF
concentrations.In order to properly perform c-Met inhibition experiments
in vitro, a better understanding of in situ HGF concentration is needed.
Serum levels of HGF were measured in the C3H/HeJ, nude, and Balb/c mice.
The average serum HGF concentration in these mice was between 3 and 5
ng/mL. Still, it is ultimately the local concentration of HGF within the
tumor microenvironment that is critical, but no intra-tumor values for
HGF have been reported. Consequently measurements of HGF levels within
tumors by microdialysis are ongoing.

