Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A glioblastoma methylation assay (GaMA) developedfrom genomic
analysis of glioma spheroid cultures predicts response toradiation
therapy in patients with glioblastoma


Radiation therapy (RT) remains one of the most effective treatments for
patients with GBM and has been repeatedly demonstrated to improve
survival; yet response to RT is variable. We explored the relationship
between methylation status and radiation response to develop a predictor
of RT response using the epigenetic data of glioma sphere-forming cells
(GSCs). The DNA methylomes of 42 GSCs were profiled using Illumina
Infinium 450K methylation bead arrays. 15 GSCs were irradiated with 2-,
4-, and 6-Gy RT and response determined using clonogenic assays. We
discovered 168 CpG probes capable of distinguishing sensitive from
resistant GSCs. To validate, we analyzed 362 TCGA GBM samples, 272 that
received standard 60Gy RT and 90 treated with low or no RT. Using the
glioblastoma methylation assay (GaMA) signature, we classified the
samples as either RT sensitive or resistant. Survival was significantly
different between the predicted sensitive vs resistant patients for those
treated with standard RT (median 21.0m vs 14.7m, pRadiation therapy (RT)
remains one of the most effective treatments for patients with GBM and
has been repeatedly demonstrated to improve survival; yet response to RT
is variable. We explored the relationship between methylation status and
radiation response to develop a predictor of RT response using the
epigenetic data of glioma sphere-forming cells (GSCs). The DNA methylomes
of 42 GSCs were profiled using Illumina Infinium 450K methylation bead
arrays. 15 GSCs were irradiated with 2-, 4-, and 6-Gy RT and response
determined using clonogenic assays. We discovered 168 CpG probes capable
of distinguishing sensitive from resistant GSCs. To validate, we analyzed
362 TCGA GBM samples, 272 that received standard 60Gy RT and 90 treated
with low or no RT. Using the glioblastoma methylation assay (GaMA)
signature, we classified the samples as either RT sensitive or resistant.
Survival was significantly different between the predicted sensitive vs
resistant patients for those treated with standard RT (median 21.0m vs
14.7m, p<0.005). GaMA did not predict a survival difference among
patients receiving no/low-dose RT, suggesting a predictive, but not
prognostic, role for the signature. Using the ENCODE ChIP-Seq
Significance Tool, we observed that the transcription factor EZH2 was
significantly associated with the radiation resistant promoters in the
GaMA signature. Among the hypermethylated genes with EZH2 binding sites,
the NR2F2 promoter had the greatest number of hypermethylated CpG sites
correlated to RT resistance. NR2F2 has previously been identified as
negatively associated with activation of the wnt/-catenin, a pathway
associated with RT resistance of mammary progenitor cells. Expression of
WNT1 in TCGA GBM cohort was negatively associated with NR2F2 expression.
Our GSC RT response-based methylome analysis corroborates this
association and provides a rationale for the methylation signature as a
predictive biomarker of radiation response.

