Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Branched-chain amino acids in the urinary metabolic profile of
colorectal cancer patients and associations with muscle mass, BMI, and
physical activity in the ColoCare Study


BackgroundBranched-chain amino acids (BCAA; e.g., valine, leucine and
isoleucine) have been previously linked with survival in colorectal
cancer patients. It is unclear whether BCAAs are prognostic biomarkers or
a surrogate endpoint for factors related to muscle mass. Thus, we
investigated the correlation between BCAAs and muscle mass, physical
activity and body mass index (BMI) at multiple time points during the
course of disease in a prospective cohort of patients.MethodsPatients
with newly diagnosed colorectal cancer [n = 197; (stage I - IV)] from the
ColoCare study in Heidelberg, Germany with baseline and follow-up data,
and measurements of urinary BCAAs were eligible. Skeletal muscle mass of
the dorsal muscle was quantified based on abdominal computed tomography
(CT)-scans (vertebral body L3/4 and L4/5). BMI (kg/m2) and physical
activity [metabolic equivalent (MET) hours/week] were reported by
questionnaire. In addition, minutes of moderate and vigorous physical
activity/week were measured by accelerometry. We prospectively monitored
the urinary metabolome of these patients at multiple time points after
surgery [baseline (n = 197), 6-month follow-up (n = 107) and 12 month
follow-up (n = 75)]. BCAAs (valine, leucine and isoleucine) were
identified using gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC/MS).
Metabolites were normalized based on the sum intensity of all annotated
metabolites for statistical analyses. Pearson and partial correlation
coefficients with parameters of energy balance/muscle mass were computed
for each time point, adjusted for gender and age at diagnosis.ResultsAs
expected, urinary valine, leucine and isoleucine were highly correlated,
independent of time point (r>0.95, PBackgroundBranched-chain amino acids
(BCAA; e.g., valine, leucine and isoleucine) have been previously linked
with survival in colorectal cancer patients. It is unclear whether BCAAs
are prognostic biomarkers or a surrogate endpoint for factors related to
muscle mass. Thus, we investigated the correlation between BCAAs and
muscle mass, physical activity and body mass index (BMI) at multiple time
points during the course of disease in a prospective cohort of
patients.MethodsPatients with newly diagnosed colorectal cancer [n = 197;
(stage I - IV)] from the ColoCare study in Heidelberg, Germany with
baseline and follow-up data, and measurements of urinary BCAAs were
eligible. Skeletal muscle mass of the dorsal muscle was quantified based
on abdominal computed tomography (CT)-scans (vertebral body L3/4 and
L4/5). BMI (kg/m2) and physical activity [metabolic equivalent (MET)
hours/week] were reported by questionnaire. In addition, minutes of
moderate and vigorous physical activity/week were measured by
accelerometry. We prospectively monitored the urinary metabolome of these
patients at multiple time points after surgery [baseline (n = 197),
6-month follow-up (n = 107) and 12 month follow-up (n = 75)]. BCAAs
(valine, leucine and isoleucine) were identified using gas chromatography
mass spectrometry (GC/MS). Metabolites were normalized based on the sum
intensity of all annotated metabolites for statistical analyses. Pearson
and partial correlation coefficients with parameters of energy
balance/muscle mass were computed for each time point, adjusted for
gender and age at diagnosis.ResultsAs expected, urinary valine, leucine
and isoleucine were highly correlated, independent of time point (r>0.95,
P<0.01). There were no statistically significant correlations between
BCAA and parameters of energy balance or muscle mass at baseline, 6
months, or 12 months (ranges of correlations for muscle mass: r = -0.17
to -0.04; for self-reported physical activity, MET hours/week r = -0.006
to -0.04, accelerometry-based moderate physical activity: r = -0.21
to-0.10; BMI: r = -0.05 to 0.09).ConclusionThe present data suggests that
urinary levels of BCAA in colorectal cancer patients do not reflect
parameters of energy balance and muscle mass. Thus, they warrant further
investigation as potential prognostic biomarkers.

