Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tissue and cellular destination of therapeutic IgGs in
glioblastoma


Most patients with recurrent glioblastoma (GBM) are treated with
bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) that binds VEGF-A and
inhibits its binding to VEGFR. Approximately 30% of GBM patients are
non-responsive to bevacizumab and the underlying mechanism for the lack
of response is not known. It has been assumed that bevacizumab solely
targets circulating VEGF-A in blood. We hypothesized that bevacizumab and
human IgGs in general gain access to the perivascular niche that contains
cancer stem cells (CSCs) in GBM. We found that bevacizumab gains access
to the perivascular tumor area through leaky blood vessels and was
internalized by tumor cells in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model of
GBM. In vitro, CSCs (CD133+) from GBM rapidly internalized either
bevacizumab or human IgG into membrane protrusions that contained actin
and internalization was significantly inhibited by a macropinocytosis
inhibitor (EIPA), suggesting CSCs internalize bevacizumab or human IgG
via macropinocytosis. Furthermore, bevacizumab or human IgG was largely
detected in the Rab4+ fast recycling compartment at 5 min, and both were
largely detected in the LAMP1+ compartment (late endosome/lysosome) at 3
hr in the CSCs. CSCs (CD133+) from GBM do not express the neonatal Fc
receptor, the canonical pathway for recycling of IgG. Administration of
bevacizumab to an orthotopic xenograft mouse model of established GBM
showed that bevacizumab was partially co-localized with Rab4+ or with
LAMP1+ in perivascular tumor cells, consistent with our in vitro
findings. Taken together, our data show that in GBM, humanized IgG,
including bevacizumab, gains access to the perivascular tumor space and
is then macropinocytosed by CSCs and trafficked to a recycling
compartment or to the late endosome/lysosome. These data suggest that
alterations in endocytosis or recycling in the CSCs could impact the fate
of therapeutic IgGs like bevacizumab and ultimately influence a patients
response to GBM therapy.

