Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity-induced inflammation and desmoplasia promote pancreatic
cancer progression and resistance to chemotherapy


INTRODUCTION: With the current epidemic of obesity, the majority of
pancreatic cancer patients are overweight or obese at diagnosis.
Importantly, obesity worsens treatment outcomes in pancreatic cancer
patients. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms that underlie the
poorer prognosis of obese cancer patients is of paramount importance.
Obesity causes inflammation and fibrosis in the normal pancreas due to
the accumulation of dysfunctional hypertrophic adipocytes. Importantly,
desmoplasia - a fibroinflammatory microenvironment - is a hallmark of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), and we have shown that
activation of pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) via angiotensin-II type 1
receptor (AT1) pathway is a major contribution to tumor desmoplasia.
Whether obesity affects desmoplasia in PDACs, and interferes with
delivery and response of chemotherapeutics is currently
unknown.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using both human samples and mouse models of
PDAC - multiple syngeneic models of PDAC: PAN02, AK4.4, KPC, iKRAS in
diet-induced and genetic obese mouse models -, we determined the effects
of obesity on desmoplasia and inflammation/immune cell infiltration,
tumor growth and delivery and response to chemotherapy.RESULTS: We found
that obesity aggravates desmoplasia in PDACs in both patient samples and
multiple mouse models. In addition, tumors in obese mice presented with
elevated levels of activated PSCs and fibrosis, as well as inflammatory
cytokines and TANs,. These alterations in the tumor microenvironment in
obesity associated with accelerated tumor growth, reduced tumor blood
perfusion and increased hypoxia, and impaired delivery and efficacy of
chemotherapeutics. Genetic ablation and pharmacological inhibition
(losartan) of AT1 signaling reversed obesity-augmented desmoplasia and
tumor growth, and improved the response to chemotherapy to the level
observed in lean mice. We further discovered the underlying mechanisms:
1) obesity increases intra-tumor adipocytes and IL-1 secretion by these
cells; 2) increased IL-1 induces TAN recruitment; 3) recruited TANs
activate PSCs; and 4) activated PSCs enhance desmoplasia. Conversely,
activated PSCs also secrete IL-1 that recruits further TANs. Of clinical
relevance, we found that metformin not only normalizes the abnormal
systemic metabolism, but also reprogramms PSCs and immune cells and
alleviates the fibroinflammatory microenvironment in pancreatic cancer in
obesity/diabetes.. Importantly, the strategies described above were not
effective in the normal weight setting.CONCLUSION: Here we successfully
demonstrated that targeting desmoplasia, including immunomodulation with
anti-IL-1, or treatment with generic drugs such as losartan and metformin
are potential strategies to potentiate treatments in PDAC patients with
excess weight.

