Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prior vaccination is critical to PD1/PDL-1 treatment efficacy in a
mouse breast cancer allograft


We previously generated the MuPrime mBR6004 model, by engrafting the
breast adenocarcinoma derived from MMTV-PyVT transgenic mice (GEMM)1 into
the syngeneic FVB/N mice2,3. The allograft grows robustly, maintains the
histopathology features of the original GEMM, and metastasizes to the
lungs in all examined cases when implanted orthotopically2. Additionally,
histopathology shows that the models is HER2++, but ER-/PR-. We profiled
drug responses to standard of care (SoC)2 and checkpoint inhibitors3.
Interestingly, among all checkpoints inhibitors tested, our model is
insensitive to PD1/PDL-1 inhibitors, but responds to CTLA-4 inhibitors3.
To further explore the underlying mechanism of response, we performed
extensive tumor immuno-profiling for the presence of infiltrating immune
cells, e.g. TIL, CTL, Treg, immune-suppressive macrophages, NK, etc3. We
observed a good pharmacodynamic (PD) correlation between the presence of
tumor infiltrating T-cells, particularly CD8+ TIL, and NK and a positive
response to therapy, regardless the treatment type. Given this
preliminary observation, we attempted animal vaccination with tumor
lysates prior to tumor engraftment or treatments. Interestingly, while
vaccination had minimal effects on the engraftment take rate (100% take
for all animals) and on the growth kinetics of the engraftments, it had
profound effects on the tumor response to anti-PD1/anti-PDL-1 antibody
treatments, significantly enhancing tumor response to these agents in a
model that was otherwise unresponsive. Our results suggest that the
immunological status of the animal, at least with regard to the specific
anti-tumor immunity, is critically important to determine the response to
checkpoint inhibitors. Our observations suggest that vaccination is
critical for the overall success of immunotherapy (I/O) treatments
utilizing checkpoint inhibitors as well other treatment
strategies.References1. Guy, C.T., Cardiff, R.D. & Muller, W.J. Induction
of mammary tumors by expression of polyomavirus middle T oncogene: a
transgenic mouse model for metastatic disease. Molecular and cellular
biology 12, 954-961 (1992).2. Annie Xiaoyu An1, Jinping Liu1, Jie Cai1,
Jean Pierre Wery1, and Henry Q.X. Li1,. Building mouse tumor derived
allogragfts for immune-oncology research. (2015).3. Zhun Wang1, A.X.A.,
2*, Jinping Liu1, Gavin Jiagui Qu1, Likun Zhang, Jie Cai1, Bin Chen1,
Davy Xuesong Ouyang1, Jean Pierre Wery1, and Henry Q.X. Li1,2. Response
to checkpoint inhibition by GEMM breast cancer allograft EORTC-AACR-NCI
Abstract (2015).

