Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local and sustained delivery of tamoxifen for the prevention of
ER+ breast cancer using a nanochannel delivery platform


A high incidence (75%) of primary breast cancers are estrogen receptor
positive (ER+), and a large fraction of these patients can pursue
chemopreventive therapies. However, due to adverse side effects, only 5%
to 20% of the women at high risk who could benefit from chemotherapeutics
enroll in preventive treatment. There is a clear need for alternative
preventive strategies that minimize side effects and improve enrollment
and compliance. Selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as tamoxifen
(TMX), have been shown to reduce ER+ breast cancer incidence by up to 50%
among high-risk women. Importantly, along with raloxifene, it is one of
only two FDA-approved drugs for breast cancer prevention. TMX has been in
use for over 40 years and has a proven record in pre- and post-menopausal
women. However, the drug is marred by side effects, the most common being
symptoms of menopause. Further, women treated systemically and
chronically with TMX were found to have an increased incidence of
endometrial carcinoma. Although rare, this side effect, along with other
serious adverse effects (such as blood clots, strokes, and cataracts),
has resulted in a debate concerning TMX use in cancer prevention. As the
key for breast cancer chemoprevention relies upon long-term delivery of
drugs while circumventing side effects, we have developed a novel local
delivery strategy for the constant and sustained administration of TMX.
We maintain a long-term, local release of TMX in mammary tissues by
utilizing a novel implantable nanochannel Delivery System (nDS). The nDS
consists of a bioinert, implantable, and mechanically robust silicon
membrane which houses an exact number of densely packed slit-nanochannels
as small as 2.5 nm with tight tolerances on size, geometry, and surface
properties. Providing steady levels of TMX at the mammary gland target
through nDS delivery maximizes the therapeutic index while limiting the
unwanted secondary effects, which will ultimately improve patient
compliance. In this work we chemically induced tumorigenesis in
Sprague-Dawley rats by N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (NMU) injection to promote
development of estrogen-dependent tumors. We performed ovariectomies
seven days after NMU injection to mimic post-menopausal biology. nDS
implants loaded with either TMX or PEG400 (negative control) were
inserted under the left abdominal mammary gland to determine effects of
nDS-TMX on tumor growth and biomarkers. Utilizing LC/MS we were able to
determine the amount of TMX released from the nDS. Rats were examined for
palpable tumors to assess breast tumor incidence, latency to onset, and
multiplicity. Our results show that the nDS implant enables the effective
delivery of TMX in this breast tumor model. Further, this technology has
the potential to rapidly provide long-term breast cancer protection with
significant improvement in the quality of life of patients at high risk,
thereby saving thousands of lives every year.

