Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A switch in metabolic phenotype in vemurafenib-resistant melanoma
cells to increased amino acid dependence serves as an alternate mechanism
for survival


Despite considerable progress in the understanding of melanoma, and an
increase in overall survival, resistance ultimately develops in most
patients treated with BRAF inhibitors. To study the molecular
mechanism(s) involved in acquired resistance, we generated a
Vemurafenib-resistant A2-1b cell line in the BRAFV600E mutated SK-Mel28
melanoma cell background. Viability assays established IC50 of parental
SK-Mel28 cells as 0.2 M, while IC50>12 M was noted for
Vemurafenib-resistant A2-1b cells. Utilizing a quantitative proteomic
strategy, profiling of A2-1b versus SK-Mel28 cells resulted in positive
identification of 1720 proteins (1% FDR). Analysis of this data set
identified a subset of 13 proteins, including Enolase 2, Triose-phosphate
isomerase and Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase with a role in
glycolysis, gluconeogenesis and NADH repair, to be differentially
regulated in resistant cells. Additional studies validated significantly
decreased Enolase 1 and 2 protein expression, suppressed glucose uptake
and reduced lactic acid levels in resistant A2-1b cells. The pentose
phosphate pathway, in contrast to citric acid cycle intermediates, was
unaffected while the latter was significantly suppressed in resistant
cells. The energy status of cells was similar as evidenced by equivalent
total adenylate, guanylate, NADH, NADP+ and NADPH levels. Flux
experiments measuring extracelluar acidification and oxygen consumption
rates demonstrated that resistant A2-1b cells are unable to efficiently
utilize intrinsic or exogenous fatty acids to meet energy demands.
However, A2-1b cells maintained in media deprived of arginine and lysine
exhibited increased basal and maximal respiration indicative of an energy
reserve that relies on amino acid metabolism. Finally, metabolomics
studies showing an overall increase in the absolute concentrations of
gluconeogenic and ketogenic amino acids along with significantly elevated
S6Kinase expression signify a shift from glucose to amino acids as the
major energy source, in resistant A2-1b cells. Our data are consistent
with a model of prolonged treatment response in which de-repression of
ERK-MAPK pathway activity upon emergence of resistance to Vemurafenib is
associated with adaptive changes in cellular metabolism. Sensitivity to
BRAF inhibitors in the context of melanoma may not be defined by a
reliance on glycolysis for survival, and that switch in metabolic
phenotype can serve as an alternate mechanism for cell survival.

