Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bmi1 identifies treatment-refractory stem cells in human
glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive and fatal primary adult brain tumor.
Even with surgery, chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ), and radiation,
tumor re-growth and patient relapse are inevitable. Brain tumor
initiating cells (BTICs), a rare subset of GBM cells with stem cell
properties, were shown to be both chemo- and radio-resistant. We
hypothesize that these treatment-resistant BTICs cause tumor relapse and
a subset of neural stem cell genes regulate BTIC self-renewal, driving
GBM recurrence.Using patient-derived primary GBM samples, we designed an
in vitro model of tumor recurrence by treating cells with TMZ and
radiation. We also adapted the existing treatment protocol for adults
with primary GBM for in vivo treatment of immunocompromised mice
engrafted with GFP+ GBM cells. Post-chemoradiotherapy, GFP+ cells were
recovered from mouse brains and profiled for self-renewal, proliferation
and mRNA expression of important stem cell genes. Using in vitro and in
vivo gain-of-function/loss-of-function experiments, we investigated the
regulatory functions of Bmi1 in primary neural stem & progenitor cells
(NSPCs) and GBM tumor formation. To understand the consequences of Bmi1
dysregulation on target gene expression, we performed global RNA-seq
profiling on NSPCs and GBMs.GBM cells showed an increase in Bmi1 levels
post-chemoradiotherapy, suggesting the presence of a treatment-refractory
BTICs. GFP+ cells extracted from chemoradiotherapy treated human tumor
xenografts showed increased self-renewal and elevated BTIC marker
expression. Although treated mice responded to therapy with decreased
tumor size, we observed tumor relapse post-chemoradiotherapy with
increased Bmi1 protein expression. Knockdown of Bmi1 diminished
self-renewal and proliferation of GBM cells and delayed tumorigenesis in
xenografted mice, highlighting a critical role for Bmi1 in tumor
initiation and maintenance. Conversely, over-expressing Bmi1 in NSPCs
induced stem cell properties in vitro, but failed to initiate tumor
formation in vivo. Using high-throughput sequencing data, we generated a
map of signaling pathways dysregulated in GBM that may lead to tumor
recurrence.Our data confirms the existence of a rare treatment-refractory
BTICs population that escapes therapy, and drives tumor relapse and
recurrence with enhanced self-renewal capacity. Our human BTIC in vitro
assays and human-mouse BTIC xenograft model provide fundamental tools to
characterize the functional relevance and of key stem cell self-renewal
genes in GBM recurrence.

