Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tumor-associated neovasculature for delivery of optical
enhancers detects ovarian cancer micrometastasis


Background: Patients with epithelial ovarian cancer have the best overall
survival when maximal surgical effort is accomplished. While
identification and removal of large metastases do not pose a challenge,
micrometastases are impossible to distinguish intra-operatively and
contribute to the high mortality. Our objective is to develop specific
tumor-targeting optical enhancers that can aid surgeons in the
performance of microscopic tumor debulking with the goal of minimizing
microscopic residual disease. We hypothesize that we can utilize
overexpressed V3 integrins in the tumor-associated neovasculature.
Specific targeting is achieved by encapsulating fluorescent probes in
FDA-approved PLGA-based nanoparticle (NP) coated with the peptide
sequence arginine-glycine-aspartate (RGD), which binds with high affinity
to these integrins.Materials and methods:Ovarian cancer xenograft is
established intra- peritoneally (i.p.) in nude mice using cancer cells
that stably express mCherry fluorescent protein. The following
formulations were tested: soluble deep infrared dye (DIR), DIR
encapsulated in naked NP (DIR-NP), and DIR encapsulated in RGD-coated NP
(DIR-RGD-NP). Formulations were delivered i.p. and colocalization of
fluorescent signals were determined ex vivo. Staining of micrometastasis
was visualized using fluorescent dissection microscope.Results: The best
colocalization was observed in mice administered DIR-RGD-NP. We observed
75% colocalization in this group compared to 26% and 0% in DIR-NP and DIR
groups, respectively. Ex vivo analysis of DIR intensity in tumors less
than 2 mm showed mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) of 1209 in DIR-RGD-NP
group versus 155 MFI DIR-NP group. Based on DIR staining, we can locate
81% of mCherry+ micrometastasis in animals administered DIR-RGD-NP. In
these animals, tumors less than 1 mm were detected due to a halo of DIR
staining around each micrometastatic lesion. In these foci, DIR signal
was observed to stain the vasculature surrounding the small tumor
implants especially those in the mesentery and diaphragm. In contrast, we
were able to detect only 18% of the mCherry+ micrometastasis in animals
administered DIR-NP.Conclusion:We demonstrate that we can utilize the
specific phenotype of tumor-associated neovasculature to target optical
enhancers to locate and delineate micrometastasis. RGD-coated
nanoparticles are able to carry probes to the tumor microenvironment
leading to optimal staining of micrometastasis. Our results highlight the
use of this nanotechnology platform in microscopic surgical debulking to
assure maximal surgical effort, minimize residual disease, and improve
patient survival.

