Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunogenic chemotherapy synergize PD-1 blockade by enhancing
dendritic cells infiltration in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)


Targeting immune checkpoints such as programmed cell death protein 1
(PD1), programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PDL1) has achieved noteworthy
benefit in multiple cancers. However, their efficacy remains
unsatisfactory in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Breast cancer is
not highly mutagenic and immune checkpoints blockade therapies for TNBC
is not as effective as for melanoma or lung cancer with high mutation
rates. Combination of different modalities offers an opportunity to
enhance their effect. We studied the synergistic effect of cancer
chemotherapy and immunotherapy in TNBC mouse model. Here we report that
the combination of Doxisome (liposomal encapsulated formulation of
Doxorubicin) and anti-PD-1 antibody suppresses tumor growth, reduces lung
metastasis and improves survival of mice bearing 4T1-triple negative
breast cancer. Moreover, the combination of Doxisome and anti-PD-1 was
able to overcome low dose Doxisome resistance in mouse models of TNBC.
The success of anticancer chemotherapy is linked to a durable immune
response of targeting tumor. We present evidence that the synergistic
therapeutic activity of Doxisome with anti-PD1 blockade results in
enhanced T cell anti-tumor immune responses. Moreover, the synergetic
effect is due to increased dendritic cells (DCs) infiltration in tumor
microenvironment, which internalize tumor antigens and subsequently
activate tumor-reactive T cells. In TNBC mouse model, by combining
anti-PD1 checkpoint blockade while shifting the immune response towards
CD4+ Th1 with Doxisome, immune tolerance to TNBC tumor can be overcome.
Enhancing antigen presenting cells (APCs, e.g. DCs) infiltration by
immunogenic chemotherapy and T cell activation by anti-PD1 blockade
increase therapy response in TNBC. These results provide rationale for
several newly planned clinical trials combining immunogenic chemotherapy
with PD-1 or PD-L1 blockade in breast cancer and exploration of such a
combination in others solid tumors.

