Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beta blockers abrogate EGFR TKI resistance induced by adrenergic
receptor-mediated upregulation of IL-6 and modulation of the
LKB1/AMPK/mTOR axis


Therapeutic strategies to target EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
resistance mediated by mechanisms other than T790M are a major clinical
challenge. Studies have implicated IL-6 as a mediator of EGFR TKI
resistance, and IL-6 is known to be regulated by adrenergic receptors
(AR) in some cancers. We investigated whether adrenergic pathways can
promote T790M-independent EGFR TKI resistance in preclinical models and
in clinical studies. We found that 2-AR was highly expressed in our panel
of 119 cell lines and in NSCLC clinical specimens. Activation of -ARs by
stress hormones such as norepinephrine (NE) induced a dramatic rise in
IL-6, and this occurred through 2-ARs. -AR inhibitors (i.e. propranolol),
but not -AR inhibitors, blocked IL-6 induction. Analysis of downstream
signaling pathways revealed that 2-ARs induced IL-6 expression through
activation of adenylyl cyclase, p90RSK and CREB. To identify novel
signaling pathways modulated by ARs, we stimulated NSCLC cell lines with
NE and analyzed protein lysates by RPPA to detect expression and
activation of >100 proteins. -AR signaling inactivated the tumor
suppressor LKB1 through phosphorylation of S428 and subsequently
increased mTOR activity. LKB1 inactivation was critical for IL-6
induction. This finding is important as LKB1 loss is known to be a driver
of NSCLC resistance and metastasis. Moreover, we found that 2-AR
activation promoted EGFR TKI resistance in cell lines and in mouse models
of EGFR mutant NSCLC. The effect of -AR on EGFR TKI resistance was
blocked by the addition of the beta blocker propranolol or IL-6
antibodies, in vitro and in vivo. Consistent with our preclinical
studies, in the phase III ZEST clinical study testing erlotinib vs
vandetanib, we found that high plasma levels of IL-6 was associated with
a worse PFS and OS in the erlotinib arm. In addition, we found that
circulating levels of IL-6 were significantly lower in NSCLC patients
incidentally receiving beta blockers in the BATTLE trial. Finally, we
analyzed the influence of incidental beta blocker use in the LUX-Lung3
study testing afatinib vs chemotherapy in EGFR mutant NSCLC patients. In
patients not receiving beta blockers, the median PFS was 11.1 and 6.9
months for afatinib and chemotherapy, respectively, and afatinib improved
PFS with a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.60. In patients receiving beta
blockers, the median PFS was 13.6 and 2.5 for afatinib and chemotherapy,
respectively, and afatinib improved PFS with a HR of 0.25. In conclusion,
our preclinical and clinical data provide evidence that 2-AR activation
can upregulate IL-6 in EGFR mutant+ NSCLC, modulate the LKB1/AMPK/mTOR
axis, and promote EGFR TKI resistance. Moreover, EGFR mutant+ patients
using beta blockers had greater relative PFS benefit from afatinib vs
chemotherapy compared with those not using beta blockers, supporting
future clinical testing of EGFR TKIs in combination with beta blockers.

