Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced chemotherapeutic effect with matrix metalloproteinase
sensitive liposomes


Introduction: Drug bioavailability following intra-tumoral accumulation
is a major challenge in existing drug delivery systems. A site-specific
trigger for obtaining drug release specifically in tumor tissue would
overcome this problem and enhance the antitumor effect of the carried
drug. Our aim was to develop a new drug delivery platform based on
liposomes that are sensitive to matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).Methods:
In the present work, we have designed a matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-sensitive liposomal drug delivery system encapsulating oxaliplatin,
which by tumorspecific enzymatic dePEGylation allows for controlling the
precision of drug release. The dePEGylation is provided by a
cholesterol-anchored PEGylated lipopeptide containing a short peptide
sequence cleavable by MMP-2 and MMP-9. These MMP-sensitive liposomes are
designed to make a charge-reversal transformation upon encountering MMPs
in the tumor environment. The surface charge of the liposome turns from
slightly negative to positive, resulting in cationic liposomes. In vitro
cellular uptake of the liposomes was assessed using flow cytometry and
ICP-MS, and further confirmed by confocal microscopy in CT26 and HT1080
cell lines. In vivo studies was evaluated in a syngeneic murine model of
MMP-positive CT26 colon cancer.Results: We successfully formulated
MMP-sensitive, oxaliplatin encapsulated liposomes and characterized their
zeta potential, size, stability and encapsulation efficiency. The results
showed uniformly dispersed particles, and the charge-reversal properties
were confirmed as the surface charge changed from slightly negative to
distinct positive upon enzymatic cleavage generating cationic liposomes.
These MMP-sensitive liposomes were evaluated in vitro and in vivo with a
high correlation. In vivo studies showed a prolonged circulation profile
with minimal leakage, and similar accumulation in tumors as conventional
Stealth liposomes. Efficacy experiment in the same model demonstrated
significantly improved antitumor activity relative to free oxaliplatin,
and with a superior effect compared to the conventional Stealth
liposomes.Conclusion: With this study, we establish a promising liposomal
drug delivery platform for the carriage and release of numerous
anticancer drugs into the microenvironment of an MMP-positive tumor.

