Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-parametric 3D tumor microtissue-based phenotypic compound
classification


Here, we report on the development of homo- and heterotypic ovarian and
pancreatic microtissue tumor models for a screening of up to 40 compounds
selected from the NCATS Oncology focused library of small molecules. The
goal of this study was to develop a high throughput compatible drug
screening platform that could leverage the best of high throughput and
high content screening assays to generate a pharmacological profile of
activities that we hope will help better predict activity in vivo .This
platform utilizes 3D multicellular spheroids from ovarian (HEY and SKOV)
and pancreatic (Panc-1) cancer and enables the discrimination of
tumor-specific efficacy and nonspecific cytotoxicity of a drug candidate
with subsequent identification and validation of the molecular mechanism
of action (MMOA). The biological responses measured over a 10-day drug
exposure period included (i) growth kinetic (microtissue size), (ii)
potency (IC50ATP_10_days) and efficacy (max. response ATP and size). The
biological response of the compounds was compared between the different
cell culture formats tested, 2D, 3D homotypic and 3D heterotypic. The
comparison of IC50 values among the different ovarian cancer cell
cultures showed that 21 out of the 38 compounds tested were more potent
in 3D than in 2D. Within the pancreatic models, 13 out of 20 compounds
tested were more potent in 3D than in 2D. Interestingly, most of the
compounds which showed stronger potency in 3D were targeted small
molecule agents. Comparing drug responses of homo vs heterotypic ovarian
tumor model systems, 3 compounds were effective only in the heterotypic
model including the WNT inhibitor PNU-74654 and GABA uptake inhibitor
(Gat-1) SK&F-89976A.We also evaluated nonspecific cytotoxic effects on
the incorporated NIH3T3 fibroblasts by quantifying a secreted reporter
over time. The assay system allowed us to discriminate between acute
cytotoxic effects (3-day exposure) and sub-chronic toxicity (7-day
exposure). Whereas only a very limited number of compounds had acute
cytotoxic effects, there were considerable more compounds with
sub-chronic cytotoxicity. Based on the single endpoint classifications,
we chose an mTOR inhibitor, Torin-2, to further assess molecular
mechanism of drug action for all three tumor microtissue models used in
this study, applying reverse phase protein array (RPPA) and transcriptome
analysis for signaling pathway profiling. Preliminary results of RPPA
analysis revealed a clear down-regulation in the cell cycle and
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway, especially for S6 ribosomal protein
phosphorylated at Ser 235, 236, 240 and 244, indicating a strong
inhibitory effect on translation and cell growth control.In summary, we
present a 3D tumor microtissue-based phenotypic drug discovery testing
scheme which allows a multi-parametric endpoint analysis paired with
subsequent molecular pathway identification.

