Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The TCA cycle transferase DLST is critical for MYC-mediated
leukemogenesis


The proto-oncogene MYC has been implicated in the pathogenesis of many
human cancers, including hematological and solid malignancies1. In the
majority of T-ALL cases, MYC is aberrantly expressed downstream of
activated NOTCH1 mutations. Despite the pivotal role of MYC in the
pathogenesis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and many
other cancers, the mechanisms underlying MYC-mediated tumorigenesis
remain inadequately understood2. Here we utilized a well-characterized
zebrafish model of Myc-induced T-ALL for genetic studies to identify
novel genes contributing to disease onset. We found that heterozygous
inactivation of a tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzyme, dihydrolipoamide
S-succinyltransferase (Dlst), significantly delayed tumor onset.
Concordant with our zebrafish results, RNAi knockdown of DLST led to
decreased cell viability and induction of apoptosis in human T-ALL cell
lines. DLST is the E2 transferase of the -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex (KGDHC), which converts -ketoglutarate (-KG) to succinyl-CoA in
the TCA cycle3. Polar metabolomics profiling revealed that the TCA cycle
was disrupted by DLST knockdown in human T-ALL cells, as demonstrated by
an accumulation of -KG and its precursor glutamine, as well as a loss of
succinyl-CoA. Addition of succinate, the downstream TCA cycle
intermediate, to human T-ALL cells was sufficient to rescue defects in
cell viability caused by DLST inactivation. Taken together, our studies
identify DLST as an important mediator of MYC-driven leukemogenesis and
provide compelling evidence for the metabolic dependence of T-ALL cells
on the TCA cycle.1. Nesbit CE, Tersak JM, Prochownik EV. MYC oncogenes
and human neoplastic disease. Oncogene 1999 May 13; 18(19): 3004-3016.2.
Sharma VM, Calvo JA, Draheim KM, Cunningham LA, Hermance N, Beverly L, et
al. Notch1 contributes to mouse T-cell leukemia by directly inducing the
expression of c-myc. Molecular and cellular biology 2006 Nov; 26(21):
8022-8031.3. Sheu KF, Blass JP. The alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1999; 893: 61-78.

