Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A CpG island methylator phenotype in acute myeloid leukemia
independent of IDH mutations and associated with a favorable outcome


Background: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) causes the most leukemia-related
deaths in the United States, and has frequent epigenetic aberrations,
including a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). CIMP defines unique
molecular subtypes of other cancers and has been linked to mutations in
IDH1/2, however the clinical consequences of CIMP and the role of IDH1/2
mutations in AML remain unclear.Methods: To measure genome-wide CpG
methylation we used Digital Restriction Enzyme Analysis of Methylation
(DREAM) on AML bone marrow samples and normal peripheral blood controls.
For validation we used methylation data from patient samples from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) on the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450
platform. We also used RNA-seq data from TCGA, and microarray data from
GEO (GSE6891). Statistical analysis was done using R.Results: Genome-wide
analysis of variably methylated CpG sites in 96 AML bone marrow samples
using DREAM revealed two distinct CpG island methylator phenotypes by
hierarchical clustering: IDH-CIMP (I-CIMP) in which 7/10 cases had
oncogenic IDH1/2 mutations, and AML-CIMP (A-CIMP), which lacked any
mutations in IDH1/2. At median follow-up of 6.16 years, A-CIMP cases, but
not I-CIMP cases were associated with longer overall survival (median OS,
years: A-CIMP = Not reached, P = 0.08; I-CIMP = 3.35, P = 0.50;
CIMP-negative = 1.17). We validated and extended these findings using
TCGA data. In this cohort A-CIMP cases also had significantly longer OS
compared to CIMP-negative (median OS, years: A-CIMP = 2.34, P = 0.01;
I-CIMP = 1.25, P = 0.89; CIMP-negative = 1.00). Aberrant hypermethylation
in A-CIMP occurred preferentially at CpG islands by a factor greater than
3, while I-CIMP cases demonstrated a slight preference for
hypermethylation at sites outside CpG islands. Interestingly, A-CIMP was
enriched in CEBPA (19%) and WT1 mutations (14%), but inversely correlated
with IDH, TET2, and NPM1 mutations. Functional pathway analysis revealed
that genes hypermethylated in A-CIMP are associated with pluripotency
maintenance - including PAX6, GBX2, and HOXA9 - and RNA-seq data largely,
but not entirely, recapitulated methylation-based patterns. There was a
strong correlation between promoter CpG island methylation and gene
expression for many A-CIMP genes. Finally, the transcriptional program
associated with A-CIMP was found to correlate with outcome and genetic
backgrounds in both TCGA and additional independent datasets.Conclusions:
Taken together, our data suggest that CIMP in AML is complex,
multifactorial and cannot be explained solely by coding gene mutations
(e.g. IDH1/2, TET2). There is an association between A-CIMP and
curability in multiple AML datasets that cannot be recapitulated by
mutational data alone and that may be worth validating in prospective
studies.

