Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preneoplastic activity of dietary poly unsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA) regulation of organ and tissue microenvironments in an iso-caloric
pair-fed mouse model


Diets containing omega-3 (3) PUFAs have health benefits due to their
anti-inflammatory activity and lower risk of chronic conditions including
cardiac, autoimmune and neoplastic diseases. This contrasts with 6 PUFA
containing Western diets, which are pro-inflammatory. Balancing the
dietary 6:3 ratio has been suggested to have cancer preventive and
potentially therapeutic activity; however, the majority of these studies
have not differentiated dietary PUFA content from obesity. Herein we
examined the effects of the 6:3 ratio in iso-caloric diets that were pair
fed. These diets had 35.5% of calories from fat with an 6:3 ratio in the
6 and 3 based diets of 42:1 and 1:1 respectively (confirmed by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry) using the liquid, Lieber DeCarli diet
and fish oil substituting for 70% of olive oil. The 3 diet contained
eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) acid at a 3:1 ratio,
while the 6 diet contained linoleic acid as the predominant 6 PUFA and a
low level of the 3 PUFA, linolenic acid. After establishing female BALB/c
mice on these diets, weight gain and diet consumption were monitored for
12 weeks, the mice sacrificed and the dietary effects on mammary gland
and hepatic histopathology, leukocyte phenotypes and organ and tissue
lipidomics determined. In association with pair feeding there were no
differences in diet consumed (-3 diet used as baseline) and weight gain
between cohorts. The cohort on the 6 diet had depressed numbers of marrow
progenitor cells and increased splenic subcapsular extramedullary
hematopoiesis consistent with an inflammatory response, increased
hepatocyte lipidosis, hypertrophy and multinucleation and increased
hepatic vascularity with thicker intima. The -6 dietary cohort also had
mammary fat pads (MFPs) with increased adipocytes in the tubular
epithelium, stromal cellularity and epithelial tissue density. These
mammary gland and hepatic histopathologic changes and subclinical
inflammation are consistent with pre-neoplastic lesions and were
accompanied by organ specific lipodemic changes. This included
significant increases in arachidonic acid (AA) in the plasma, spleen and
liver, but not MFPs, of the -6 cohort, and a significant increase in EPA
and DHA levels in the plasma, spleen, MFPs and liver of the -3 cohort. In
addition, the liver and MFPs had a significant increase in the 3 PUFA,
docosapentaenoic acid. In summary, our studies demonstrate that the
dietary ratio of 6:3, independent of obesity can regulate mammary gland
and hepatocyte proliferation and subclinical inflammation in association
with significant, organ specific increases in AA levels contributing to
microenvironmental preneoplastic hyperplasia.

