Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib enhances expression of effector molecules in antitumor
CD8+ T lymphocytes by modulating Notch-NF-kB-miR-155 crosstalk


The immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment usurps host antitumor
immunity by multiple mechanisms including interference with the Notch
system, which is important for various metazoan cell fate decisions and
hematopoietic cell differentiation and function. We observed that
treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in mice bearing
various solid tumors resulted in an upregulated expression of various
Notch signaling components in lymphoid tissues, thereby increasing
CD8+T-lymphocyte IFN secretion and expression of effector molecules,
perforin and granzyme B, as well as the T-box transcription factor
eomesodermin. Bortezomib also neutralized TGF-mediated suppression of IFN
and granzyme B expression in activated CD8+T-cells. Of note, bortezomib
reversed tumor-induced downregulation of Notch receptors, Notch1 and
Notch2, as well as increased the levels of cleaved Notch intracellular
domain (NICD) and downstream targets Hes1 and Hey1 in tumor-draining
CD8+T-cells. Moreover, bortezomib promoted CD8+T-cell nuclear factor-B
(NF-B) activity by increasing the total and phosphorylated levels of the
IB kinase and IB as well as the cytoplasmic and nuclear levels of
phosphorylated p65. Even when we blocked NFB activity by Bay-11-7082, or
NICD cleavage by -secretase inhibitor, bortezomib significantly increased
expression of Notch Hes1 and Hey1 genes as well as perforin, granzyme B
and eomesodermin in activated CD8+T-cells. Data suggest that bortezomib
can rescue tumor-induced dysfunction of CD8+T-cells by its intrinsic
stimulatory effects promoting NICD-NFB crosstalk. We are also elucidating
components of microRNA regulation affecting NICD-NFB crosstalk. Our
preliminary data suggest that miR-155 plays a role in bortezomib-induced
regulation of T cell function. These findings provide novel insights on
using bortezomib not only as an agent to sensitize tumors to cell death,
but also to provide lymphocyte-stimulatory effects, thereby overcoming
immunosuppressive actions of tumor on anti-tumor T-cell functions.

