Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How to deal with DNA damage during mitosis: a genetic interaction
map of the PICH DNA translocase


Genomic instability is one of the enabling characteristics of cancer, and
is thought to be driven in large part by replication stress. It is
generally believed that damaged DNA needs to be repaired before entry
into mitosis. Recent evidence showed that DNA damage occasionally is
present in mitosis, and can be repaired either through break-induced
replication during early mitosis or during anaphase at so-called
ultrafine DNA bridges (UFBs). These UBFs are characterized by the
presence of the PICH DNA translocase, and Rif1, which we recently
identified to be involved in the resolution of UFBs (Hengeveld et al, Dev
Cell, 2015). However, detailed molecular composition of UFBs associated
proteins and their mechanism of action are incompletely understood. Also,
whether specific cancer types are dependent on this DNA repair pathway
for their survival is not known. We hypothesise that cancer cells with
high levels of replication stress may increasingly depend on these
mechanisms for their survival. Here, we aimed to identify the genetic
make-off of cancer cells that depend for their survival on repair of
damage lesion during anaphase.We used inactivation PICH or Rif1 as a
model for defective resolution of anaphase bridges. To elucidate the
consequences of loss of DNA repair at UFBs, we analysed the sensitivity
to genotoxic agents and assessed genomic instability in HAP1 cells, in
which the ERCC6L gene, which encodes the PICH DNA translocase, or the
Rif1 gene were inactivated using Cas9/CRISPR-mediated mutation. ERCC6L as
well as RIF1 knock-out cells showed increased levels of intrinsic DNA
damage, as judged by elevated levels of H2AX phosphorylation and
increased frequencies of 53BP1 bodies, known to represent unrepaired
replication damage. ERCC6L as well as RIF1 knock-out cells also display
increased sensitive to the topoisomerase II inhibitor ICRF193.
Amplifications and loss of genomic areas was assessed using single strand
sequencing of single cells. Subsequently, we wanted to determine which
genetic mutations are not allowed or show competitive outgrowth in the
absence of UFB resolution during anaphase. To this end, we exploited the
haploid nature of the HAP1 cells, which allows insertional mutagenesis
using retroviruses carrying a strong spice-acceptor to create random
instantaneous knock-outs. The list of candidate genes of which depletion
leads to a lethal phenotype specifically in cells lacking PICH is
currently being analysed.In conclusion, our studies have shown that the
inactivation of PICH or RIF1 results in a marked increase in unresolved
UFBs which ultimately lead to elevated numbers of 53BP1 bodies, and
increased sensitivity to topoisomerase inhibitors. These data makes both
RIF1 and PICH interesting therapeutic targets in tumours with high levels
of replication stress, or targets to potentiate the effects of
topoisomerases.

