Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microfluidic cancer-on-a-chip platform for assessing anti-cancer
drug efficacies


Introduction: The tumor microenvironment is known to play an influential
role in the angiogenic and metastatic progression of cancer and is
regulated by different factors (stromal fibroblasts, extracellular matrix
(ECM) proteins and endothelial cells) present in the complex milieu.
Recapitulation of this complexity in three-dimensional (3D) tumor models
is critical in understanding the processes involved in cancer progression
and to provide clinically relevant efficacy data for cancer drugs. To
address this challenge, we developed a microfluidic oncomimetic platform
where breast cancer cells are co-cultured with fibroblasts along with a
complex, intricate vascular network. We further investigated the effect
of mechanical stiffness of the tumor stroma on the growth and morphology
of cancer cells, migration of cancer cells into surrounding vasculature
and the ability of standard cancer drugs to perfuse through the
vasculature and target cancer cells.Materials and Methods: Poly(dimethyl
siloxane) (PDMS)-based microfluidic devices, containing vascular networks
in communication with tumor chamber, were fabricated using
photolithography as described earlier1. Poly(ethylene glycol)-fibrinogen
(PEG-Fb), used for 3D co-culture of cancer cells and fibroblasts, was
prepared using established protocols2. Human breast tumor associated
endothelial cells (hBTECs) were seeded within fibronectin-coated vascular
channels and maintained under flow to develop endothelial networks. To
obtain 3D cancer-fibroblast co-culture system, MCF7 or MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells were co-encapsulated with BJ-5ta human fibroblasts in PEG-Fb
hydrogel in the tumor chamber. Immunostaining with standard endothelial
and cancer markers was conducted to confirm maturity and functionality of
seeded cells. GFP-labelled cancer cells were co-cultured with hBTECs to
visualize tumor cell migration. Cancer cells were also maintained in
culture over several weeks within the devices to demonstrate
applicability of this system to perform long-term drug dosing
experiments. Finally, the cytotoxic effects of doxorubicin and paclitaxel
at two different concentrations on cancer cells were evaluated by
perfusing the drugs through the endothelial channels and cell viability
quantified via Live/Dead staining.Conclusions: We have developed a novel
3D microfluidic, vascularized cancer-fibroblast co-culture platform, with
the ability to predict drug efficacy for breast cancer. This platform can
also be extended in future for cancer-immunotherapy based investigations
and screening of novel nano-carrier based anti-cancer
drugs.Acknowledgements: We gratefully acknowledge financial support from
NIH (#HHSN261201400037C) and AURIC.References: 1. B. Prabhakarpandian et
al., J Control Release 2015; 201:49-552. L. Almany et al., Biomaterials
2005; 26(15):2467-77

