Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anastomotic recurrences are clonally related to primary tumors in
sporadic colorectal carcinoma


Background:Anastomotic recurrences occur in 2-10% of colorectal carcinoma
(CRC) cases after surgical resection of the primary tumor. To date there
are no molecular data investigating their genetic profile and multiple
theories exist as to their pathogenesis including re-growth of tumor
cells present within local lymphatics after initial surgery, seeding of
anastomosis by metastatic tumor cells and a second primary tumor. The aim
of our study was to compare the genomic profile of anastomotic
recurrences to that of matched primary tumors and, where available, to
that of distant metastases.Design:Thirty-six tumors from 14 patients were
genotyped using a hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing
assay for targeted deep sequencing of all exons and selected introns of
341 key cancer genes. All patients had resection of their primary tumor
with clear margins and recurred either at the anastomotic line or in the
peri-anastomotic area 1.1 to 7.0 years following resection of their
primary tumor. In 3 patients 2 consecutive anastomotic recurrences were
sequenced, while in 6 patients a distant metastasis that occurred 1.2 to
3 years prior to the anastomotic recurrence was also analyzed. All tumors
were microsatellite stable except in one patient with genetically
confirmed Lynch syndrome.Results:A total of 254 somatic mutations were
detected including 140 mutations in the microsatellite stable cases. The
most commonly mutated genes (mutated in > 3 patients) were APC, KRAS,
TP53, PIK3CA, ATM and PIK3R1. In 13/14 patients the anastomotic
recurrence(s) and primary tumor shared between 50-100% of mutations,
including mutations in key driver genes such as APC, KRAS and TP53,
consistent with these tumors being clonally related. In the patient with
the Lynch syndrome the 2 tumors showed distinct somatic mutations
suggestive of independent primaries. We identified eleven genetic events
present in a distant metastasis and not in a primary tumor and none of
these events was detected in the anastomotic recurrence arguing against
re-seeding of the anastomotic site by a metastatic clone. All five
patients with isolated anastomotic recurrence were free of disease 0.9 to
6.1 years following resection of their recurrent
CRC.Conclusions:Anastomotic recurrences appear to be clonally related to
the primary tumor in sporadic CRC cases. Our data also provide molecular
data in support of the treatment of anastomotic recurrences as localized
disease.

