Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local release of combretastatin A-4 from NIR-light activatable
prodrugs overcomes areal and temporal limitations of photodynamic therapy


A unique prodrug strategy for treating localized cancers, in which NIR
light-illuminated prodrug effectively ablates tumors through the combined
effects of photodynamic therapy (i.e., singlet oxygen [SO]) and locally
released anticancer drugs has been proposed. Due to short distance of
action (A unique prodrug strategy for treating localized cancers, in
which NIR light-illuminated prodrug effectively ablates tumors through
the combined effects of photodynamic therapy (i.e., singlet oxygen [SO])
and locally released anticancer drugs has been proposed. Due to short
distance of action (< 0.04 s) and short lifetime (A unique prodrug
strategy for treating localized cancers, in which NIR light-illuminated
prodrug effectively ablates tumors through the combined effects of
photodynamic therapy (i.e., singlet oxygen [SO]) and locally released
anticancer drugs has been proposed. Due to short distance of action (<
0.04 s) and short lifetime (< 0.02 m) of SO, direct damage of PDT is both
areally and temporally limited. We hypothesized that the locally released
anticancer drugs would overcome the areal and temporal limits of SO. Near
IR-activatable prodrug of combretastatin A-4 (CA4), Pc-(L-CA4)2, and its
pseudo-prodrug, Pc-(NCL-CA4)2, were evaluated in vitro and in vivo. After
partial illumination of a 24 well, all the cells in the prodrug-treated
well were killed by the released CA4. Limited areal damage was observed
in the pseudo-prodrug-treated wells. A time-dependent cell survival study
revealed more extensive cell death in the prodrug-treated cells, due to
the sustained damage from the released CA4. Cell cycle analysis and
microscopic imaging data demonstrated the typical damage patterns of CA4
in the prodrug-treated cells. A time-dependent histological study showed
that prodrug-treated tumors lacked mitotic bodies. The prodrug caused
broader and more long-lasting tumor size reduction than did the
pseudo-prodrug. These data consistently support that the released CA4
overcomes the areal and temporal limits of SO, providing far superior
antitumor effects.

