Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoplasmic p21WAF1/CIP1 increases metastatic melanoma survival
upon chemotherapy


Initially described as a potent cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor and
thus a negative regulator of cell cycle, p21waf1/cip1 is a protein whose
expression is often altered in cancer. Paradoxically, its upregulation
has been correlated with aggressiveness and poor prognosis. p21waf1/cip1
fits the definition of antagonistic duality, since its cytoplasmic
functions differ from its nuclear tasks. Our group had previously
developed a murine melanoma progression model, which culminated in the
establishment of cell lines representing different stages in melanoma
genesis. Surprisingly, we detected overexpression of p21waf1/cip1 protein
in a metastatic melanoma cell line (4C11+), which exhibits highly
aggressive behavior. Despite its aberrant overexpression has already been
described in melanoma, including metastases, little is known about the
impact of its ectopic overexpression in melanoma aggressiveness. We
performed viral-mediated overexpression and downregulation of
p21waf1/cip1 in the non-metastatic melanoma lineage (4C11-) which does
not express this protein and in the metastatic melanoma cell line
(4C11+), respectively, and assessed for its impact on melanoma survival
upon Dacarbazine treatment. Flow cytometry analyses were conducted to
investigate p21waf1/cip1 cell cycle control in these lineages. Through
Western blot analysis, we also evaluated the expression of phospho-Akt
and phospho-p21 as well as p21waf1/cip1 subcellular localization, in an
attempt to investigate the mechanisms underlying ectopic location of
p21waf1/cip1 and thus its oncogenic activities. Our research shows that
upregulated cytoplasmic p21waf1/cip1 increases metastatic melanoma
survival upon Dacarbazine treatment, which can be reverted by
p21waf1/cip1 silencing. We also detected high levels of
phospho-Akt(Ser473) and phospho-p21(Thr145), which are determinant in
promoting p21waf1/cip1 cytoplasmic retention. Using Wortmannin, a PI3K
inhibitor that prevents Akt activation, cytoplasmic p21waf1/cip1 level
was substantially diminished. Importantly, we identified high levels of
p21waf1/cip1 and phospho-p21waf1/cip1 in patients-derived metastatic
melanoma cells. We provided new insights about molecular pathways
involved in Dacarbazine-associated resistance in melanomas, pointing
p21waf1/cip1 and PI3K/Akt as key contributors in this process.
Altogether, our findings contribute to not only design new therapeutic
approaches against metastatic melanoma, but also help to elucidate the
contradictory and complex role exerted by p21waf1/cip1 in
cancer.Supported by FAPESP and CNPq

