Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemically modified gamma PNAs targeting oncomiR-210 as a
potential anticancer therapy


The specific aims of this study are to test the hypothesis that new
generation PNA molecules targeting miR-210 delivered using nanoparticles
will have therapeutic effects in xenograft mouse models and in human
cancer cell lines.MicroRNAs (miRs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs
(22-23nt) that regulate the translation and stability of mRNA during
post-transcriptional events. miR profiling experiments reveal that
certain miRs are widely over-expressed in several cancers, and inhibiting
these miRs may offer a promising anticancer therapy. Little is known
about how they work to cause cancer. This warrants further investigation
to understand the relationship between miRNAs and cancer, but also to
capitalize on fact that oncomiRs may be potent therapeutic targets. In
particular, miR-210 exhibit differential expression levels in cancers,
especially in hypoxic cancer cells, resulting in a demonstrated
capability to affect cellular transformation and carcinogenesis by acting
as an oncomiR.Many antisense molecules such as locked nucleic acids (LNA)
have been developed that can target specific miRs, but they are few in
number and often require further optimization for cellular delivery, off
target toxicity, tumor selectivity and enzymatic resistance properties.
Unlike most nucleic acids, PNA is a synthetic DNA/RNA mimic in which the
phosphodiester backbone is substituted with a neutral N-(2-aminoethyl)
glycine backbone. PNA has been shown to bind single-stranded targets
sequence-specifically, with high binding affinity, and is not susceptible
to protease or nuclease degradation. These salient features make PNAs
excellent candidates for targeting miRs. Here, we used a new class of
conformationally preorganized gamma peptide nucleic acids (PNAs), which
possess superior properties in terms of solubility, binding affinity,
biocompatibility, and in vivo delivery in order to target miR-210. For
cellular delivery, we used FDA approved poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA) nanoparticles. PNA encapsulated in PLGA nanoparticles were
evaluated in human cancer cell lines in vitro as well as in xenograft
mouse model in vivo. Our results show that nanoparticles containing PNAs
targeting miR-210 cause significant delay in tumor growth in a xenograft
mouse model. Further, histopathological analyses also support the
enhanced antimiR-210 activity of PNA. Hence our work will provides a) a
framework for a antimiR-210 based therapeutics at the clinical level
using PNA; b) a promising clinically translatable system for selectively
targeting cancer using a PLGA based nanoparticle system which can be
scaled up easily; c) a step forward for personalized therapy for cancers
by inhibiting specific miRs. In addition, use of hydrophilic chains (MP)
at the position will improve the pharmacokinetic properties of PNA for
preclinical and clinical studies for oncomiR-based therapeutics.

