Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic response to HER2/CD3 bispecific antibody
(HER2-TDB): evidence of T-cell recruitment and further rationale for
combination treatment with anti-PD-L1


Based on the recent clinical success of tumor immunotherapies that block
immune suppressive mechanisms to restore T cell function, there is a
profound interest in the clinical development of T cell targeted
therapies. We have produced a trastuzumab-based HER2 T cell dependent
bispecific antibody (HER2/CD3; HER2-TDB; Junttila et al Cancer Res 2014,
74:5561) that conditionally activates T cells resulting in lysis of HER2
expressing cancer cells at low picomolar concentrations. In vivo,
HER2/CD3 can inhibit growth of established mammary tumors in mice at
doses as low as 0,01 mg/kg. Due to its unique mechanism of action, which
is unrelated to HER2 signaling or sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents,
HER2/CD3 can eliminate cells refractory to currently approved HER2
therapies and inhibit growth of Kadcyla insensitive mammary tumor models.
Treatment with HER2-TDBs also results in tumor regression as a second
line treatment for Kadcyla relapsed mammary tumors in mice.Spontaneous
mammary tumors arising in MMTV-huHER2 transgenic animals are poorly
immunogenic or immunological deserts due to their low mutational load and
low T cell infiltration. Despite these attributes, HER2/CD3 shows
remarkable activity in this model characterized by a robust increase in
the number of infiltrating lymphocytes and CD8+ T cells as well as a
significant enhancement of tumor CD8+ cytotoxic effector function as
measured by increased IFNg production. In addition to inducing T cell
proliferation, we further show that HER2/CD3 strongly recruits new T
cells from the periphery and this leads to significantly increased T cell
numbers in the mammary tumor tissue. Another notable feature of the
response to HER2/CD3 treatment is a significant upregulation of PD-1
expression on tumor infiltrating CD8+ T cells. This observation adds a
strong rationale for combining HER2/CD3 with anti-PDL1 treatment. Our in
vitro experiments further demonstrate that PD-1/PD-L1 signaling can
inhibit killing mediated by CD3 bispecific antibodies and that combining
two immune therapies - direct polyclonal recruitment of T cell activity
together with inhibiting the T cell suppressive PD-1/PD-L1 axis results
in enhanced and durable long term responses in vivo.

