Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel Akt inhibitor AZD5363 following radiotherapy improves
tumor control in mouse models of head and neck cancer


Radiation therapy (RT) is an important anti-cancer treatment.
Understanding the molecular pathways involved in the response of tumors
to RT has led to interest in developing drugs which target these; one
such target is Akt. Previous studies support the hypothesis that Akt
inhibition might enhance the radiosensitivity of tumors through
modification of cellular and micro-environmental factors. AZD5363 is a
novel, orally bio-available, ATP competitive inhibitor of Akt and here we
have evaluated whether AZD5363 will increase the efficacy of RT in
preclinical models of head and neck (H&N) cancer.The ability of AZD5363
to inhibit the Akt pathway was investigated in vitro in 5 H&N cell lines
and in vivo (FaDu xenografts) using western blot and ELISA techniques.
The effect of AZD5363 on the radiosensitivity in vitro was assessed using
clonogenic assays. The FaDu xenograft model was used to test the effect
of AZD5363 on tumor growth when used as a sequential treatment (for 7
days before RT) or adjuvant therapy (continuously after RT). RT was given
as a 6Gy single dose. The effect of these treatments on the tumor
microenvironment prior to and after irradiation was also assessed using
FAZA PET/CT, immunohistochemistry and ELISA techniques.AZD5363
effectively inhibited the Akt pathway in in vitro and in vivo. There was
no effect on radiosensitivity in vitro when drug was administered in a
variety of sequences and durations around RT. In vivo, there was no
improvement in tumor control when AZD5363 was given for 7 days before RT.
But survival was improved (p = 0.006) when AZD5363 was administered
continuously after RT with reduced tumor growth (p = 0.0035, 7 days after
RT). There was no effect of drug alone on tumor growth and no difference
in the level of tumor hypoxia (measured using FAZA PET/CT or pimonidazole
binding) after 7 days AZD5363. Human VEGF and HIF1 levels were reduced (p
= 0.0104 and p = 0.002, respectively) after 7 days AZD5363. There was no
difference in microvessel density (MVD) prior to RT, but 7 days after,
MVD was significantly reduced if adjuvant AZD5363 had been given (p =
0.0317). AZD5363 was also found to effect the rate of proliferation of
human umbilical vein endothelial (HUVEC) cells in vitro.AZD5363
effectively improves long term control of FaDu tumors when combined with
RT. However, this only occurs when the drug is used in the adjuvant
setting. AZD5363 has no effect on the radiosensitivity of H&N cells in
vitro, which suggests that the in vivo effects are dependent on the tumor
microenvironment. AZD5363 reduces tumor VEGF and HIF1 in an oxygen
independent manner and inhibits the rate of proliferation of vascular
endothelial cells, effects that would reduce vascular recovery after RT.
This is the first time a specific inhibitor of Akt has been reported to
have this sequence dependent ability to enhance the effects of RT and has
implications for how AZD5363 and potentially other Akt inhibitors are
used in combination with RT in the clinic.

