Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rare protein truncating and missense variants in ATM, CHEK2,
PALB2, but not XRCC2, confer increased breast cancer risks


Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy in women and has a major
heritable component that is driven by both common SNPs and rarer variants
in susceptibility genes. However, the risks associated with most rare
susceptibility alleles are not well estimated. We sequenced the coding
regions of ATM, CHEK2, PALB2, and XRCC2 in 13,087 BC cases and 5,488
controls from East Anglia to characterize their role in BC risk in the
largest sequencing study of these genes to date.We performed multiplexed
microfluidic PCR target enrichment of 221 amplicons, covering 99.3% of
the coding bases. Amplified DNA was barcoded, pooled, and sequenced on
the Illumina HiSeq2000. Reads were demultiplexed, trimmed, and aligned to
the hg19 reference sequence. Variants were called with GATK
UnifiedGenotyper and filtered for missing data. Retained variants were
annotated with CADD and VEP. Truncating variants, missense alleles, and
other functional variant groups were assessed for association with BC
risk using logistic regression.Truncating variants in ATM, CHEK2, and
PALB2 increased overall BC risk, whereas XRCC2 variants did not (Table
1). The estimated relative risk was higher for PALB2 than ATM or CHEK2.
While 88% of CHEK2 variant alleles were attributable to CHEK2*1100delC,
other truncating alleles appeared to confer similar risks. CHEK2
truncating alleles were more strongly associated with risk of estrogen
receptor (ER) positive disease than ER negative or triple negative
disease. In contrast, PALB2 protein-truncating variants conferred similar
relative risks for all subtypes. Analysis of rare missense variants
suggested that specific subset of alleles in ATM (P = 0.012), CHEK2 (P =
0.009), and PALB2 (P = 0.017) may contribute to risk. Localization within
known functional domains were a predictor of association among these
variants.These results confirm that truncating variants in ATM, CHEK2,
and PALB2 are associated with moderate BC risks, and exclude a large
effect on risk from XRCC2 variants.


