Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PEAK1/ZEB1/ITGA1 pathway mediates survival, stemness and
TGFbeta-induced EMT in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States with a five-year survival rate
of approximately 7%. Its highly invasive characteristics, lack of
biomarkers for early detection, limited therapeutic targets and inherent
resistance to chemotherapy are the central factors that lead to an
overall poor prognosis for this malignancy. Since most cancer-related
deaths are a result of metastatic tumors, we reasoned that our previously
published proteomic signature of the cell pseudopodium (PD) may be a good
pool from which to identify novel protein biomarkers or therapeutic
targets in pancreatic cancer. We cross-referenced PD enriched proteins
with Oncomine and identified 37 genes that are upregulated in pancreatic
cancer. The function of integrin alpha 1 (ITGA1), a cell surface receptor
for collagen and regulator of cell adhesion, has not been previously
characterized in the context of PDAC. Our results indicate that ITGA1 is
required for PDAC cell viability, promoting cell survival and tumor
growth. We further analyzed ITGA1 cell-surface levels and discovered that
ITGA1hi cells represent a subpopulation of Aldehyde Dehyrogenase high
(ALDH1hi) cells, and that ITGA1 knockdown reduces the ALDH1hi cell
population. One mechanism by which PDAC cells acquire metastatic
potential is via epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Thus, we
searched for prominent EMT genes among the top ITGA1 co-expressors using
RNA-Seq data from the Cancer Bio Portal. Interestingly, ZEB1 (a
transforming growth factor beta, TGFbeta, response gene and central
regulator of EMT) and PEAK1 kinase (a protein weve shown to be required
for pancreatic cancer progression and TGFbeta/ZEB1-induced EMT)
co-expresses with ITGA1. We tested the function of ITGA1 on
TGFbeta-induced EMT and found that ITGA1 is upregulated by TGFbeta during
EMT, and required for metastasis and a complete EMT response to TGFbeta.
We also demonstrate that PEAK1 is required for TGFbeta-induced ITGA1 in
PDAC cells. Finally, we demonstrate that ITGA1 is responsible for
collagen-induced spreading and an EMT-like shift in PDAC cell morphology.
Taken together, these results point to a novel TGFbeta/PEAK1/ZEB1/ITGA1
signaling cascade that when targeted can abrogate PDAC cell survival,
stemness, EMT and tumor growth/metastasis.

