Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic reprogramming discriminates aggressive vs. slowly
growing preneoplastic lesions at early stages of HCC development


Introduction and aim: Among the several changes underlying metabolic
reprogramming of cancer cells, increased glucose utilization and its
uncoupling from oxygen availability is a well-established phenomenon and
has been recognized as a hallmark of cancer. To what extent these
metabolic changes are important for the progression of slow growing
tumors and whether a metabolic rewiring occurs in the very early stages
of neoplastic progression represent key questions on the significance of
these metabolic alterations in cancer. Here, we compared the metabolic
features of preneoplastic hepatic lesions with those of advanced
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and of proliferating liver, following
partial hepatectomy (PH).Materials and Methods: Expression levels,
activity and modulation of several enzymes with key roles in glycolysis,
pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
were assessed in preneoplastic hepatic lesions and HCC, induced in rats
exposed to the Resistant-Hepatocyte (R-H) model. In vitro experiments
were performed on HCC cells obtained by perfusion of HCC-bearing rats.
Expression of metabolic genes was also investigated in two different
cohorts of human patients carrying HCC.Results and discussion: A switch
from OXPHOS to PPP was observed in very early preneoplastic lesions
generated 10 weeks after the treatment with DENA. Notably, this metabolic
reprogramming was observed only in the most aggressive preneoplastic
lesions, characterized by positivity for cytokeratin 19 (CK-19+). PPP
induction, shown by a strong increase in the expression and activity of
glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) was supported both by inhibition
of pyruvate kinase activity and by TP53-inducible glycolysis and
apoptosis regulator (TIGAR) induction. Importantly, such metabolic
rewiring was not observed in normal hepatocytes, undergoing proliferation
following 2/3 partial hepatectomy (PH). Activation of the NRF2/KEAP1
pathway and down-regulation of miR-1 accompanied the metabolic
reprogramming in CK-19+ preneoplastic lesions. Accordingly, NRF2
silencing decreased G6PD and increased miR-1 expression, consequently
inhibiting PPP, while forced expression of miR-1 downregulated G6PD
expression in HCC cells. Finally, an inverse correlation between miR-1
and its target gene G6PD was found in human HCC patients.Conclusion:
These results demonstrate that metabolic reprogramming takes place at
early stages of hepatocarcinogenesis and is likely the consequence of the
concomitant activation of the NRF2-KEAP1 pathway.

