Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRIP12 as a mediator of human papillomavirus/p16-related radiation
enhancement effects


Objective: Patients with human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have better responses to
radiotherapy and higher overall survival rates than do patients with
HPV-negative HNSCC, but the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are
unknown. P16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection. Our goal
was to examine the role of p16 in HPV-related favorable treatment
outcomes and to investigate the mechanisms by which p16 may regulate
radiosensitivity.Methods: HNSCC cells and xenografts were used.
P16-overexpressing (HPV/p16-negative HN5 and UMSCC-1) and p16 shRNA
knockdown (HPV/p16-positive UMSCC-47 and UCPI-SCC154) cells, TRIP12 shRNA
or siRNA knockdown (HPV/p16-negative HN5 and Fadu) cells were generated.
The effects of p16 or TRIP12 on HNSCC cell radiosensitivity were
determined by clonogenic cell survival. The effects of p16 on tumor
xenografts (HPV/p16-negative HN5 and HPV/p16-positive UMSCC-47)
radioresponse were evaluated by tumor growth delay assays. DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs) were assessed by immunofluorescence analysis
of 53BP1 foci; DSB levels were determined by neutral comet assay; western
blotting was used to evaluate protein changes; changes in protein
half-life were tested with a cycloheximide assay; gene expression was
examined by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR); and data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas HNSCC project were analyzed.Results: P16 expression
led to downregulation of TRIP12 protein both in vitro and in vivo via
decreasing TRIP12 protein's half life, which in turn led to increased
RNF168 levels and subsequently repressed DNA damage repair, represented
by increased 53BP1 foci and neutral comet moment tails at 24 hours after
irradiation. As a result, p16 expression enhanced radioresponsiveness
both in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of TRIP12 expression led to
radiosensitization through repressed DNA damage repair, represented by
decreased BRCA1 foci at 1 and 5 hours after irradiation; and increased
neutral comet moment tails at 24 hours after irradiation. Furthermore,
overexpression of TRIP12 was associated with poor survival in patients
with HPV-positive HNSCC.Conclusions: The findings of our study reveal
that p16 participates in radiosensitization through influencing DNA
damage repair. P16 downregulates TRIP12 protein expression via
post-translational regulation. Inhibition of TRIP12 sensitized HNSCC
cells via prohibition of DNA damage repair. These findings support the
rationale of blocking TRIP12 signaling to improve radiotherapy outcomes.

