Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quinacrine in endometrial cancer: repurposing an old antimalarial
drug


Although the majority of patients with endometrial cancer (EC) are
diagnosed early when disease is confined in the uterus and prognosis is
excellent, there is a subset of patients with advanced, metastatic,
recurrent or persistent after surgery disease with dismal prognosis.
Chemotherapy has a critical role for these patients. Carboplatin (carbo)
and paclitaxel (taxol) is the standard first-line chemotherapy in EC with
response rates as low as 50% and even lower for recurrent disease.
Furthermore, many patients will eventually relapse with chemo-resistant
disease and very poor prognosis. As the chemotherapeutic options for
these patients are limited and of questionable efficacy, it is of
paramount importance that novel agents are identified to increase or
restore chemo-sensitization to platinum-based chemotherapy.Quinacrine
(QC) is an inexpensive antimalarial drug with a predictable safety
profile which recently surfaced as a promising anticancer agent thought
to be associated with decreased risk of developing chemo-resistance
through targeting multiple pathways simultaneously. While prior
investigators have provided evidence that QC exerts strong anticancer
activity against a wide range of solid tumors, there are no studies
focused on QC in EC.In our study, QC exhibited strong synergism in vitro
when combined with cisplatin, carbo or taxol with the highest level of
synergism being observed in the most chemo-resistant EC cell line.
Neither QC monotherapy (QC every other day for 3 weeks) nor standard
chemotherapy (carbo+taxol for 3 cycles, on days 3, 7, 11) significantly
delayed tumor growth in the mouse xenografts. Only combination (standard
chemo + QC every other day during carbo+taxol treatment) and maintenance
(combination regimen followed by QC every other day until end of study)
significantly augmented carbo+taxol antiproliferative effect as evidenced
by the significant decrease in tumor burden and delayed tumor growth in
xenografts. Combination treatment was associated with a 14-day
prolongation of median survival compared to carbo+taxol (68 vs. 54 days).
Maintenance therapy with QC was proven superior to carbo+taxol as it
resulted in long-term stabilization of disease and further prolongation
of overall survival; in fact, median survival in the maintenance group
was not reached as the mice were surviving at the end of study. QC alone,
in combination with carbo+taxol or as maintenance was well-tolerated with
no issues of weight loss compared to control mice. A yellow skin
discoloration was noted during QC treatment which was entirely reversible
within few days upon QC discontinuation.In conclusion, QC exhibited
significant antitumor activity against EC cell lines in vitro and was
successful in stabilizing disease and prolonging survival as maintenance
therapy in chemo-resistant EC mouse xenografts. This data suggests that
QC may be an important adjunct to standard chemotherapy for patients with
recurrent EC.

