Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P32-targeting TT1 peptide delivers nanoparticles to intracranial
glioblastomas


Targeted delivery of cancer therapeutics using affinity ligands can
dramatically improve antitumor efficacy. Over the years a number of
homing peptides that upon systemic injection accumulate in solid tumors
have been identified by in vivo peptide phage display. In a quest to find
homing peptides optimally suited for drug delivery to high-grade gliomas,
our laboratories are using advanced mouse models of glioblastoma (GBM) to
systematically audit known tumor-homing peptides and to perform new in
vivo screens using peptide phage libraries.P32 is a mitochondrial
chaperone that is aberrantly expressed on the cell surface in activated
malignant and stromal cells in tumors. P32 is a receptor for widely used
LypP-1 peptide and for recently identified TT1 peptide. Here we show that
iron oxide nanoworms (IONW) functionalized with linear TT1 peptide
(CKRGARST) strongly home to intracranial GBMs grafted in immune deficient
mice. IONW are paramagnetic nanoparticles that are PEGylated to extend
blood half-life, and have, because of their elongated shape, more
effective targeting properties than spherical nanoparticles. Five hours
after intravenous injection of IONW (7.5 mg/kg), macroscopic fluorescence
imaging demonstrated robust homing of TT1-IONW in GBMs of murine origin
(WT GBM and VEGF KO GBM from the G. Berger lab) and in a patient-derived
glioma model (P13 model from the Bjerkvig lab). Confocal microscopy
confirmed the presence of TT1 but not control IONW in gliomas, with
TT1-IONW signal showing partial overlap with blood- and lymphatic vessel
markers (CD31 and LYVE-1) in WT GBM and P13 gliomas, whereas lower level
of colocalization with these markers was detected for mouse GBM not
expressing VEGF. In addition, moderate colocalization between TT1-IONW
and the macrophage marker CD11b was detected in the P13 tumors. Detailed
phenotyping and functional characterization of TT1-positive macrophages
is ongoing.Our data suggest that TT1 peptide has potential applications
as a glioma-targeting vehicle. Currently, we are evaluating TT1-targeted
IONWs as a contrast agent for glioma MRI and as carriers for cytotoxic
compounds.

