Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship of characterization of the immunological
microenvironment and pathological response in advanced rectal cancer
after oxaliplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy


Background:Characterization of the immunological microenvironment has
been demonstrated to be associated with prognosis and the effect of
chemotherapy of various cancers. Then it has been shown by their role
several studies in 5-FU-based neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for rectal
cancer. However, their role in neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) for rectal
cancer remains unknown. The objective of this study was to examine the
relationship between immune reactions and the pathological response to
induction oxaliplatin-based NAC in patients with advanced rectal
cancer.Methods:A total of 65 patients with advanced rectal cancer who
underwent induction oxaliplatin-based NAC followed by surgical resection
were enrolled. The resected tumor specimens were counted positive cell of
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and macrophages by using
immunohistochemical staining for CD3, CD8, Foxp3, CD86, CD206. We
analyzed for the relationship between the numbers of TILs or macrophages
at the stroma in resected specimens and the pathological response to
induction oxaliplatin-based NAC.Results:The numbers of Foxp3+ TILs in
resected specimens were strongly correlated with pathological response.
Patients with higher number of Foxp3+ TILs showed poor pathological
response (pBackground:Characterization of the immunological
microenvironment has been demonstrated to be associated with prognosis
and the effect of chemotherapy of various cancers. Then it has been shown
by their role several studies in 5-FU-based neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy
for rectal cancer. However, their role in neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC)
for rectal cancer remains unknown. The objective of this study was to
examine the relationship between immune reactions and the pathological
response to induction oxaliplatin-based NAC in patients with advanced
rectal cancer.Methods:A total of 65 patients with advanced rectal cancer
who underwent induction oxaliplatin-based NAC followed by surgical
resection were enrolled. The resected tumor specimens were counted
positive cell of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and macrophages by
using immunohistochemical staining for CD3, CD8, Foxp3, CD86, CD206. We
analyzed for the relationship between the numbers of TILs or macrophages
at the stroma in resected specimens and the pathological response to
induction oxaliplatin-based NAC.Results:The numbers of Foxp3+ TILs in
resected specimens were strongly correlated with pathological response.
Patients with higher number of Foxp3+ TILs showed poor pathological
response (p<0.001). There were no statistically significant differences
between the number of CD3+, CD8+ TILs and pathological response, but
patients with higher ratio of CD8+/FOXP3+ TILs was associated with good
pathological response (p = 0.023). No associations were observed between
the numbers of CD86+, CD206+ macrophages and pathological
response.Conclusions:In rectal cancer patients, T lymphocyte-mediated
immune reactions significantly correlated with pathological response of
oxaliplatin-based NAC for advanced rectal cancer. These were similar to
the T lymphocyte-mediated immune responses in the neoadjuvant radiation
therapy for rectal cancer.

