Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel role of microRNA-128 in proneural to mesenchymal subtype
transition in glioblastoma stem cells by targeting components of
pro-oncogenic Polycomb Repressor Complex


Heterogeneous glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) was categorized based on
transcriptional signatures into four subtypes (proneural (PN), neural,
classical, and mesenchymal (MES)). In order to develop effective targeted
therapeutic strategies, understanding the heterogeneous gene expression
and molecular features of these subtypes is crucial. De-regulation of
microRNA expression and activity has been shown to play an important role
in tumor initiation and progression, including gliomagenesis. We have
previously reported that expression of microRNA-128 (miR-128) is
significantly down regulated in GBM and it diminishes self-renewal of GBM
stem-like cells (GSCs) and sensitizes them to irradiation.
Proneural-to-mesenchymal transition (PMT) manifested by concomitant up
regulation of MES markers and down regulation of PN markers, is
associated with increased malignancy, therapy-resistance and worse
prognosis, but the underlying causes of PMT have not been convincingly
characterized yet. In this study, we have demonstrated that miR-128 can
regulate the PMT in GSC subsets. We showed that the expression of miR-128
in PN GSCs was significantly higher compared to MES subtype. As a tumor
suppressive microRNA, miR-128 inhibited the MES GSC-specific high
expression of Bmi1 and Suz12, two components of Polycomb Repressor
Complexes (PRC) 1 and 2, respectively. In both GSC subtypes, miR-128
driven targeting of PRCs suppressed their epigenetic activity measured by
ubiquitination of H2AK119 and tri-methylation of H3K27. Stable down
regulation of miR-128 in PN GSCs significantly increased the expression
of MES-specific gene signature (BCL2A1, CD44, WT-1, LYN, and MET) while
its stable up regulation in MES GSCs resulted in the restoration of PN
specific gene signature (CD133, SOX2, NES, OLIG2, and NOTCH1). We also
showed that stable expression of miR-128 in GSCs could regulate the
process of irradiation-induced PMT. Our in vivo studies showed the
anti-tumorigenic role of miR-128 in both PN and MES GSC-derived
intracranial tumor models. Taken together, we demonstrated that altering
levels of miR-128 was sufficient to cause or reverse PMT, most likely by
targeting the level/functions of PRCs and their target genes in GBM.

