Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-fat diet promotes tumorigenesis in two mouse models of
K-ras-driven lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide,
and 85% of lung cancer cases are associated with tobacco use. Within this
group, activating mutations in K-ras have been identified in 25% of lung
adenocarcinomas. Using a mouse model of k-ras-driven lung tumorigenesis,
we previously demonstrated that deletion of the IGF-1 gene or reduction
of systemic IGF-1 levels using the antidiabetic drug metformin markedly
reduced tumor burden. Since preclinical and clinical studies suggest that
diet composition is the best predictor of IGF-1 levels, we hypothesized
that diets high in fat or carbohydrate would promote lung tumorigenesis
by increasing systemic IGF-1 levels.To assess the effect of diet on
systemic IGF-1 levels, 9 week old C57Bl/6J and A/J mice were fed standard
cereal, high-carbohydrate, or high-fat (HFD) diets for 12 weeks. At the
conclusion of the study plasma, liver, and lung samples were collected.
Compared to the cereal-fed control mice, IGF-1 and insulin levels were
increased in both strains of mice only with HFD. Average body weight only
increased for the C57Bl/6J group that was fed HFD.We investigated the
effect of HFD on lung tumorigenesis using two mouse models of lung
cancer. In the first, C57Bl/6LA2 mice, which are genetically modified
with a K-ras mutation present in human smokers, were fed either cereal
diet or HFD for 10 weeks following weaning. Lung tumor burden in the mice
fed HFD was increased 2.7-fold compared to littermates fed cereal diet.
In the second model, the tobacco carcinogen
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1 butanone (NNK) was given by IP
injection to A/J mice beginning at 6 weeks of age. This carcinogen causes
lung tumor formation by inducing K-ras mutations. Following once weekly
injections of NNK for 3 weeks, the mice were randomized to cereal diet or
HFD. 10 weeks later, mice fed HFD were found to have a 60% increase in
lung tumor burden. In both studies, there was no relationship between the
final body weight of the mice and tumor burden.These studies show that
HFD promotes lung tumor growth resulting from a mutation commonly
observed in smokers. Therefore, dietary modification may slow the
progression of tumorigenesis resulting from smoking-related genetic
changes through IGF-1. Chemopreventative drugs, like metformin, may also
have greater efficacy in a HFD model due to the increased insulin and
IGF-1 associated with this model. Finally, understanding the molecular
mechanisms by which HFD promotes tumor growth may help to identify new
targets for cancer prevention.

