Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Externalized cytokeratin 8 : A relevant target at the crossroads
of microenvironment and intracellular signaling


Accumulating evidence suggests the unusual presence of proteins at the
external leaflet of plasma membrane of cancer cells while, in normal
cells, these proteins are expressed in the intracellular compartments.
They lack transmembrane domains and signal sequences that allow delivery
to the plasma membrane and their role is not fully understood. As such,
aberrantly externalized proteins represent a promising source of targets
for cancer therapy. In order to find new targets for the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC), we performed a comparative dynamic
proteomic analysis of Isreco-1, a cell line characterized by a high
invasiveness capacity. Among a set of proteins associated with invasion,
we identified CK8, an intermediate filament protein of epithelial cells
cytoskeleton involved in the maintenance of cell integrity of normal
glandular epithelial cells. CK8 was shown to be expressed both
intracellularly and associated at the plasma membrane of highly invasive
Isreco-1 line (KRAS mutant) as well as in two other cell lines i.e.
HCT116 (KRAS mutant) and HT29 (KRAS wild-type), by immunofluorescence.
Using a biochemical approach, we demonstrated in all 3 cell lines, that
plasma membrane-associated CK8 was strongly anchored to the plasma
membrane, and subsequently referred as externalized CK8 (eCK8). eCK8 was
co-localized with plasminogen and urokinase-type plasminogen activator
(uPA) at the plasma membrane of Isreco-1 cells, consistent with its
previously reported role as a plasminogen receptor. Among several murine
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) targeting specifically eCK8, one was able to
reduce plasminogen induced invasion in vitro (Isreco-1) as well as tumor
growth in vivo (Isreco-1 and HCT-116 subcutaneous xenograft models). It
was specific of an extra-cellular portion of eCK8. Besides the inhibition
of tumor growth, tumors were strikingly necrotic and characterized by
apoptosis activation. No difference in terms of proliferation and
microvascular density was observed. Altogether, our results suggest that
in colorectal cancer, CK8 may be externalized and strongly anchored to
the plasma membrane in highly invasive cells. eCK8 co-localize with
plasminogen and uPA. Targeting a specific portion of eCK8 was associated
with decreased tumor growth and apoptosis activation. We suggest that
this particular domain of eCK8 is essential for bidirectional signaling,
toward the tumor cell microenvironment by favouring the invasion process
and the intracellular compartment by inhibiting apoptosis. Because the
combination of cell invasion and inhibition of apoptosis are key
mechanisms involved during metastasis, externalization of CK8 may
represent a key event of the metastatic process and a relevant target in
CRC, including in tumors with KRAS mutation.

