Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of abemaciclib as a single agent or in
combination with anti-mitotic or targeted therapies for breast cancer


The cyclin D:CDK-4/6:Rb axis is dysregulated in a number of different
cancers and is implicated in resistance to hormonal therapy in breast
cancer. Pharmacologically targeting cyclin dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4
and 6) has proven to be a successful therapeutic approach in ER+ breast
cancer (BC). This study aimed to identify the molecular subtypes of BC
that are sensitive to the novel CDK4 and 6 inhibitor, abemaciclib, and
identify the best combination strategies for the clinical
development.Growth inhibition activity of abemaciclib was assessed in a
panel of 46 BC cell lines molecularly characterized by genomic,
transcriptomic and proteomic profiling. IC50 values were determined from
direct cell counts using a Z1-particle counter. In vivo activity of
abemaciclib was assessed in cell line xenograft models of ER+ and
HER2+/ER+ BCs. For ER+ BC, mice were treated daily with clinically
achievable doses of abemaciclib (50-75 mg/kg) as a single agent or in
combination with tamoxifen or fulvestrant. Combinations with trastuzumab,
docetaxel and tamoxifen were assessed in the HER2+/ER+
xenografts.Sensitivity to abemaciclib was observed predominately in
multiple luminal BC cell lines and a small subset of triple negative cell
lines that had intact Rb signaling. Activating mutations in PIK3CA also
marked for abemaciclib sensitivity. Abemaciclib potentiated the
anti-proliferative effects of cytotoxic/anti-mitotic agents when given
simultaneously or 48 hours prior to treatment in vitro. Significant tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) was observed with single agent abemaciclib in the
ER+ BC cell line xenografts. In ZR751 xenografts, the addition of either
tamoxifen or fulvestrant to abemaciclib induced complete inhibition of
tumor growth for the 12 weeks of treatment. In the MCF7 model, treatment
was withdrawn after five weeks, which triggered tumor regrowth in each of
the single agent arms. However, complete responses were maintained in the
combination arms for a further six weeks post drug withdrawal. In HER2
amplified xenografts, abemaciclib single agent treatment induced
significant TGI in trastuzumab sensitive and resistant xenografts, and
combination with trastuzumab further increased this anti-tumor effect.
The addition of tamoxifen to this combination induced a further increment
in TGI. Consistent with the in vitro findings, the combination of
abemaciclib and the anti-mitotic agent docetaxel was not antagonistic in
vivo, and the addition of docetaxel to the triple combination of
abemaciclib, trastuzumab, and tamoxifen induced the most efficacy of any
of the treatment arms tested. Combinations were well tolerated in
animals.These data highlight the potential of abemaciclib to have single
agent activity in addition to combined activity with anti-mitotic or
targeted therapies for breast cancer.

