Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoliposomal targeting of Ephrin receptor A2 (EphA2): Clinical
translation


Ephrin receptor A2 (EphA2) is part of the Ephrin family of cell-cell
junction proteins highly overexpressed in several solid tumors, and is
associated with poor prognosis. We developed a novel EphA2-targeted
docetaxel nanoliposome, leveraging organ specificity through enhanced
permeability effect and cellular specificity through EphA2 targeting. The
goal of the study was to develop the diagnostic framework enabling the
clinical implementation of EphA2-based exclusion criteria in future
MM-310 trials.We used qFACS and an in vitro assay for liposome (Ls)-cell
interaction to identify the minimum number of EphA2 receptors to enable
antibody-mediated internalization of Ls. We developed an IHC assay able
to differentiate EphA2 - vs + cell lines. We characterized EphA2 staining
pattern in tumor samples of various indications and developed a scoring
algorithm that allows selection of patients in early clinical
trials.While non targeted Ls do not associate with cells in vitro, there
is a strong correlation between EphA2 expression and EphA2-Ls cell
association independent of the cell line origin. We used the non-targeted
Ls to determine the extent of non-specific binding that can be achieved
(340 Ls/cell) and used partitioning to determine the minimum number of
EphA2 receptors necessary to mediate targeting (3000 receptors/cell). We
have developed and validated a qIHC assay for EphA2 (precision 90%,
linearity 0.8 and reproducibility 5%). We stained a set of 200 tumor
samples from various indications. EphA2 was found to be expressed in
tumor cells, tumor-associated myofibroblasts, and tumor-associated blood
vessels. Using an inclusive cutoff of 10%, EphA2 prevalence was found to
range from 50% to 100% in the tumor types evaluated. No significant
difference in staining was seen between metastasis and primary tumors in
matched samples.In summary, we developed a diagnostic framework for
prospective selection of EphA2+ patients for MM-310 trials based on a
mechanistic single cell cut-off, and a clinical-grade IHC assay.


