Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor necrosis serves as a prognostic predictor in operable and
stage I lung adenocarcinoma


BackgroundA relatively high proportion of stage I lung adenocarcinoma
patients suffer from disease relapse after surgical resection. This
highlights an unmet need in clinical risk assessment for this patient
group. Several previous studies suggested adopting the feature tumor
necrosis as a risk stratification parameter, but consensus has not been
reached. Here we evaluated whether gene signatures that represented three
biological processes, cell proliferation, tissue hypoxia and nutrient
supplement, underlying their pathological sum tumor necrosis, supported
the assumption that necrosis is a prognostic predictor.Methods and
ResultsThe three selected gene signatures, cell-cycle, hypoxia and mTOR,
were revealed to have higher signature activities in necrosis-positive
lung adenocarcinoma tissues than in necrosis-negative ones. This
phenomenon was observed in a Japanese dataset and was verified in The
Cancer Genome Atlas lung adenocarcinoma dataset. In these two datasets,
both the feature tumor necrosis and the signatures were shown to stratify
operable and/or stage I lung adenocarcinoma patients into different risk
groups. We further validated this observation in a 130 surgically
resected lung adenocarcinoma patient cohort. The results showed that
tumor necrosis predicted shorter overall and relapse-free survival in
patients with operable (PBackgroundA relatively high proportion of stage
I lung adenocarcinoma patients suffer from disease relapse after surgical
resection. This highlights an unmet need in clinical risk assessment for
this patient group. Several previous studies suggested adopting the
feature tumor necrosis as a risk stratification parameter, but consensus
has not been reached. Here we evaluated whether gene signatures that
represented three biological processes, cell proliferation, tissue
hypoxia and nutrient supplement, underlying their pathological sum tumor
necrosis, supported the assumption that necrosis is a prognostic
predictor.Methods and ResultsThe three selected gene signatures,
cell-cycle, hypoxia and mTOR, were revealed to have higher signature
activities in necrosis-positive lung adenocarcinoma tissues than in
necrosis-negative ones. This phenomenon was observed in a Japanese
dataset and was verified in The Cancer Genome Atlas lung adenocarcinoma
dataset. In these two datasets, both the feature tumor necrosis and the
signatures were shown to stratify operable and/or stage I lung
adenocarcinoma patients into different risk groups. We further validated
this observation in a 130 surgically resected lung adenocarcinoma patient
cohort. The results showed that tumor necrosis predicted shorter overall
and relapse-free survival in patients with operable (P<0.001 and P =
0.007, respectively) and stage I (P = 0.003 and P = 0.03, respectively)
lung adenocarcinomas.ConclusionsOur study showed that tumor necrosis
served as a prognostic predictor in operable and stage I lung
adenocarcinomas. The findings supported the results from previous pure
pathological studies.

