Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIG-6 suppresses epithelial cell proliferation via inhibiting AKT
phosphorylation during endometrial tumorigenesis


Endometrial cancer is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy of the
female genital tract. Hysterectomy is typically the first line
therapeutic strategy for endometrial cancer. However, there is an
increasing demand for nonsurgical approaches for endometrial cancer,
especially for women of reproductive age with endometrial cancer who wish
to preserve their fertility. Most endometrial cancers are characterized
by actively proliferating epithelial cells, increased AKT signaling and
association with prolonged, unopposed E2 exposure.Mitogen-inducible gene
6 (Mig-6) is an important mediator of progesterone receptor action in the
murine uterus. As P4 achieves the inhibition of proliferation by
coordinating stromal-epithelial cross-talk, we generated a mouse model in
which we specifically ablate epithelial endometrial Mig-6 using
Sprr2f-cre mice (Sprr2fcre+Mig-6f/f) to understand the role of epithelial
Mig-6 in the uterus. Sprr2fcre+Mig-6f/f mice displayed endometrial
hyperplasia upon 10 weeks of age and develop endometrial cancer by E2
treatment for 3 months. The levels of epithelial proliferation by Ki67
staining were significantly increased in epithelial cells of
Sprr2fcre+Mig-6f/f mice at 10 weeks of age. The levels of phospho-AKT and
phospho-S6, downstream of AKT, were remarkably higher in
Sprr2fcre+Mig-6f/f mice. Interestingly, the hyperplasia exhibited by
Sprr2fcre+Mig-6f/f mice was prevented by P4 treatment for 1 week in
morphological and histological analysis. Aberrant activation of
proliferation as well as AKT signaling was decreased in the epithelium of
Sprr2fcre+Mig-6f/f mice by P4 treatment. Furthermore, we identified that
MIG-6 inhibits AKT phosphorylation in human endometrial cancer cells.
These data suggest that stromal P4 signaling including Mig-6 is critical
in regulation of epithelial cell proliferation via regulating AKT
phosphorylation during endometrial cancer development and
progression.(This work was supported by American Cancer Society Research
Grant, RSG-12-084-01-TBG to J.W.J.)

