Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2)-mediated tumor suppression of
glioblastoma involves modulation of cell cycle and DNA damage response
pathways


Purpose: Glioblastomas (GBM) are deadly brain tumors, have greater
incidence in males than females. Epidemiological evidence supports a role
of estrogen in tumor suppression. Estrogen signaling is mediated by
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2). Our earlier studies
showed that GBM preferentially express ESR2. However, mechanisms by which
E2-ESR2 signaling promote suppression of GBM is poorly understood. The
objective of this study is to determine the mechanisms by which ESR2
promote tumor suppression.Experimental design: Established and patient
derived primary GBM cells overexpressing or under expressing ESR2 were
generated using lentiviral vectors. Three different ESR2 agonists
(LY500307, Liquiritigenin, and Erb041) were used in the study and
transcription changes elicited by ESR2 were profiled using RNA-seq. Cell
cycle was analyzed using FACS analysis. In vivo efficacy of ESR2 agonists
was tested in an orthotopic model using syngeneic murine GBM model
(GL26), tumor growth was measured using bioluminescence, and survival was
recorded. The synergy experiments using 119 FDA approved drugs was done
using cell viability assay.Results: ESR2 agonist treatment or ESR2
overexpression significantly reduced the viability and colony formation
and induced apoptosis of various GBM cell lines with minimal effect on
normal astrocytes. Further, ESR2 agonist (LY500307 5mg/kg/day) treatment
significantly improved survival of GL26 tumor-bearing mice. RNA-seq
studies using ESR2 overexpression or ligands treatment revealed
downregulation of a number of genes involved in DNA repair, DNA damage
response and cell cycle. The canonical pathways modulated by ESR2
included cell cycle, DNA damage, p53 signaling, and checkpoint
regulation. In addition, pathways related to molecular mechanism of
cancer, ILK signaling, Wnt signaling and glioma invasion were also
altered. ESR2 agonist treatment significantly increased the percentage of
cells in G2/M phase in U87, U251 and LN229 GBM cells when compared to
vehicle further supporting the RNA-seq pathway analysis of cell cycle and
G2/M DNA damage checkpoint regulation. Using combinational screening of
119 FDA-approved drugs combined with a low dose of ESR2 agonists (below
the IC50 dose), we discovered synergism of ESR2 agonist treatment with
several DNA-damaging agents. We independently validated synergy using
additional ESR2 agonists with currently used chemotherapy drugs in GBM
including temozolomide.Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that ESR2 as
tumor suppressor for GBM and ESR2 agonists have potential as a
therapeutic agent for GBM. ER agonists ability to suppress pathways
involved in DNA repair can be exploited to promote apoptosis of GBM cells.

