Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethal approaches targeting E-cadherin-deficient cancers


E-cadherin is a cellular adhesion protein that is frequently mutated in
lobular breast cancer and diffuse gastric cancer. The E-cadherin protein
which is encoded by the CDH1 gene has key roles in establishing and
maintaining cell polarity and differentiation, the organization of cell
migration and architecture and the mediation of signaling through various
proliferation and survival pathways. E-cadherin also has a tumor
suppressor role and its loss in cancer cells would preclude drug
targeting by conventional therapy. To circumvent this, we have taken a
synthetic lethal approach to exploit any vulnerability created by the
loss of E-cadherin. In the therapeutic setting, synthetic lethality
refers to a combination of a mutated gene and a drug targeted at a second
gene or protein causing cell death (specifically in cancer cells). To
identify the vulnerabilities created by E-cadherin loss, we performed a
genome-wide siRNA knockdown screen in isogenic MCF10A cell lines with and
without E-cadherin expression. From the functional screen, we identified
broad classes of G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling proteins and
families of cytoskeletal proteins which were highly enriched among the
synthetic lethal candidates. Indeed, we identified drug classes with
linkages to several of the GPCR and cytoskeletal targets that showed
evidence of E-cadherin synthetic lethality when we performed a 4,057
known drug screen. These included certain PI3K inhibitors (PI-103),
anti-glucocorticoid (mifepristone), tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(saracatinib) and multiple histone deacetylase inhibitors (vorinostat and
entinostat). Interestingly, the combination of saracatinib and
mifepristone gave a synergistic effect (combination index E-cadherin is a
cellular adhesion protein that is frequently mutated in lobular breast
cancer and diffuse gastric cancer. The E-cadherin protein which is
encoded by the CDH1 gene has key roles in establishing and maintaining
cell polarity and differentiation, the organization of cell migration and
architecture and the mediation of signaling through various proliferation
and survival pathways. E-cadherin also has a tumor suppressor role and
its loss in cancer cells would preclude drug targeting by conventional
therapy. To circumvent this, we have taken a synthetic lethal approach to
exploit any vulnerability created by the loss of E-cadherin. In the
therapeutic setting, synthetic lethality refers to a combination of a
mutated gene and a drug targeted at a second gene or protein causing cell
death (specifically in cancer cells). To identify the vulnerabilities
created by E-cadherin loss, we performed a genome-wide siRNA knockdown
screen in isogenic MCF10A cell lines with and without E-cadherin
expression. From the functional screen, we identified broad classes of
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling proteins and families of
cytoskeletal proteins which were highly enriched among the synthetic
lethal candidates. Indeed, we identified drug classes with linkages to
several of the GPCR and cytoskeletal targets that showed evidence of
E-cadherin synthetic lethality when we performed a 4,057 known drug
screen. These included certain PI3K inhibitors (PI-103),
anti-glucocorticoid (mifepristone), tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(saracatinib) and multiple histone deacetylase inhibitors (vorinostat and
entinostat). Interestingly, the combination of saracatinib and
mifepristone gave a synergistic effect (combination index < 1.0) in
targeting E-cadherin-deficient MCF10A cells. These results demonstrate
that E-cadherin loss creates druggable vulnerabilities that have the
potential to improve the management of both of sporadic and familial
lobular breast cancer and diffuse gastric cancer.

