Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unique pleural vs peritoneal mesothelioma exosomal signature: does
mesothelial cell susceptibility to asbestos matter


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a cancer of mesothelial cells of the
pleura or peritoneum caused exclusively by asbestos exposure. It is a
deadly cancer which is only diagnosed at terminal stages, possibly due to
the long latency period of development and lack of biomarkers for early
diagnosis. Both pleural and peritoneal mesothelial cells can develop MM
in response to asbestos, however, pleural MM (85%) is more common than
peritoneal MM (15%). To get an insight of this difference we first
isolated exosomes from pleural (Hmeso, H2373) and peritoneal (ORT) MM
cells and performed proteomic analysis. We found that 45 proteins are
common and specific to MM cells derived from pleural cavity (Hmeso/H2373)
while 86 proteins are specific to ORT cells lines derived from peritoneal
cavity. On the other hand, the non-transformed mesothelial cell line,
LP9, showed a completely different profile with 269 proteins secreted in
exosomes not shared with MM models. This led us to hypothesize that
mesothelial cells of two different locations may have different
susceptibility to asbestos, accounting for differences observed in
pleural and peritoneal MM. To test this hypothesis we exposed human
primary pleural and peritoneal mesothelial cells to asbestos for 8 h, and
performed massively parallel sequencing on the RNA. Gene expression
analysis performed on the RNA-Seq data showed a higher magnitude of
responses from pleural mesothelial cells as compared to peritoneal
mesothelial cells for the same genes. In addition, at a pMalignant
mesothelioma (MM) is a cancer of mesothelial cells of the pleura or
peritoneum caused exclusively by asbestos exposure. It is a deadly cancer
which is only diagnosed at terminal stages, possibly due to the long
latency period of development and lack of biomarkers for early diagnosis.
Both pleural and peritoneal mesothelial cells can develop MM in response
to asbestos, however, pleural MM (85%) is more common than peritoneal MM
(15%). To get an insight of this difference we first isolated exosomes
from pleural (Hmeso, H2373) and peritoneal (ORT) MM cells and performed
proteomic analysis. We found that 45 proteins are common and specific to
MM cells derived from pleural cavity (Hmeso/H2373) while 86 proteins are
specific to ORT cells lines derived from peritoneal cavity. On the other
hand, the non-transformed mesothelial cell line, LP9, showed a completely
different profile with 269 proteins secreted in exosomes not shared with
MM models. This led us to hypothesize that mesothelial cells of two
different locations may have different susceptibility to asbestos,
accounting for differences observed in pleural and peritoneal MM. To test
this hypothesis we exposed human primary pleural and peritoneal
mesothelial cells to asbestos for 8 h, and performed massively parallel
sequencing on the RNA. Gene expression analysis performed on the RNA-Seq
data showed a higher magnitude of responses from pleural mesothelial
cells as compared to peritoneal mesothelial cells for the same genes. In
addition, at a p<0.05 and 2-fold threshold, unique genes expressed in
pleural mesothelium were pro-inflammatory genes known to be involved in
MM tumorigenesis. Taken together, results from our study suggest that
exosomal cargo from pleural and peritoneal MM cells bear unique
signatures which may be due to the different responses of pleural and
peritoneal mesothelial cells to asbestos. Future directions involve
assessing miRNA cargo from exosomes of pleural and peritoneal MM cells
and identifying potential biomarker candidates. This work is supported by
grants from NIH (RO1 ES021110), DoD (W81XWH-14-1-0199) and the University
of Vermont Cancer Center/Lake Champlain Cancer Research Organization.

