Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel HER2-targeted gold nanoparticles; integration of antibody
therapy and nanotechnology


Targeted therapies utilizing monoclonal antibodies for malignant tumors
has been increasingly developed and applied to clinical practice.
Trastuzumab (Tmab) is a humanized monoclonal antibody which binds to the
human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2), which leads to strong antitumor
effects by inducing antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC)
and inhibiting HER2 signaling pathway. While Tmab is clinically applied
to HER2-positive breast and gastric cancers, there still remain some
issues such as low HER2 expression (only 20%) and resistance to Tmab.
Recent progress in nanotechnology has brought significant benefits to
medical fields. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), marked by the in vivo
stability and easy surface functionalization, have been developed as
therapeutic and contrast agents in the medical field, and some AuNPs
reportedly show some cytotoxicity by inducing autophagy and apoptosis,
which indicates that AuNPs could be attractive therapeutic agents in
combination with tumor-targeting antibodies. In this study, we created
Tmab-conjugated AuNPs and evaluated the antitumor effects on
HER2-positive but Tmab-resistant gastric cancer cells (MKN7) and
HER2-negative gastric cancer cells (MKN74) in addition to HER2-positive
and Tmab-sensitive esophagogastric cancer cells (NCI-N87, TE4, OE19) in
vitro and in vivo. IC50 dose of Tmab-AuNPs was 6.5 times smaller than
free Tmab on NCI-N87 cells. Tmab-AuNPs exhibited stronger antitumor
effects on MKN7, NCI-N87, TE4 and OE19, HER2-positive cells, than the
other controls on XTT assay, but not such strong effects on MKN74 and
NHLF, HER2-negative cells. Notably, Tmab-AuNPs showed potent antitumor
effects even on MKN7, HER2-positive but Tmab-resistant cells. Moreover,
once HER2 was overexpressed on MKN74 cells by Ad-HER2/ECD, Tmab-AuNPs
became effective on artificially-HER2-overexpressed MKN74 cells. More
effective intracellular uptake of Tmab-AuNPs was observed by dark field
microscopy and transmission electron microscopy on HER2-positive cells,
which seemed to cause stronger induction of oxidative stress, autophagy
and apoptosis. Finally, stronger antitumor effects of Tmab-AuNPs were
also confirmed in mouse subcutaneous xenograft models using HER2-positive
cells. In conclusion, Tmab-AuNPs demonstrated potent antitumor effects on
Tmab-resistant cells as well as Tmab-sensitive cells, and if combined
with HER2/ECD overexpression, Tmab-AuNPs became effective even on
HER2-negative cells. These findings suggest that Tmab-AuNPs could be
promising HER2-targeted nanodrugs which were able to overcome
shortcomings in Tmab-based therapy.

