Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying TMEM106B as a novel metastasis driver in non-small
cell lung cancers through an in vivo gain-of-function screen


Metastatic lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death in
the world and novel approaches are necessary to elucidate specific genes
that drive lung cancer progression and metastasis. Lung cancers commonly
demonstrate genetic alteration of potent drivers like Kras, p53 or EGFR
accompanied with hundreds of low frequency gene aberrations which are a
mix of key driver events and nascent passenger mutations. We established
a robust screening platform to selectively identify these functionally
critical driver genes in lung cancers from a prioritized list of
candidates selected by a multi-level cross-species comparison of our
published high confidence transcriptome data from genetically-engineered
mouse models and genomic data of human lung cancers from TCGA, focusing
on elevated gene expression and/or gene amplification. We identified 225
putative candidate driver genes which were used to construct a lentiviral
based cDNA expression library with unique molecular barcoding of
individual cDNAs. Using a non-metastatic syngeneic mouse lung cancer
model we generated individually transduced stable over-expressing lines
for each gene. These candidate lines were used for a unique in vivo
positive selection screen to identify functional metastasis drivers. We
transplanted pools of 20 cDNA expressing lines into syngeneic mice and
observed for primary tumor growth and occurrence of metastases in lungs
and other organs. Metastatic drivers were identified by the relative
enrichment of the unique barcode sequences in the genomic DNA from
metastatic lesions over primary tumors. We have identified both known
(e.g. MYC) and several novel (e.g. THRA, TMEM106B, GNAS) potential
oncogenic and metastatic drivers. We validated our top hits for their
individual in vivo metastatic potencies by
gain-of-function/loss-of-function studies and identified TMEM106B as one
of the primary drivers of metastasis. TMEM106B is a transmembrane protein
localizing to the lysosomes and has been shown to drive expression of
lysosomal genes. We hypothesize that elevated levels of TMEM106B is able
to drive the expression and secretion of lysosomal enzymes thus making
cancer cells hyper invasive and metastatic. We found strong correlation
for expression of TMEM106B with several lysosomal genes in a panel of
1016 human lung cancers and are currently performing in depth studies to
understand these mechanisms of TMEM106B driven metastasis. We are also
analyzing the clinical relevance of TMEM106B based upon their expression
pattern and prognostic utility across TCGA and other public datasets,
along with in-house patient samples and tissue microarrays of resected
and biopsy specimens. Identification of such novel players will
significantly advance the field of cancer target discovery by identifying
new drug targets and biomarkers, essential for effective treatment
options for lung cancer patients.

