Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comorbidities contribute to breast cancer disparities among
African-American and Hispanic women


Background: Comorbidities may influence health outcomes from breast
cancer and can significantly contribute to health disparities. Studies
examining the association of specific comorbidities with breast cancer
outcomes in underrepresented African-American and Hispanic women have
been few. Notably, underrepresented women are more likely to have
comorbidity. Presence of comorbidity may impact not only breast cancer
risk and progression, but also likelihood to complete treatment and
therapy. Therefore, the aims of the present study are to evaluate
comorbidity and breast cancer among African-American and Hispanic women.
In addition, the study will assess the consequence of comorbidity on
therapy completion and breast cancer survival.Methods: The study included
a cross-sectional cohort of 426 African-American and Hispanic women from
South Los Angeles. Personal and medical history was obtained during the
informed consent process and from post-hoc medical chart. The results
were evaluated using the chi-square test and logistic regression with
multivariate analysis. Five year disease free survival analysis (DFS) was
performed using Kaplan-Meier survival curves with log rank test. The
two-sided P-value less than 0.05 was considered significant.Results: Our
study identified a high frequency of comorbidity among women with breast
cancer compared with women without breast cancer (55% vs.45%,
respectively: P = 0.032). Diabetes was also more frequent among breast
cancer patients than non-cancer participants (62% vs. 38%; P = 0.005).
African-American women were more likely than Hispanic women to have
comorbidity (P = 0.003), particularly hypertension and hypertension with
diabetes. Hispanic women were more likely to have diabetes only. In
univariate analysis, the presence of any comorbidity was significantly
associated with breast cancer (OR = 1.536; 95% CI = 1.045-2.255; P-value
= 0.029). In the adjusted multivariate model, this association was
borderline significant (P-Value = 0.057). The association of compound
comorbidity (diabetes with hypertension) was significant in both the
univariate and multivariate models (OR = 3.333; 95% CI = 1.290-8.611;
P-Value = 0.013). Women with an increasing number of comorbidities were
increasingly less likely to complete treatment with chemotherapy (P =
0.022). African-American women with compound comorbidity were least
frequently able to complete treatment with chemotherapy (P = 0.002).
Lastly, women who completed treatment with chemotherapy had a
significantly higher survival vs. women who did not complete (Log rank =
5.09; P = 0.024).Conclusions: The presence of comorbidity can affect risk
of breast cancer, likelihood of completion of therapy, and subsequent
survival. African-American and Hispanic women have higher frequency of
comorbidities and this may place women, especially with compound
comorbidity, at a greater risk for breast cancer and lower survival
outcomes.

