Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple antigens stimulating cellular therapy increases immune
responses in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma


Background & Aims: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most
common tumors in China, and frequently occurs in the patients with
chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. To investigate whether
adoptive cell therapy induces tumor specific immune responses in HCC
patients and further brings clinical benefits, Multiple Antigens
Stimulating Cellular Therapy (MASCT) was applied in addition to
conventional therapies.Methods: Activated T cells that were prepared from
the autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Cells were
stimulated and amplified with dendritic cells (DCs) pulsed by multiple
tumor antigen peptides, including tumor associated antigen peptides and
HBV antigen peptides. All patients received infusions of 5-10107cells/kg
of body weight of the resulting T cells every 1-3 months. The immune
responses in the patients' PBMCs were examined before and after the
treatment.Results: The resulting amplified cells were almost exclusively
CD3+ (95% 1%), with a major percentage being CD3+CD8+ cells (70% 5%) and
a minor proportion being CD3+CD4+(19% 3%) and CD3+CD56+ (14% 1%) cells,
while there were insignificant amounts of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells (0.4% 0.1%). These T cells have restored immune functions and
HLA-restricted specific cytotoxicity against HCC cells. After repeating
treatment of MASCT, the frequency of regulatory T cells in the patients
PBMCs was significantly decreased, and the proliferation and function of
tumor antigen specific T cells were enhanced. The specific immune
responses against each kind of tumor antigens were also detected in
patients. And these immune responses were gradually increased during the
treatment of MASCT. Moreover, in retrospective study, the disease control
rate (DCR) in one year was found to be raised to 80% in stage B HCC
patients receiving MASCT combined with conventional
therapies.Conclusions: Our study has demonstrated that MASCT is a well
tolerate immunotherapy in patients with HCC. Specific T cell responses
against tumor antigens can be strongly induced in vivo. Our study also
indicated that repeated MASCT treatment improves both the immunologic
function and disease control of patients with HCC.

