Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High levels of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) predict biochemical
recurrence after prostatectomy in ERG negative prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer (PC) can be stratified into distinct
molecular subtypes based on TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion status, but its
potential prognostic value remains controversial. Likewise, routine
clinicopathological features cannot clearly distinguish aggressive from
indolent tumors at the time of diagnosis, thus new prognostic biomarkers
are urgently needed. The DNA methylation variant 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
(5hmC, an oxidized derivative of 5-methylcytosine) has recently emerged
as a new diagnostic and/or prognostic biomarker candidate for several
human malignancies. However, this remains to be systematically
investigated for PC. In this study, we determined 5hmC levels in 311 PC
(stratified by ERG status) and 228 adjacent non-malignant (NM) prostate
tissue specimens by immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue microarray,
representing a large radical prostatectomy (RP) cohort with long clinical
follow-up. We investigated possible correlations between 5hmC and routine
clinicopathological variables and assessed the prognostic potential of
5hmC by Kaplan-Meier, uni- and multivariate Cox regression analyses in
ERG+ (n = 178) vs. ERG- (n = 133) PCs using biochemical recurrence (BCR)
as endpoint.Results: We observed a borderline significant (p = 0.06)
reduction in 5hmC levels in PC compared to NM tissue samples, which was
explained by a highly significant (pBackground: Prostate cancer (PC) can
be stratified into distinct molecular subtypes based on TMPRSS2-ERG gene
fusion status, but its potential prognostic value remains controversial.
Likewise, routine clinicopathological features cannot clearly distinguish
aggressive from indolent tumors at the time of diagnosis, thus new
prognostic biomarkers are urgently needed. The DNA methylation variant
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC, an oxidized derivative of
5-methylcytosine) has recently emerged as a new diagnostic and/or
prognostic biomarker candidate for several human malignancies. However,
this remains to be systematically investigated for PC. In this study, we
determined 5hmC levels in 311 PC (stratified by ERG status) and 228
adjacent non-malignant (NM) prostate tissue specimens by
immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue microarray, representing a large
radical prostatectomy (RP) cohort with long clinical follow-up. We
investigated possible correlations between 5hmC and routine
clinicopathological variables and assessed the prognostic potential of
5hmC by Kaplan-Meier, uni- and multivariate Cox regression analyses in
ERG+ (n = 178) vs. ERG- (n = 133) PCs using biochemical recurrence (BCR)
as endpoint.Results: We observed a borderline significant (p = 0.06)
reduction in 5hmC levels in PC compared to NM tissue samples, which was
explained by a highly significant (p<0.001) loss of 5hmC in ERG- PCs. ERG
status was not predictive of BCR in this cohort (p = 0.73) and no
significant association was found between BCR and 5hmC levels in ERG+ PCs
(p = 0.98). In contrast, high 5hmC immunoreactivity was a significant
adverse predictor of BCR after RP in ERG- PCs, independent of Gleason
score, pathological tumor stage, surgical margin status, and
pre-operative PSA level (HR (95% CI): 1.62 (1.15-2.28), p =
0.006).Conclusions: This is the first study to demonstrate a prognostic
potential for 5hmC in PC. Our findings highlight the importance of ERG
stratification in PC biomarker studies, and suggest that epigenetic
mechanisms involving 5hmC are important for the development and/or
progression of ERG- PC.

