Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo CRISPR reveals dual activation of apoptosis and
necroptosis as means to eradicate drug resistant leukemia


Dysregulation of apoptosis constitutes a general mechanism for refractory
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) to escape cell death during
chemotherapy. We have assessed the potential of SMAC mimetic compounds
(SM) to eradicate drug resistant ALL by blocking the pro-survival
cellular inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (cIAPs). On the basis of a large
xenograft bank of primary ALL samples, obtained by xenotransplantation in
immunodeficient NSG mice, we detected exquisite sensitivity to SM in
vitro in a third of the cases tested, including drug-resistant and
relapsed samples. Potent in vitro activity was highly predictive of in
vivo efficacy in the xenograft model. Treatment of transplanted mice with
SM not only delayed leukemia progression, but also completely eliminated
leukemia burden in established disease for several weeks following
treatment. SM activity required the presence of RIP1, since lentiCRISPR
mediated gene knockout of RIP1 in patient-derived ALL cells blocked
SM-induced cell death in vivo and in vitro. In contrast, RIP1 loss had no
significant impact on the response to standard antileukemic therapies,
supporting a view that RIP1-dependent death pathways are not likely to be
selected against by front line chemotherapy. Furthermore, using a
multicolor lentiCRISPR approach for simultaneous disruption of multiple
genes, we found that downstream of RIP1, the response to SM was dependent
on simultaneous execution of apoptosis and necroptosis, since genetic
targeting of both cell death pathways was required to block SM-induced
death. Upstream of RIP1, expression levels of TNF receptor II (TNFR2) in
primary ALL correlated with sensitivity to SM, and genetic disruption of
TNFR2 conferred resistance to SM treatment in vivo. Thus, SM treatment
circumvents drug resistance through parallel activation of RIP1-dependent
apoptosis and necroptosis, providing a strong rationale for application
in salvage treatment of refractory childhood ALL.

