Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligomeric proanthocyanidins inhibit Hippo-YAP pathway and prevent
colorectal cancer stem cell formation


Background and Aims: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause
of cancer-related mortality rate in the United States, but can be
prevented through lifestyle and dietary modifications. Over the last two
decades, anti-tumorigenic properties of various botanicals have been
studied extensively, and currently selected compounds are being exploited
as potential chemopreventive agents. Proanthocyanidins are the most
abundant dietary polyphenols present in many fruits and vegetables.
Although anti-tumorigenic properties of proanthocyanidins have been
investigated substantially, emerging evidence indicates that oligomeric
form of proanthocyanidins (OPCs) has more potent anti-tumorigenic
properties, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. A small subset
of cancer cells, termed cancer stem cells (CSCs), are believed to be the
major contributors of tumor initiation and metastasis. Despite complex
molecular network associated with CSCs, several botanicals have shown
promising efficacy against CSCs. We aimed to investigate the protective
role of OPCs, focusing on CRC CSC formation, using cell lines and animal
models. Methods: The effects of OPCs on cellular proliferation, apoptosis
and cell-cycle dynamics were examined in a series of in-vitro
experiments. Spheroid derived CSCs (SDCSCs) were generated from CRC cell
lines to determine whether OPCs can suppress sphere formation capacity.
The role of OPCs on major signaling pathways driving self-renewal
capability (Hippo-YAP, Polycomb repressive complex (PRC) and intestinal
stem cell markers) was systematically assessed. Finally, chemopreventive
efficacy of OPCs was tested in a mouse xenograft model. Results: OPCs
inhibited cellular proliferation and induced apoptosis in a
dose-dependent manner. Cell cycle analysis revealed that OPC-treated CRC
cells underwent G2/M arrest and subsequently showed reduced cellular
proliferation. Intriguingly, OPCs suppressed SDCSC formation at a
significantly low dose, suggesting that these could effectively inhibit
CSC formation. Mechanistically, OPCs suppressed Hippo-YAP pathway, a
major pathway driving cellular proliferation and stem cell reprogramming,
through simultaneous inhibition of multiple Hippo-YAP associated
proteins. In CRC cell lines with high YAP expression, OPCs preferentially
inhibited YAP, while a downstream regulator TAZ was targeted in cells
with low YAP expression. Furthermore, we showed that OPCs suppressed CRC
CSC markers (CD44, CD133, ALDH1 and Notch1) and BMI1, EZH2 and SUZ12, key
oncogenic PRC subunits. In addition, using SDCSC derived mouse xenograft
model, we demonstrated that OPCs significantly inhibited tumor growth.
Conclusion: Collectively, our data unravels previously unrecognized
mechanisms for OPCs to target CSCs and Hippo-YAP pathway in CRC. These
data highlight the therapeutic potential of OPCs as chemopreventive
agents through inhibition of CSC formation.

