Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of combining epigenetic modifiers
azacitidine and AG-221 in the TF-1:IDH2R140Q AML model


Approximately 15% of AML patients have an IDH2 mutation which leads to
production of the oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG). Accumulation
of 2HG inhibits aKG-dependent DNA and histone demethylases, resulting in
epigenetic disregulation, which in turn leads to a block in cellular
differentiation, promoting AML. AG-221 is a selective inhibitor of IDH2
mutant enzyme and is in development for AML patients carrying IDH2
mutation. Clinical responses to AG-221 therapy have been observed,
including decreases in blast percentages and evidence of differentiated
functional blood cells; however, preliminary analysis indicated that the
mutant allelic burden was not reduced in a majority of subjects treated
with AG-221. Azacitidine (AZA) is another epigenetic modifying agent with
clinical activity in AML. We hypothesized that combining AG-221 with AZA
could synergize in releasing the differentiation block in IDH2-mutant AML
cells and enhance cell killing. TF-1:IDH2R140Q are human erythroleukemia
cells engineered to express R140Q-mutant IDH2 and model the
differentiation block conferred by 2HG accumulation. TF-1:IDH2R140Q cells
were treated with AG-221, AZA or the combination of AG-221 + AZA, and
measures of cell differentiation (hemoglobinization, KLF1 and HBG
qRT-PCR, CD34/CD38 flow cytometry) and death (IncuCyte Zoom caspase 3/7)
were evaluated. Measures of cell differentiation were evaluated in
TF-1:IDH2R140Q cells, using an in vitro erythropoietin differentiation
assay. Single agent AG-221 and AZA increased heme production in a
dose-dependent manner, as evidenced by increased red color of cells. With
AZA + AG-221 combination, hemoglobinization was greater than with single
agents. Dose-dependent increases in RNA expression of differentiation
markers KLF1 and HBG were observed with single agents, and the
combination resulted in additive, or greater than additive, increases.
Quantification of hematopoietic stem /progenitor cell populations
demonstrated that as single agents, both AG-221 and AZA reduced
CD34+/CD38+ and CD34+/CD38- cell populations, and the combination
resulted in additive or greater than additive decreases. Real-time
quantification of cell death showed that single agent AG-221 had no
effect, while single agent AZA increased apoptosis. Concurrent
combination of AZA + AG-221 increased cell death beyond that of single
agents. Whole genome expression data (RNA-seq) showed enrichment of
differentiation and cell death gene signatures with the combination when
compared to single agents alone. We have demonstrated the beneficial
effects of combining AG-221 + AZA in the TF-1:IDH2R140Q AML cell line,
including greater than additive increases in hemoglobinization and
expression of differentiation markers, reduced stem /progenitor cell
populations, and potentiation of death. Further exploration of the
molecular mechanism of the combination is ongoing.

