Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of antiangiogenesis treatments on
betel-nuts-related head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in Taiwan


Background:The treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma(HNSCC)
in Taiwan is very challenging and might be related to betel-nuts use.
Betel-nuts chewing might contribute to (1)strong inflammation, invasion,
and angiogenesis; (2)easy recurrence or metastasis; (3) poor response to
chemotherapy, radiation, and epidermal growth factor receptor(EGFR)
inhibitors.Purpose:We try to prove different kinds of anti-angiogenesis
treatments will lead to different response on betel-nuts related HNSCC in
Taiwan.Methods:Different anti-angiogenesis treatments, such as
axitinib(VEGFR2 inhibitor), nintedanib(VEGFR2/FGFR inhibitor), and
regorafenib(VEGFR2/FGFR/ more other signals inhibitor) were first used to
treat (1)HUVEC; (2)HNSCC cell lines(SCC4, SCC9, SCC15, SCC25, FaDu, SAS,
KB, Cal27, and TW2.6, betel-nuts related) to evaluate (a) invasion
capacity by wound healing; (b) drug sensitivity by MTT assay;
(c)synergistic effect with chemotherapy, EGFR inhibitor, and polo-like
kinase inhibitor. Western blotting was also used to test signal change by
treatments. TW2.6 had already been proved to possess defective p53, p16
loss, and increased Bcl2.Results:In our previous study, TW2.6 was
resistant to chemotherapy, radiation, EGFR inhibitors, and
ani-angiogenesis treamtents, such as axitinib and sunitinib. Axitinib,
pure VEGFR2 inhibitor, was found to suppress HUVEC more prominently than
nintedanib or regorafenib did. Invasion capacity of all HNSCC cell lines
were all blocked by the three drugs but regorafenib did mostly well.
However, axitinib had no effect on TW2.6; but nintedanb and regorafenib
had moderate response on TW2.6. Besides, nintedanib and regorafenib both
would resensitize TW2.6 to respond to chemotherapy, EGFR inhibitor, and
polo-like kinase inhibitor again. Western blotting showed mesenchaml
differentiation markers(slug, Twist, snail, Axl, c-MET, Vimentin)
decreased after nintedanib and regorafenib use, too.Conclusion:TW2.6
might reflect treatment refractoriness of betel-nuts related HNSCC in
Taiwan. In addition to PI3K/mTOR dual inhibition and polo-like kinase
inhibitor with radiation(our studies shown in AACR and ESMO2015),
VEGFR2/FGFR dual blockage might be effective on TW2,6 and resensitize
TW2.6 to EGFR inhibitor, polo-like kinase inhibitor, & chemotherapy,
maybe through the inhibition of mesenchymal transformation. VEGFR2/FGFR
dual blockage will be one future combination backbone of betel-nuts
related HNSCC.

