Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic reprogramming in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is currently the most lethal gynecologic malignancy, with
no new significant changes in treatment options for these patients in the
last 30 years. Importantly, ovarian cancer patients have increased levels
of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a bioactive phospholipid in ascites and
serum that has been linked to driving oncogenesis and progression of
ovarian cancer. Accumulating evidence has implicated Hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) as a critical mediator of the glycolytic shift observed
in cancer cells. However, the precise biological role of LPA in
regulating HIF-1-mediated glycolytic shift is largely unknown. Therefore,
we were interested in examining the potential role of LPA in promoting
metabolic reprogramming in ovarian cancer via HIF-1 signaling. In this
study, we identified a novel mechanism by which LPA upregulates HIF-1
expression via Gi2 (the gip2 oncogene) in human ovarian cancer cells.
This study demonstrates that LPA induces a glycolytic shift via
LPA-mediated activation of Gi2, which causes a subsequent upregulation of
HIF-1 in ovarian cancer cells. Additionally, we show that LPA-signaling
via Gi2 induces an increase in the expression of Hexokinase-2 (HK2) and
Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1), which are known targets of HIF-1. We also
demonstrate that LPA induces an increase in extracellular acidification
rate (ECAR) in a dose dependent manner in both ovarian cancer cell lines
and in patient-derived cells taken from the ascites fluid of ovarian
cancer patients using an XFe96 analyzer. Furthermore, we found that
inhibition of Rac signaling caused a reduction in LPA-induced ECAR,
identifying Rac as a critical downstream component of Gi2-medidated
increase of ECAR. Moreover, using NAC, an inhibitor of redox signaling,
we found that this caused a decrease in LPA-induced ECAR in SKOV3-ip
cells, indicating that inhibition of redox signaling abolishes
LPA-induced ECAR in ovarian cancer cells. Similarly, the use of EUK-134,
a scavenger of superoxide and H2O2, also decreased LPA-induced increase
in ECAR. Altogether, these results indicate that LPA regulates glycolysis
through redox signaling via a Gi2-Rac-HIF1-dependent signaling pathway.
Most importantly, the Gi2-Rac-dependent pathway identified in this study
more than likely serves as a potential driver of HIF-1-mediated metabolic
changes in ovarian cancer cells and represents a potential target for
therapy in these patients.

