Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prognostic value of tumor-infiltrating immune cells and
clinical application of immunoscoring methods in advanced colorectal
carcinoma


Background Immunoscore(IS) which quantifies tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte
(TIL) has been noteworthy for novel prognostic biomarker especially in
colorectal cancer (CRC). Recent studies have been insisted that IS method
is superior to current tumor-node-metastases staging system in various
cancers. The prognostic significance of tumor-associate macrophage (TAM)
also has been suggested. However, studies in the past included patients
with stage I-III CRCs and the clinical implication of TIL and TAM has not
been fully clarified in advance CRC patients who presented distant
metastases. In this study, we investigated TIL and TAM in the primary
site and the corresponding metastatic organ to identified the
heterogeneity of each characteristics according to tumor location. We
evaluated the prognostic significance of TIL and TAM in advanced CRCs.
Also we designed new IS methods and conducted comparative analysis
between existing and new methods for prognostic predictive value.
Methods. Using immunohistochemistry and digital image analyzer, we
measured the density of CD3, CD4, CD8 and FOXP3-positive lymphocyte of
196 advanced CRC patients. CD68 and CD163 immunohistochemistry was
conducted to evaluate the density of tumor-associated macrophage. These
properties were examined within tissue from four sites (the center (CT)
and periphery of the primary cancer (IM), a distant metastasis (DM) and a
lymph node metastasis (LM)). High density of lymphocyte marker and low
density of macrophage marker in each region recorded as a score. IS
method is based on the combination of two markers (CD3 and CD8) in two
regions (CT and IM). Newly designed model, IS-metastatic and
IS-macrophage included the additional scores of two markers (CD3 and CD8)
in DM and macrophage markers (CD68 and CD163) in CT, respectively.
Results. The each density of TIL and TAM showed significant heterogeneity
according to the tumor location. Patients with high density of
CD3-positive lymphocyte in CT presented favorable outcome (p = 0.030). In
contrast, patients showing high density of CD68 and CD163-positive
macrophage in CT had significantly worse prognosis (p = 0.011 and
pBackground Immunoscore(IS) which quantifies tumor-infiltrating
lymphocyte (TIL) has been noteworthy for novel prognostic biomarker
especially in colorectal cancer (CRC). Recent studies have been insisted
that IS method is superior to current tumor-node-metastases staging
system in various cancers. The prognostic significance of tumor-associate
macrophage (TAM) also has been suggested. However, studies in the past
included patients with stage I-III CRCs and the clinical implication of
TIL and TAM has not been fully clarified in advance CRC patients who
presented distant metastases. In this study, we investigated TIL and TAM
in the primary site and the corresponding metastatic organ to identified
the heterogeneity of each characteristics according to tumor location. We
evaluated the prognostic significance of TIL and TAM in advanced CRCs.
Also we designed new IS methods and conducted comparative analysis
between existing and new methods for prognostic predictive value.
Methods. Using immunohistochemistry and digital image analyzer, we
measured the density of CD3, CD4, CD8 and FOXP3-positive lymphocyte of
196 advanced CRC patients. CD68 and CD163 immunohistochemistry was
conducted to evaluate the density of tumor-associated macrophage. These
properties were examined within tissue from four sites (the center (CT)
and periphery of the primary cancer (IM), a distant metastasis (DM) and a
lymph node metastasis (LM)). High density of lymphocyte marker and low
density of macrophage marker in each region recorded as a score. IS
method is based on the combination of two markers (CD3 and CD8) in two
regions (CT and IM). Newly designed model, IS-metastatic and
IS-macrophage included the additional scores of two markers (CD3 and CD8)
in DM and macrophage markers (CD68 and CD163) in CT, respectively.
Results. The each density of TIL and TAM showed significant heterogeneity
according to the tumor location. Patients with high density of
CD3-positive lymphocyte in CT presented favorable outcome (p = 0.030). In
contrast, patients showing high density of CD68 and CD163-positive
macrophage in CT had significantly worse prognosis (p = 0.011 and
p<0.001, respectively). Higher IS (score 3-4) was significantly
correlated with better survival rate (p = 0.020). Patients with higher
IS-metastatic as well as IS-macrophage (score 4-6) also showed
significantly better outcome (p = Background Immunoscore(IS) which
quantifies tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) has been noteworthy for
novel prognostic biomarker especially in colorectal cancer (CRC). Recent
studies have been insisted that IS method is superior to current
tumor-node-metastases staging system in various cancers. The prognostic
significance of tumor-associate macrophage (TAM) also has been suggested.
However, studies in the past included patients with stage I-III CRCs and
the clinical implication of TIL and TAM has not been fully clarified in
advance CRC patients who presented distant metastases. In this study, we
investigated TIL and TAM in the primary site and the corresponding
metastatic organ to identified the heterogeneity of each characteristics
according to tumor location. We evaluated the prognostic significance of
TIL and TAM in advanced CRCs. Also we designed new IS methods and
conducted comparative analysis between existing and new methods for
prognostic predictive value. Methods. Using immunohistochemistry and
digital image analyzer, we measured the density of CD3, CD4, CD8 and
FOXP3-positive lymphocyte of 196 advanced CRC patients. CD68 and CD163
immunohistochemistry was conducted to evaluate the density of
tumor-associated macrophage. These properties were examined within tissue
from four sites (the center (CT) and periphery of the primary cancer
(IM), a distant metastasis (DM) and a lymph node metastasis (LM)). High
density of lymphocyte marker and low density of macrophage marker in each
region recorded as a score. IS method is based on the combination of two
markers (CD3 and CD8) in two regions (CT and IM). Newly designed model,
IS-metastatic and IS-macrophage included the additional scores of two
markers (CD3 and CD8) in DM and macrophage markers (CD68 and CD163) in
CT, respectively. Results. The each density of TIL and TAM showed
significant heterogeneity according to the tumor location. Patients with
high density of CD3-positive lymphocyte in CT presented favorable outcome
(p = 0.030). In contrast, patients showing high density of CD68 and
CD163-positive macrophage in CT had significantly worse prognosis (p =
0.011 and p<0.001, respectively). Higher IS (score 3-4) was significantly
correlated with better survival rate (p = 0.020). Patients with higher
IS-metastatic as well as IS-macrophage (score 4-6) also showed
significantly better outcome (p = <0.001 and p = 0.005, respectively). In
multivariate analysis, IS-Metastatic model was independent prognostic
factor (p = 0.012). Conclusions. TIL and TAM are distributed
heterogeneously with respect to the tumor location in CRC patients and
has a significant effect on patients outcome. IS is reproducible methods
and applicable for predicting survival in advanced CRC. New IS model
including CD3- and CD8-positive cells at distant metastasis could be an
independent prognostic biomarker in advanced CRC patients.

