Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma epigenetic marks change depending
on cell culture conditions: Implications for investigating epigenetically
directed therapy


Methylation of cytosine is viewed as repressive of transcription.
5-methylcytosine (5mC) can be removed from DNA by activity of ten-eleven
translocation (TET) methylcytosine dioxygenase. The first step in erasing
the repressive 5mC mark is conversion to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC)
by TET. Subsequent steps lead to replacement of 5hmC by cytosine,
providing a mechanism by which 5mC-mediated repression can be erased. We
have previously identified 5hmC and 5mC as being imbalanced in primary
tumor tissue samples from the universally fatal pediatric malignancy
diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) compared normal brain and
glioblastoma (GBM). The aberration in DNA methylation along with known
aberrant histone methylation in DIPGs, likely creates an active
transcriptional/translational state and potentiates tumor growth. We
hypothesized that the elevation of 5hmC in DIPG is secondary to increased
TET activity. We found two different epigenetic signatures for DIPG cells
depending on their culture conditions. When cultured in serum-free media
as neurospheres, to our surprise, we found cells had low 5hmC, in
contrast to what we observed in primary tumor and in orthotopic xenograft
tumors. We hypothesized that 5hmC status may vary depending on
differentiation state, and found that when DIPG cells were differentiated
on matrigel for 14 days in the presence of serum, 5hmC levels increased
and were similar to that observed in primary tissue and xenograft tumors.
Differentiation was confirmed by upregulation of GFAP (glial marker) and
MAP2 (neuronal marker) expression and the elaboration of long processes.
We also found that DIPG cells in the serum/matrigel/differentiated state
had increased TET1 and TET2 mRNA expression relative to undifferentiated
neurospheres (2.6 and 2.1 fold increase respectively for TET1 and TET2
mRNA expression). As a control for adherent versus nonadherent growth, we
also plated DIPG cells on laminin in EGF/FGF media, and we found that the
serum-differentiated cells upregulated TET1 and TET2 mRNA 6.7 and 3.3
fold respectively, compared to laminin-plated cells, providing further
support that differentiation affects epigenetic marks in DIPG. In
contrast to DIPG, GBM cells did not exhibit similar changes in TET mRNA
expression when differentiated, emphasizing the uniqueness of the DIPG
epigenetic signature. Our data shows that neurosphere cell culture models
of DIPG may not be true epigenetic representations of DIPG tumor in vivo
and the predicted response to potential therapeutic options may differ
based on the epigenetic state used for preclinical testing.

