Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapeutic and chemomodulatory effects of naturally
occurring tetrahydrofuran type terpenoid


Naturally occurring terpenoid compounds are diverse active constituent in
several plants and known of their potential anticancer activities.
Camptothecin (CPT) is a topoisomerase inhibitor agent with well
documented anti-neoplastic activity against several types of tumors. The
purpose of this study is to investigate the potential chemotherapeutic
effects of some terpenoid compounds isolated from Salvia africana lutea,
Stachys aegyptiaca, Tanacetum sinaicum. Terpenoid compounds with
promising anticancer profile has been further investigated for potential
chemomodulatory effects to CPT against different tumor cell types.
Cytotoxicity of the isolated terpenoids were assessed against human
breast adenocarcinoma (MCF7), human colorectal cancer (HCT116 and LS174T)
and human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells using sulpharhodamine-B
assay after cell exposure for 72 h. Cytotoxic parameters (IC50 and
R-fraction) were calculated from cell viability after fitting to Emax
mathematical model. The tetrahydrofuran type terpenoid,
(R,E)-6-hydroxy-6-methyl-2-((2S,5R)-methyl-5-vinyltetrahydrofuran-2-yl)hept
-4-en-3-one (TSS-7), isolated from Tanacetum sinaicum showed considerable
cytotoxicity with IC50 ranging from 49 to 70 M in all tested cell lines.
On the other hand, IC50 of CPT ranged from 0.13 to 1.5 M in the same cell
lines under investigation. Combination index analysis (CI-value) for
TSS-7 with CPT showed synergistic relationship in MCF7, HCT116 and HepG2
(CI-values were 0.17, 0.17 and 0.39 respectively). However, the same
combination of TSS-7 and CPT against LS174T cells showed antagonistic
relationship (CI-value of 1.2). Further investigation for
apoptosis/necrosis assessment using annexin-V/PI staining was undertaken
for single and combination treatment of CPT and TSS-7. In HCT116 cells,
TSS-7 combination with CPT significantly increased apoptotic and necrotic
cells compared to CPT treatment alone. However, in LS174T cells, TSS-7
combination with CPT significantly decreased apoptotic and necrotic cells
compared to CPT treatment alone. Cell cycle analysis using DNA cytometry
showed strong G2/M arrest induced by CPT treatment. Yet, TSS-7 increased
cell population in S-phase and to a lesser extend in G2/M-phase which
might be the reason for temporal synergism/antagonism of TSS-7 and CPT in
different cell lines. In conclusion, TSS-7 could be considered promising
anticancer chemomodulatory terpenoid compound which requires further
molecular investigations to elucidate its sub-cellular molecular target.

