Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of increased dietary fat consumption on prostate cancer
progression in genetically engineered mice


Prostate cancer is a highly heterogeneous disease and evidence indicates
that lifestyle and environmental factors can contribute to cancer-related
deaths. Accumulating data also suggests that increased dietary fat
consumption may promote and increase the risk of prostate cancer-related
morbidity and mortality. However, data between studies is inconsistent
and a direct link between increased consumption of dietary fat and the
promotion of prostate cancer remains unclear. Here, we present our
findings from a preclinical study of increased dietary fat consumption
and its effects on prostate tumor growth and progression using
genetically engineered mouse models of prostate cancer. We determined the
effects of a high fat diet on tumor cell proliferation and apoptosis in
vivo using a well-established mouse model of prostate cancer.
Twenty-week-old mice, with conditional biallelic deletion of PTEN,
harboring castration-nave or castration-resistant prostate tumors were
randomized and assigned to a standard laboratory diet (4% fat) or a
high-fat diet (HFD, 13.6% fat) for 8 weeks. In both tumor models, mice
fed a HFD had increased expression levels of proteins associated with
proliferation and decreased levels of apoptosis markers. To determine the
long term effects of a HFD, we used a mouse model of advanced prostate
cancer. Mice with concomitant inactivation of PTEN and p53 develop tumors
that progress quickly and are characterized with increased metastatic
development and decreased survival compared to PTEN knockout mice.
PTEN/p53 double knockout mice were randomized and assigned to control or
HFD experimental groups after weaning. Our findings revealed that mice
fed a HFD resulted in obesity that led to decreased progression-free
survival and overall survival rates compared to mice fed a standard diet.
Our results provide evidence to support the effects of high dietary fat
consumption and increased prostate cancer risk, and provide a platform to
investigate chemoprevention strategies.

