Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EpiCapture: Benchmarking commercially available targeted
bisulfite-sequencing platforms to gold-standard whole genome bisulfite
sequencing


Genomic DNA methylation is one of the most important epigenetic
modifications in eukaryotes necessary for cellular differentiation and
plays a crucial role in gene regulation of many oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. Aberrant DNA methylation at the level of both
individual gene promoters and on a genome-wide scale has been heavily
implicated in cancer initiation and progression.Whole genome bisulfite
sequencing (WGBS) is the gold standard method for studying alterations in
DNA methylation at a single base pare resolution. However, the high cost
of WGBS is still prohibitive for high-throughput observational studies on
large sample cohorts. Moreover, the WGBS data analysis requires
substantial IT resources and a complex bioinformatics analysis. Targeted
bisulfite sequencing enables a cost-effective and focused analysis of
genomic regions of interest where most of DNA methylation alterations
occur, such as promoters, CpG islands and shores, and enhancer regions.
Currently, there are 2 main approaches for targeted bisulfite sequencing
of medium-to-large genomic regions, reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing (RRBS) and hybridization-based enrichment.We have performed a
comparison of 5 commercially available platforms for RRBS and in-solution
hybridization-based enrichment panels. We analyzed a panel of two cancer
cell lines (Hela and Coriell NA12878) and a normal blood reference gDNA
sample, in duplicate on each platform using recommended sample inputs,
and compared the results to WGBS data. Given that sample input
requirements differ significantly between RRBS (100ng or less), and
hybridization based methods (500ng - 1 g), we have analyzed the normal
blood reference gDNA sample at 500ng input in duplicate across all
platforms. All samples were sequenced to a 30x depth on an Illumina HiSeq
2500 sequencer. We compared the genomic coverage, precision and
off-target effects and overall concordance in methylome profiles for each
method.In summary, here we provide a comprehensive comparison of the
performance of 5 different commercially available methods for medium to
large scale targeted bisulfite sequencing, facilitating information to
researchers for selection of appropriate method depending on required
application.

