Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel HIF-2 targeted RNAi therapeutic for renal cell carcinoma


Background: Targeted therapy including VEGF and mTOR pathway inhibitors
has dramatically transformed treatment options and outcomes for patients
with metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). However,
alternate treatments are needed as resistance to these initially
promising agents occurs frequently. RNAi interference (RNAi), an innate
gene silencing mechanism, has been explored as a new class of
therapeutics where conventional treatments are lacking or have failed.
The challenge in leveraging this promising approach has been efficient
delivery of an RNAi trigger (siRNA) to target tissue. Over 90% of ccRCC
tumors express a mutant inactive form of the von Hippel-Landau protein
(pVHL), an E3 ubiquitin ligase that promotes target protein degradation.
Strong evidence supports the observation that pVHL functional loss leads
to the accumulation of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor
2 (HIF-2), a tumorigenic driver of ccRCC.Methods: We have developed a
targeted delivery platform called Dynamic Polyconjugte (DPC) as an
RNAi-based therapeutic targeting HIF-2 for advanced ccRCC. The
ccRCC-specific DPC (ITG-DPC) comprises a membrane active polymer to
promote RNAi trigger endosomal release, a ligand that binds to
V-containing integrin receptors expressed on tumor cells, reversible
masking to prevent polymer activity before reaching the endosomal
compartment, and a potent and specific RNAi trigger to HIF-2. The modular
nature of this delivery platform allows for flexibility to optimize each
functional component independently. The ligand-dependent delivery of
ITG-DPC was first evaluated in cultured tumor cells and then confirmed in
ccRCC tumors established in nude mice using fluorescently-labeled ITG-DPC
and confocal microscopy. To validate silencing of HIF-2 as an effective
therapeutic approach, an inducible shRNA to HIF-2 was expressed in ccRCC
tumors established in mice that significantly silenced HIF-2 gene
expression and induced tumor regression.Results: Bi-weekly injection of
ITG-DPC into nude mice with established orthotopic A498 ccRCC tumors
resulted in >80% knockdown of HIF-2 mRNA and significant tumor growth
inhibition. Histological examination of tumor sections showed substantial
cell killing and destruction of tumor architecture. Down-regulation of
HIF-2 regulated pathways genes including VEGF-A, and the corresponding
reduction in tumor-associated CD31 positive neovascularization,
corroborated on-target effects of HIF-2 gene silencing.Conclusion:
Targeted delivery of a HIF-2 specific RNAi-based-therapeutic has the
potential to radically impact the late-stage ccRCC treatment paradigm.

