Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuroendocrine and luminal progenitors drive cancer progression in
prostate cancer


Neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer (PCa) occurs frequently
during the development of castration resistance and rarely in primary
tumors. Using the transgenic mouse model of prostate cancer (TRAMP) in a
B6/C57 background, we were able to detect, isolate and further
characterize basal, luminal and neuroendocrine subsets of cancer cells.
We performed allograft experiments in NSG mice to ensure cellular stem
and progenitor properties as well as metastatic potential, and thus
created a murine model of neuroendocrine prostate cancer.Whilst all three
previously described cell populations were present in approximately three
quarters of primary TRAMP tumors, some tumors lacked basal stem cells and
showed a more aggressive phenotype. These tumors, mainly consisting of
small cancer cells, expressed markers of neuroendocrine differentiation
such as synaptophysin and chromogranin A as shown by immunohistochemistry
and are further referred to as neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs), as ruled
by an experienced uropathologist of our institution. Adenocarcinoma-like
tumors (ACs), in contrast, showed high expression of cytokeratins and
retained glandular histology. Using fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) against newly discovered NEC markers within the TRAMP model, we
found a relative increase of neuroendocrine progenitors in prostate NECs
compared to ACs (approximately 75 vs. 33%, respectively). In ACs, on the
other hand, luminal progenitors were found to be the predominant drivers
of cancer progression. To further evaluate this, we transplanted
single-cell-suspensions into NSG mice without androgen supplementation
and observed successful engraftment of both non-basal cell populations.
Additionally, we were able to passage the resulted tumors for at least
two generations and observed maintenance of histology and biological
features for tumors of both luminal and neuroendocrine origin.Based on a
RNA sequencing, we were able to define gene signatures for neuroendocrine
and luminal progenitors, uncovering a number of novel potential
therapeutic targets. Ultimately, we were able to evaluate the prognostic
value of the signatures obtained from mice in the human disease by
in-silico analyses of publically available gene expression profile
databases.In conclusion, we created and characterized a murine model of
neuroendocrine prostate cancer using flow cytometry and murine
allografts. Further, we established gene expression signatures of luminal
and neuroendocrine progenitors and translated them to the human disease.
Our findings foster the understanding of neuroendocrine differentiation
in prostate cancer and may help in developing new targeted approaches in
this entity.

