Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor expression in non-small cell lung cancer
circulating tumor cells


BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a leading cause of
death worldwide. There is a critical need to develop new therapeutic
options for patients with advanced NSCLC. Androgen Receptor (AR)
expression has been observed in lung cancer, along with castration
associated inhibition of tumor growth in mouse models. The AR is a high
value therapeutic target in prostate cancer and many targeted therapies
are clinically available. However, significant genomic and functional
alterations occur in NSCLC over the course of targeted therapies that may
predict response and resistance to AR targeted therapies. The development
of predictive and pharmacodynamic biomarkers of the AR signaling pathway
in NSCLC may be critical to developing appropriate therapeutic strategies
in this context. To evaluate AR expression and the AR signaling pathway,
we developed a circulating tumor cell (CTC) assay to evaluate orthogonal
endpoints across protein and gene expression analytics in patients with
advanced NSCLC.METHODS: CTCs were isolated from patients with metastatic
NSCLC using an integrated CTC capture and analysis technology known as
the VERSA (Versatile Exclusion-based Rare Sample Analysis) platform. This
microscale platform integrates tumor cell capture, for any target of
interest, with enumeration and nucleic acid extraction for analysis of
orthogonal endpoints from a blood sample. CTCs were captured with
multiple antibodies, including EpCAM, MUC1, and Vimentin. mRNA was
extracted from CTCs for gene expression analysis of the AR, AR splice
variants, downstream targets in the AR signaling pathway and activation
markers in NSCLC.RESULTS: Enumeration of CTCs from patients with
metastatic NSCLC shows significant tumor burden, ranging from 10-150 CTCs
per 7.5mL of blood. Gene expression analysis of CTCs identified
expression of proliferative markers KRAS, BRAF, and RET. In our initial
cohort of patients, full length AR expression was identified in 13/13
patients with NSCLC. The AR V7 splice variant was detected at low levels
in 2/13 patients. PSMA, but not TMPRSS2, was identified in a subset of
these patients suggesting activity of the canonical AR signaling
pathwayCONCLUSIONS: The VERSA effectively captures CTCs with high
sensitivity to detect the AR and AR variants in NSCLC CTCs. The AR is
detectable in patients with NSCLC CTCs at high frequency. A subset of
patient samples show activity in the AR signaling pathway that could
potentially drive disease progression. The identification of the AR V7
splice variant suggests shared mechanisms of resistance in NSCLC and
prostate cancer. These assays may serve as predictive and pharmacodynamic
biomarkers for AR targeted therapies in NSCLC.

