Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin-DNA adduct formation in patients receiving cisplatin +/-
sodium thiosulphate (STS) in the SIOPEL 6 randomized phase III trial


Background: The SIOPEL 6 randomised phase III trial was designed to
investigate the efficacy of sodium thiosulphate (STS) in reducing
ototoxicity in patients receiving cisplatin monotherapy for standard-risk
hepatoblastoma. Preliminary results from the trial recently presented at
ASCO indicated comparable response rates between the two study arms. The
trial has now completed patient recruitment, with final evaluation of
hearing loss at 3.5 years of age awaited as the primary endpoint of the
trial. As part of the clinical study, blood samples were collected
pre-treatment and 24 hours following cisplatin administration, to
investigate the potential impact of STS on the formation of platinum-DNA
adduct levels in leucocytes.Patients and methods: Whole blood samples
(5-10ml) were taken prior to cisplatin treatment and 24 hours following
the start of a 6 hour cisplatin infusion, with STS administered 6 hours
after the end of cisplatin administration in patients randomised to
receive STS. Samples were collected in EDTA blood tubes and frozen at
-20C or -80C prior to transport to Newcastle for analysis. DNA was
isolated from whole blood using Qiagen DNA blood Maxi kits and the
concentration of DNA in each sample quantified by UV absorption. DNA
samples were diluted in 3.5% nitric acid and hydrolyzed overnight at 70C.
Platinum-DNA adduct levels were determined by ICP-MS analysis, with
results expressed in units of nmoles platinum/g DNA.Results: Blood
samples were collected from a total of 37 patients, with 22/37 (59%)
patients having received cisplatin followed by STS and 15/37 (41%)
patients cisplatin alone. A significant difference in median platinum-DNA
adduct levels was observed in patients receiving cisplatin followed by
STS (median: 6.7 nmol/g DNA; range: 4.2 - 14.0), as compared to patients
receiving cisplatin alone (median: 13.5 nmol/g DNA; range: 4.3 - 165.7)
(P = 0.0011).Conclusion: Results indicate that the formation and/or
longevity of platinum-DNA adducts determined in whole blood samples
collected 24 hours following cisplatin administration are influenced by
the co-administration of STS, with significantly higher levels observed
in patients receiving cisplatin alone. Bearing in mind the comparable
response data reported between the two randomisation study arms, these
data would indicate that platinum-DNA adduct formation in leucocytes may
act as a surrogate marker, providing novel insights into the mechanism of
the otoprotective effects of STS when used in combination with
cisplatin.Acknowledgements: Work supported by Cancer Research UK, the
North of England Children's Cancer Research Fund and the Experimental
Cancer Medicine Centre Network.

