Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Taselisib enhances the potency of ERBB inhibitors in
biomarker-defined subsets of head and neck squamous carcinoma cell lines


The phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is one of the most
frequently activated pathways in oncogenesis, and controls critical
cellular processes such as proliferation, transcription and survival.
Taselisib (GDC 0032) is an orally bioavailable, potent, and selective
inhibitor of Class I PI3K alpha, delta, and gamma isoforms, with 30 fold
less inhibition of the PI3K beta isoform relative to the PI3K alpha
isoform. The gene that encodes the p110 alpha isoform of PI3K, PIK3CA, is
frequently mutated in breast, colorectal and endometrial cancers.
Previously published data demonstrated that taselisib has increased
activity against PIK3CA mutant cancer cell lines (Ndubaku CO et al, J Med
Chem, 2013).To determine if there are additional predictive biomarkers
outside of PIK3CA mutations for sensitivity to taselisib, we profiled
over 550 cell lines, encompassing 13 of the main tissue types, to
increasing concentrations of taselisib. As expected, a small percentage
of all tumor types responded to taselisib and correlated strongly with
PIK3CA mutations. Intriguingly, the majority of head and neck squamous
cell cancer (HNSCC) cell lines showed an IC50 concentration of less than
0.5uM, suggesting that HNSCC cell lines may be particularly susceptible
to PI3K inhibition. Interestingly, the majority of HNSCC cell lines
displayed an activated PI3K pathway as evidenced by phosphorylation of
key proteins, such as AKT, S6 and PRAS40 implicating that downstream
phospho-protein analysis of the PI3K pathway may not predict for
sensitivity to taselisib. Mutational profiling identified that only 3 out
of the tested 31 HNSCC cell lines harbored a mutation within PIK3CA,
suggesting that additional genotypes may explain the sensitivity to
taselisib. Additional molecular analysis assessing both gene expression
and copy number levels of genes relevant to the PI3K pathway found that
many of the taselisib sensitive cell lines had an activated ERBB
signaling node through low level amplification of ERBB receptors (e.g.
EGFR, FGFR1) or via a NRG1:ERBB3 autocrine mechanism. As many ERBB
receptors heterodimerize with ERBB3, which contains p85 binding sites and
potentially activates the PI3K pathway, we next tested whether taselisib
would enhance the potency of ERBB receptor inhibitors in
biomarker-defined subset of HNSCC cell lines. Combination screens were
performed in cell lines with amplified EGFR, ERBB2, and NRG1:ERBB3
autocrine signaling with taselisib + tarceva or lapatinib. We found that
combination effects assessed using the BLISS excess method showed a
synergistic interaction. These results suggest that taselisib may have
therapeutic potential for the treatment of HNSCC.

