Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Finding determinants of PARP inhibitor sensitivity using
genome-wide and focused CRISPR screens


We are using genomic approaches to study the mechanism of action of
targeted cancer drugs, particularly poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
inhibitors. One of these drugs, olaparib was recently approved for use in
ovarian cancers with germline BRCA1/2 mutations and many other clinical
trials with this and other PARP inhibitors are underway. Experimental
study of potential resistance mechanisms can inform the ongoing clinical
development of these drugs.We previously carried out a loss of function
mutagenesis screen in haploid cells, which showed that PARP1 was required
for cellular toxicity of olaparib and other PARP inhibitors. This
supported the hypothesis that PARP inhibitor toxicity occurs via a
poisoning mechanism where inhibited PARP is tightly bound to DNA, forming
a toxic lesion.Recently we carried out a similar screen using genome-wide
lentiviral CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis in diploid cells. Many PARP inhibitor
resistant clones had loss of function Parp1 mutations as expected.
However, we also isolated a point mutation affecting a single amino acid
in the Parp1 DNA binding domain. This mutant encodes a stable Parp1
protein that cannot bind DNA and does not become trapped in the presence
of inhibitors. Thus the CRISPR screen implicated PARP1 DNA binding
directly in determination of PARP inhibitor toxicity and was extremely
informative about the mechanism of action compared to conventional
loss-of-function mutagenesis.We extended this approach by synthesising a
high-density focused sgRNA library targeting only PARP1. We developed a
reporter cell line that allows us to selectively isolate in-frame
mutations that preserve PARP1 protein expression. By deep sequencing
mutagenised and appropriately selected cells we identified a series of
subtle mutations in PARP1 that result in PARP inhibitor resistance,
giving us a detailed insight into structure-function relationships in
PARP1. The approach is applicable to other drug targets, providing a
framework for understanding drug action and predicting clinical
resistance.

