Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-metastatic niche formation in palmitic acid and Caco2 BBE
secreted exosomes treated HepG2 cells by the CD98-integrin-FAK pathway


Up to 60% of patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) will develop
metastatic CRC. This study will use an in-vitro Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver
Disease (NAFLD) model in HepG2 cells to determine how CD98 and colon
cancer secreted exosomes initiate a pre-metastatic niche. CD98 is a
glycoprotein that mediates integrin signaling, amino acid transportation,
inflammatory cytokines, and possibly endocytosis of exosomes. The pathway
of CD98-integrin-FAK may mediate uptake of exosomes as well as the
formation of pre-metastatic niche in the liver. Exosomes secreted from
colon cancer and NAFLD have been implicated to initiate a pre-metastatic
niche in the liver. This combinatorial study will mimic in-vivo
conditions of metastatic CRC. HepG2 cells are treated with 0 M or 7 M of
palmitic acid (PA) for 5 days as well as stimulated with and without 10
g/mL LPS to mimic chronic inflammation in-vitro. After the 5 days of PA
and LPS, then the cells are treated for additional 2 days with Caco2BBE
secreted exosomes. The treatments were assessed for NAFLD and
inflammatory markers FAS, ABCA1, PPAR, PPAR, IL-1, IL-6, TNF-, and CD98
by Oil-Red staining, Western blot, RT-qPCR, and immunocytochemistry
(IMC). The same set experiments with a knock down of CD98 and creation of
pre-metastatic niche were examined through CD98-integrin-FAK pathway.
This model showed that low doses of PA formed lipid vacuoles and
increased NAFLD markers FAS, PPAR, PPAR, and ABCA1. The cytotoxicity test
of the 0-7 uM of PA with and without LPS as well as exosomes indicated
low toxicity. IMC of HepG2 cells showed a unique co-localization patterns
with no treatment and PA causing association CD98 with integrin 1 and
CD98 with caveolin-1, while the LPS and knock down of CD98 disrupted
these interaction and allowed an interaction between CD98 and actin. The
addition of Caco2BBE secreted exosomes with PA and LPS altered the
inflammatory markers and cellular location of CD98. In conclusion, low
doses of palmitic acid produced lipid vacuoles, little cytotoxicity, and
increased NAFLD markers. The loss of CD98 led to cellular re-location of
CD98 to the nucleus and could explain the decrease uptake of Caco2 BBE
secreted exosomes and decrease in inflammatory markers. These data
suggest that a pre-existing condition such as NAFLD and Caco2 BBE
secreted exosomes play an integral role in the development of
pre-metastatic niche by the CD98-integrin-FAK pathway. The identifying
the nuances of CD98-integrin-FAK pathway will elucidate future
nano-particle therapeutics for metastatic CRC.

