Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using functional data from Roadmap Epigenomics to inform analysis
of rare variants linked to gene expression in a large colorectal cancer
study


To investigate the role of low frequency and rare genetic variation in
colorectal cancer (CRC) susceptibility, the Genetics and Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO) and the Colorectal Cancer Family
Registry (CCFR) conducted whole genome sequencing and imputed into
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of 14,718 CRC cases and 12,186
controls. These data provide a unique opportunity to investigate rare
variants, which contribute to the majority of the variation in the
genome. To improve power for discovering rare CRC susceptibility variants
(To investigate the role of low frequency and rare genetic variation in
colorectal cancer (CRC) susceptibility, the Genetics and Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO) and the Colorectal Cancer Family
Registry (CCFR) conducted whole genome sequencing and imputed into
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of 14,718 CRC cases and 12,186
controls. These data provide a unique opportunity to investigate rare
variants, which contribute to the majority of the variation in the
genome. To improve power for discovering rare CRC susceptibility variants
(<1% MAF), Roadmap Epigenomics data were used to construct biologically
relevant testing sets of enhancers, promoters and exons for gene-based
association testing across the genome. Since enhancers exert their
effects by impacting expression of target genes, we defined enhancer-gene
networks by linking enhancer(s) to target gene expression using Roadmap
chromatin state maps and gene expression. Variants in linked enhancers
from digestive and immune tissues were aggregated together with variants
in the promoter and non-synonymous coding variants in the target gene. We
tested 9,884 variant sets for association with CRC risk using the Mixed
effects Score Test (MiST). Our most significant findings are for
acyl-Coenzyme A dehydrogenase, C-2 to C-3 short chain precursor-ACADS (p
= 1104), AlkB homologs, including AlkB homolog 1-ALKBH1 (p = 2104), and
SRA stem-loop interacting RNA binding protein-SLIRP (p = 2104). We will
replicate these findings within the Colorectal Cancer Transdisciplinary
Study (CORECT), as well as additional samples currently genotyped in CCFR
and GECCO (over 25,000 CRC cases and controls). Although the top findings
are statistically non-significant in this initial dataset, each of these
genes linked to molecular pathways implicated in CRC carcinogenesis
(fatty acid metabolism, DNA/RNA repair, and Nuclear Receptor signaling
pathway, which interacts with the Wnt, beta-catenin pathways to result in
a diverse array of cellular effects including altered cellular adhesion,
tissue morphogenesis, and oncogenesis). Our current findings suggest that
although functional insight can improve power for novel discovery, even
larger sample sizes and/or pathway-based analyses are necessary to
understand the role of rare variants in CRC carcinogenesis.

