Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin may function as an anti-cancer agent of pancreatic
cancer via targeting RET signaling pathway


Pancreatic cancer (PaCA) is one of the most lethal human cancers and is
the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States.
However, there are currently no established recommendations for
prevention of PaCA using pharmacological agents. Metformin has recently
gained attention as an anti-cancer drug and/or a chemoprevention agent
because of its effects on inhibiting mTOR, lowering hyperinsulinemia,
modulating inflammatory responses, and selectively killing cancer stem
cells. However, the key underlying molecular mechanisms for the
inhibitory effects of metformin on PaCA progression remain largely
unknown. Using RNA sequencing followed by the confirmation of RT-PCR and
Western blotting, we found that metformin significantly decreased the
mRNA and protein levels of RET (REarranged during Transfection), a
single-pass transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). RET and its
ligand, glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), were strongly
expressed in PaCA and correlated to invasion and worse survival after
surgical resection. GDNF, as a chemoattractant for PaCA cells, can
activate RET to induce tumor progression, migration and invasion in vitro
and in vivo. We further observed that metformin significantly inhibited
GDNF-induced migration and invasion of PANC-1 cells. These data indicate
that targeting RET with metformin or the combination of metformin and RET
inhibitors may be an attractive and novel strategy for the prevention and
treatment of PaCA progression and metastasis. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms for the inhibitory effects of metformin on the growth and
spread of PaCA in humans, further in vitro and in vivo studies are
warranted to investigate how metformin modulates RET signaling to inhibit
the progression and metastasis of PaCA. Such studies have potential
clinical significance using metformin as adjuvant preventive and
therapeutic options for PaCA prevention and treatment. [This work was
supported by grants from the National Cancer Institute at the National
Institutes of Health (K07CA190541 and P30CA072720) and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.: 81470132)]

