Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A gene-expression fingerprint predicting sensitivity to
all-trans-retinoic acid in breast cancer cells is tumor-context
independent


All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and derived natural as well as synthetic
retinoids are promising agents in the treatment and chemoprevention of
various types of neoplasia, including mammary tumors. ATRA is an
important component of the therapeutic schemes used for the treatment of
a rare form of Acute Myelogenous Leukemia known as Acute Promyelocytic
Leukemia (APL). A rational use of the paradigmatic retinoid, ATRA, in a
heterogeneous disease, like breast cancer, requires the definition of the
cellular and molecular determinants of sensitivity to the agent. The
major aim of the study was the definition of a predictive gene expression
fingerprint that can be used for the selection of patients who may
benefit from treatment protocols containing ATRA. To this purpose, we
selected 53 breast cancer cell lines characterized for the constitutive
whole genome gene expression profiles. The sensitivity of 30 cell lines
(training set) to the anti-proliferative action of ATRA was defined after
challenge with increasing concentrations of the retinoid for 3, 6 and 9
days. This analysis established that Luminal and ER+ cell lines are
enriched within the ATRA sensitive group. In contrast, cell lines
characterized by a Basal-like phenotype, according to the PAM50 gene
expression signature, are generally refractory to the growth inhibitory
action of ATRA. The sensitivity of Luminal-A and Luminal-B and the
general refractoriness of Basal-like tumors to ATRA was validated in
short-term tissue slice cultures of surgical breast cancer specimens. The
training set was used to define a gene-expression fingerprint consisting
of morethan 100 genes significantly associated with ATRA sensitivity. The
fingerprint was generated by reprocessing the RNA sequencing data
contained in the CCLE (Cancer Cell line Encyclopedia) of the Broad
Institute and it was built from approximately 60,000 coding and
non-coding loci. The approach involved the use of general linear models
(machine learning algorithm). The identified gene-expression fingerprint
was subsequently used to successfully predict ATRA sensitivity in a test
set consisting of the remaining 23 cell lines. As a first step towards
the use of the fingerprint for the stratification of patients, we
evaluated the proportion of predicted ATRA sensitive breast tumors in the
TCGA dataset. In accordance with the cell line and primary tumor data,
approximately 30% of the Luminal tumors present with a high similarity
score to the identified gene expression fingerprint associated with ATRA
sensitivity. In contrast, only 5% of the Basal-like or Triple-negative
mammary tumors are characterized by the same high similarity score.
Interestingly, the ATRA sensitivity signature seems to be tumor context
independent, as it correctly identifies the Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia
patients present in the Acute Myelogenous Leukemia patients present in
two publicly available datasets.

