Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of neuropilin-1 exacerbates
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and fibrosis in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by
an intense fibrotic reaction termed tumour desmoplasia/fibrosis, which is
partially responsible for its aggressive nature. Recently, endothelial
cells have been shown to display an extreme form of plasticity that
serves as an important source of fibroblasts in several pathological
disorders, including cancer. The pro-fibrotic cytokine TGF1 promotes
fibroblast accumulation via endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EndMT), thereby identifying EndMT as a potential therapeutic target
against fibrosis. Previous studies have implicated angiogenic
co-receptor, neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) also as a co-receptor for TGF1 in
mediating several oncogenic processes. NRP-1 expression and TGF1
signaling have been shown to be up-regulated in PDAC. However, the
driving mechanisms linking NRP-1 and EndMT in cancer remain unexplored.
We therefore hypothesized that the over-expressed NRP-1 may exacerbate
TGF1-mediated EndMT as a source of fibrosis in PDAC.Methods: NRP-1
over-expression studies were performed using lentivirus (Applied
Biological Materials Inc.) in human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs), at baseline and after TGF1 stimulation (10 ng/mL). Total RNA
was extracted using TRIzol reagent and protein using RIPA buffer (both
Invitrogen). Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed
using SYBR Green (Bio-Rad) following manufacturer's protocols. Markers of
EndMT, fibrosis and TGF1 signaling were evaluated by RT-PCR, western
blotting, Masson's trichrome staining and immunocytochemistry. Similarly,
expression of NRP-1, EndMT and fibrosis markers was assessed in human
PDAC xenografts to establish a correlation between NRP-1 levels with
EndMT and fibrosis.Results: RT-PCR, western blotting and tube formation
assay in HUVECs confirmed successful NRP-1 over-expression.
TGF1-stimulated HUVECs demonstrated a distinct change from
cobblestone-like endothelial cell morphology to an enlarged
spindle-shaped appearance consistent with a fibroblast-like morphology,
accompanied by rearrangement of the cytoskeleton. Moreover,
over-expression of NRP-1 in HUVECs exacerbated TGF1-induced EndMT as
demonstrated by loss of endothelial and gain of mesenchymal markers, and
was further accompanied by changes in microscopic cellular
characteristics consistent with EndMT. NRP-1 over-expression also
up-regulated TGF1 signaling and expression of pro-fibrotic genes. We
report herein a positive correlation between NRP-1 levels, EndMT and
fibrosis markers at mRNA and protein levels in human PDAC
xenografts.Conclusions: Overall, these results define a previously
undetermined role of NRP-1 in regulating TGF1-induced EndMT and fibrosis
in tumours and advocate NRP-1 as a potential therapeutic target to reduce
tumour fibrosis and PDAC progression.

