Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation of a single CpG site in the CD95-ligand promoter is a
biomarker predicting the response to therapy with APG101 in glioblastoma


CD95 (APO-1/Fas) is a member of the Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Super
Family. Binding of CD95-ligand (CD95L) to CD95 triggers intracellular
signal transduction that is critically involved in the invasive growth of
glioblastoma cells. Invasion of malignant glioblastoma cells into the
brain parenchyma is responsible for poor therapeutic outcome of currently
available treatments. The inhibition of CD95/CD95L mediated invasive
growth of glioblastoma cells represents an attractive novel therapeutic
concept. Apogenix has developed APG101, a fully human fusion protein
consisting of the extracellular domain of CD95 and the Fc-domain of an
IgG. APG101 has been confirmed as a potent inhibitor of CD95L induced
invasion of glioblastoma cells in vitro.In a randomized phase 2 study in
glioblastoma patients with 1st or 2nd relapse the combined therapy of
APG101 plus radiotherapy (RT) was found to be superior to RT alone in a
clinically relevant order of magnitude in all efficacy endpoints (i.e.
PFS-6, PFS and OS). At the same time APG101 exhibited an excellent safety
profile and was well tolerated.To identify potential biomarkers we used
available tissue sections originating from archived primary tumor of the
study patients and analyzed them for the expression of CD95L as well as
for the DNA methylation status. A genome-wide assessment of DNA
methylation identified a single CpG-site (CpG2) upstream of the
CD95L-promotor that showed differential methylation between APG101
responders (PFS>5 months) and non-responders (PFS CD95 (APO-1/Fas) is a
member of the Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Super Family. Binding of
CD95-ligand (CD95L) to CD95 triggers intracellular signal transduction
that is critically involved in the invasive growth of glioblastoma cells.
Invasion of malignant glioblastoma cells into the brain parenchyma is
responsible for poor therapeutic outcome of currently available
treatments. The inhibition of CD95/CD95L mediated invasive growth of
glioblastoma cells represents an attractive novel therapeutic concept.
Apogenix has developed APG101, a fully human fusion protein consisting of
the extracellular domain of CD95 and the Fc-domain of an IgG. APG101 has
been confirmed as a potent inhibitor of CD95L induced invasion of
glioblastoma cells in vitro.In a randomized phase 2 study in glioblastoma
patients with 1st or 2nd relapse the combined therapy of APG101 plus
radiotherapy (RT) was found to be superior to RT alone in a clinically
relevant order of magnitude in all efficacy endpoints (i.e. PFS-6, PFS
and OS). At the same time APG101 exhibited an excellent safety profile
and was well tolerated.To identify potential biomarkers we used available
tissue sections originating from archived primary tumor of the study
patients and analyzed them for the expression of CD95L as well as for the
DNA methylation status. A genome-wide assessment of DNA methylation
identified a single CpG-site (CpG2) upstream of the CD95L-promotor that
showed differential methylation between APG101 responders (PFS>5 months)
and non-responders (PFS < 2 months). Available patient DNAs were in
addition analyzed by MassARRAY and Pyro-sequencing to confirm
differential CpG2 methylation. Based on this data we used the median of
the CpG2 methylation level as a threshold to analyze for a correlation of
CpG2 methylation and response to APG101 therapy. Patients showing a low
level of CpG2 methylation responded best to therapy with APG101 whereas
patients with a high level of CpG2 methylation did not show a relevant
benefit when treated with APG101 compared to the control RT-group. The
analysis shows a significant survival benefit achieved in patients with
low CpG2 methylation (median OS: 16.1 vs 7.3 months, p = 0.029).Hence,
the level of CpG2 methylation in the CD95L promoter in the patients'
glioblastoma tissue is a prognostic biomarker predicting response to
therapy with APG101. Based on the observations described, Apogenix
currently develops a qPCR-based assay to quantify CpG2 methylation. This
assay is intended as companion diagnostic to identify patients that may
respond best to APG101 treatment.

