Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T-cell development from T cell-derived induced pluripotent stem
cell


The ability to differentiate T cells of defined specificity and function
from T-cell derived induced pluripotent stem cells (TiPSC) may be useful
for the treatment of a range of pathologies, including cancer, infection
and immune deficits. We recently reported that genetic engineering of
TiPSC to express a Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) is an effective
strategy to combine the unlimited availability of TiPSC and facilitate
reprogramming of the T cell specificity and functional potential. In
vivo, CD19-retargeted human TiPS-derived CAR T cells (CARTiPSC-T) display
therapeutic potency in a lymphoma model. Surprisingly, despite expression
of the endogenous TCR, the CARTiPSC-T cells possessed innate-like
phenotype and function, most similar to T cells. Although innate T cells
have anti-tumor activity, they lack some vital features for therapeutic
efficacy including long-term memory and in vivo persistence, which
characterize mature CD8+ and CD4+ TCR T cells.Additional research into
the mechanisms underlying in vitro T cell differentiation of TiPSC is
required to improve the development of mature TCR T cells and facilitate
the employment of their therapeutic potential. T cell lineage
determination depends in part on the balance between Notch and TCR
signaling, we are investigating their respective roles, as well as that
of the CAR, in determining lineage commitment. We hypothesize that the
combined CAR and early CD3/TCR expression disrupts the TCR/Notch
signaling balance, prohibiting mature TCR T cell development.To study the
effects of the different Notch ligands, TiPSC were differentiated on OP9
cells expressing one of four Notch ligands (DLL1, DLL4, Jagged-1 or
Jagged-2). Preliminary data suggests that DLL4 is able to facilitate T
cell development to CD4/CD8 double positive (DP) stage, however, this is
hindered by CAR expression.To determine the role of early TCR expression,
elimination of TCR expression was facilitated by targeted disruption of
the TCR constant region using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Elimination of
early TCR expression showed improved development towards DP stage of
TiPSC on OP9-DLL1.TiPSC are a valuable system for the study of human T
cell differentiation. In addition, and most importantly they are further
amenable to genetic engineering with TCRs or CARs, which may be useful
for the generation of therapeutic off-the-shelf, antigen-specific T cells.

