Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A glycan-binding malaria protein provides therapeutic access to
cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer


Bladder cancer is a disease of compelling morbidity and mortality mainly
due to its high recurrence rate. Cisplatin-based chemotherapy is an
integral part of muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) treatment.
Although responses are common, a significant number of patients develop
resistance to cisplatin and second line treatment options are not well
established. No improvement of the MIBC treatment strategy has been
achieved in the past two decades and therefore; new approaches to
systemic therapy are urgently needed.The Plasmodium falciparum host-cell
anchor protein VAR2CSA has been evolutionarily optimized to bind
distinctly modified chondroitin sulfate (CS) glycosaminoglycan (GAG)
chains expressed exclusively in the mammalian placenta. This is the
underlying key event behind pregnancy-associated malaria outbreaks in
endemic regions of the world. We have recently discovered that
placental-type CS chains are re-expressed in the malignant compartment as
a secondary oncofetal CS (ofCS) modification (Salanti et al. 2015, Cancer
Cell). In the present study, we have analyzed the expression and role of
ofCS in cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer and evaluated the potential of
a VAR2-drug conjugate (VDC) to target cisplatin-resistant tumors.Using
recombinant VAR2CSA protein (rVAR2) as an ofCS detection reagent, we
analyzed a tissue microarray of 52 chemotherapy-nave MIBC samples, with
36 matched post-chemotherapy cystectomy specimens from patients receiving
neoadjuvant gemcitabine/cisplatin. In chemoresistant tumor specimens,
of-CS expression was significantly upregulated in residual patient tumors
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (p = 0.001) and it was associated with
advanced tumor stage (ypT3/4, p = 0.005) and poor overall survival (p =
0.04). Microarray analysis of primary human bladder tumors and subsequent
in situ proximity ligation assay validation identified S100A9 and CD44 as
the major ofCS-modified proteoglycans in chemoresistant bladder cancer.
Binding of rVAR2 to ofCS chains on bladder cancer cells facilitated rapid
internalization of the protein. Moreover, a rVAR2-drug conjugate (VDC)
efficiently killed all bladder cancer cells in the low nanomolar IC50
concentration range in vitro and retarded growth of chemoresistant
orthotopic MIBC xenografts in vivo.In summary, we demonstrate how a
glycan-binding malaria protein can be utilized to gain therapeutic access
to cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer. Thus, we provide a method to
target cancer-specific glycan modifications for therapeutic intervention
as a second line treatment in MIBC, not responding to cisplatin.

