Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell cycle regulated mitophagy: a key step at the G1/S metabolic
checkpoint


How tumor cells coordinate their high demand for biosynthetic processes
with nutrient availability, proliferation rate and oxidative stress
tolerance is still not completely understood. We recently showed that
highly proliferating cells, whether normal or tumorigenic, display
different metabolic requirements throughout the cell cycle, in term of
glucose and glutamine utilization. The role of autophagy in cancer cells
is still debated, but recent evidence pointed to its involvement in the
regulation of cellular bioenergetics and nutrients utilization. To
investigate autophagy regulation during cancer cells proliferation and to
characterize in detail the metabolic behaviour associated with tumor cell
proliferation in the different phases of the cell cycle, we used
synchronized HeLaS3, a human epithelial carcinoma cell line. Treatment of
the cells with a double thymidine block (DTB) results in an arrest at the
G1/S boundary and the possibility to study their progression through a
complete division cycle. Here we show that in the highly proliferating
HeLaS3 cancer cells basal autophagy is a cell cycle regulated phenomenon,
responsible for mitochondria quality control and that it plays an
essential role at the G1/S checkpoint. Both general autophagy genetic
inhibition and mitophagy pharmacological inhibition with Mdivi-1 during
cell cycle progression lead the cells to enter faster in S phase.
However, probably due to the high levels of oxidative stress dictated by
their proliferation rate, autophagy-incompetent cells start to accumulate
insulted and less functional mitochondria. Autophagy is likely to be
involved in the induction of resistance mechanisms to treatments in
different types cancers. Because of this, there is an increased interest
in the possibility to use inhibitors of the autophagic pathways as
adjuvants for current anti-tumor therapies. Further investigations of the
mechanisms here described will be of importance to elucidate whether
drugs which inhibit autophagy may be a viable and effective approach in
combination with chemotherapy for the treatment of highly proliferating
cancers.

