Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gold nanostar as theranostic probe for brain tumor sensitive
PET-optical imaging and image-guided specific photothermal therapy


Malignant brain tumors are one of the most lethal cancer forms causing
over 14,000 deaths each year. In spite of extensive research efforts over
many decades, the median overall survival (OS) still remains at just 15
months for the common malignant giloma, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). We
have developed a multifunctional gold nanostar (GNS) probe that shows
potential to improve cancer management by providing personalized cancer
theranostics, a combination of diagnostic and therapeutic functions. The
GNS nanoprobe has a tunable plasmon absorption peak in the near infrared
(NIR) tissue optical window for deep-tissue penetration and tip-enhanced
surface plasmon resonance, which makes the GNS as a superior nanoprobe
for cancer detection using surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),
two-photon photoluminescence (TPL) imaging and photothermal therapy with
NIR light. We have also functionalized the GNS with iodine-124
radioisotopes for sensitive 3D positron emission tomography (PET) and
achieved a 10-picomolar limit of detection (LOD). The GNS nanoprobe
accumulates selectively in brain tumor due to the enhanced permeability
and retention (EPR) effect, which is caused by defective endothelial
tight junctions in blood vessels surrounding the tumor. On the contrary,
the GNS nanoprobe has minimum uptake in normal brain tissue due to the
intact blood-brain-barrier (BBB). The GNS uptake ratio of tumor-to-normal
(T/N) brain tissue is measured to be up to 30:1 by using inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). By combining the high
detection sensitivity of PET imaging and specific accumulation of GNS in
brain tumor, we have demonstrated the feasibility of 1-mm brain tumor
detection with the I-124 labeled GNS nano radiotracer. The obtained T/N
ratio is up to 10:1 with our GNS nanoprobe labeled with I-124, which is
much better than that (typically less than 1.5:1) for traditional F-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET contrast agent due to high glucose uptake in
normal brain tissue. Furthermore, we have utilized GNS's high TPL
intensity to delineate brain tumor margin with excellent sensitivity and
high spatial resolution (m level). In addition to brain tumor imaging, we
have successfully demonstrated photothermal ablation with a NIR laser
taking advantage of GNS's superior photothermal conversion efficiency. We
have also performed a 6-month toxicity study for the GNS nanoprobe and
experiment results, including body weight monitoring, blood chemistry
test, and H&E histopathology examination, show no deleterious effect
after infusion of GNS nanoprobe up to 100 mg/kg dose. In summary, the GNS
nanoprobe, with limited toxicity and multifunctional capabilities,
exhibits great promise to fulfill the unmet needs in brain tumor
management in future translational medicine investigations.

