Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the oncogenic transcription factor EWS-Fli1 by BET
bromodomain inhibition in Ewing sarcoma


ObjectiveEwing Sarcoma is the second most common primitive malignant bone
tumor after osteosarcoma. This childhood cancer is defined by a
chromosomal translocation leading to the production of a chimerical
transcription factor, EWS-Fli1, which is implicated in the progression of
this malignancy. As current treatments improve its outcome, therapeutic
resistances remain and reduce the survival rates. Despite protocols
optimization efforts, patients still relapse and it is important to
develop new therapeutic approaches. The recently synthesized molecule
JQ1, an inhibitor of the BET bromodomain proteins could be a new original
weapon against this cancer. BET proteins interact with acetylated
histones to regulate the chromatin accessibility to transcription factors
and RNA polymerases. As JQ1 was recently shown to reduce the
transcription of super-enhancers-dependent-genes such as oncogenes, which
are highly sensitive to the BET proteins presence, it sounds relevant to
hypothesize that EWS-Fli1's expression depends on the activity of these
proteins.MethodThe cell viability, the cell proliferation and the cell's
clonogenic potential consequent to a JQ1 treatment were studied in vitro.
Using a Ewing Sarcoma nude mice model, the JQ1 effects on both the tumor
growth and the animals overall survival were assessed. The EWS-Fli1
expression and ones of its transcriptional targets were evaluated by
RT-qPCR and Western blotting and the direct regulation of EWS-Fli1
expression by BRD4 was checked by ChIP-qPCR.ResultsWe demonstrated that
JQ1 reduces the viability and the clonogenic capabilities of the cells as
well as it leads to a G1-phase blockade, delays the burden of the tumor
growth and improves the mice overall survival. Histological analysis
shows that JQ1 reduces the vascularization and the cell proliferation
within the tumors. Those effects are correlated to the associated
silencing of EWS-Fli1 and the consequent modulation of some of its
target-genes resulting from the depletion of BRD4 from the EWS-Fli1
promoter.ConclusionOur results shed light on the BET bromodomains role as
essential regulators of Ewing Sarcoma carcinogenesis. These proteins are
indeed required to control EWS-Fli1's expression, consequently impacting
its downstream signaling, which is functionally decisive for the
maintenance of the tumorigenic features of these cancer-cells. Thus, the
BET bromodomain proteins could be promising therapeutic targets in the
Ewing tumors context.

