Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERCC3 R109X is a moderate risk breast cancer risk variant in
Ashkenazi Jews


Background:Known gene mutations account for approximately 50% of the risk
for breast cancer. However, a considerable fraction of heritable risk
remains unexplained. Fifteen percent of the risk is accounted for by
BRCA1/2 and another 3% by TP53, PTEN, LKB1 and CDH1. CHEK2, ATM, PALB2,
BRIP1, RAD51C, RAD51D and BARD1 account for 4%, while SNPs discovered
from large multicenter genome-wide association studies explain another
14% of the heritable risk. Founder mutations in the DNA repair pathway
genes such as BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for the majority of AJ breast
cancer mutations.Methods:We performed exome sequencing of 49 early onset
(age Background:Known gene mutations account for approximately 50% of the
risk for breast cancer. However, a considerable fraction of heritable
risk remains unexplained. Fifteen percent of the risk is accounted for by
BRCA1/2 and another 3% by TP53, PTEN, LKB1 and CDH1. CHEK2, ATM, PALB2,
BRIP1, RAD51C, RAD51D and BARD1 account for 4%, while SNPs discovered
from large multicenter genome-wide association studies explain another
14% of the heritable risk. Founder mutations in the DNA repair pathway
genes such as BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for the majority of AJ breast
cancer mutations.Methods:We performed exome sequencing of 49 early onset
(age <35) breast cancer cases, and 85 BRCA wild type familial breast
cancer cases, all of Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) from the New York City area. A
recurrent truncating mutation was then analyzed in 3131 breast cancer
cases and 2716 unaffected women of Ashkenazi ancestry from New York and
Israel. Using CRISPR and overexpression systems on the human mammary
epithelial cell line HMLE, transcript and protein levels were assayed for
the mutant and compared to wild-type. Treatment with IlludinS and UVC
were performed to assess DNA damage response. Finally, clonogenic
survival assay was also performed.Results: Amongst the DNA repair pathway
genes, exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous recurrent truncating
mutation in ERCC3 (R109X) in 2 of 49 early onset breast cancer cases of
AJ ancestry and 4 familial AJ probands. Taqman genotyping in a case
control setting from New York and Israel revealed 54 mutation carriers in
3131 cases and 32 in the 2716 controls. In total, there were 60
heterozygotes detected in 3209 cases and 32 in 2716 controls [OR 1.59
(95% CI 1.01-2.50)]; p = 0.02 Fisher one- tailed). Functional studies
using CRISPR and overexpression systems on human mammary epithelial
cells, show that the mutation results in lower transcript levels and this
reduction is effected by nonsense mediated decay of the mutant
transcript. Western blotting showed that the mutation resulted in a
smaller protein (12kDa). Clonogenic assays showed similar survival rate
of mutant and wildtype under UVC exposure, however the mutant cell line
showed significantly smaller colony size demonstrating a growth
disadvantage that was further increased upon DNA damage. Treatment with
fungal sesquiterpene IlludinS, a known sensitizer to mutant ERCC3 cell
lines, showed drastically reduced survival when compared to the wild type
human mammary epithelial cells.Conclusions:We demonstrate that ERCC3 is a
moderate risk gene for breast cancer in individuals of Ashkenazi
ancestry. ERCC3 is somatically mutated in multiple cancers including
breast, ovarian and pancreatic cancers, however its role as a cancer
susceptibility gene requires further elucidation. Additional functional
and population genetic studies to further characterize this novel ERCC3
variant are underway.

