Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of monocarboxylate transporter expression on metabolic
function in prostate cancer cells


INTRODUCTIONThe tumor microenvironment is subjected to variations in
oxygen tension which results in hypoxic regions. Hypoxia in tumors is
associated with radioresistance and a metastatic phenotype. Hypoxic
conditions cause tumor cells to favor anaerobic metabolism, however this
switch to glycolysis is also found in tumor cells under aerobic
conditions, known as the Warburg effect. An increased reliance on
glycolysis results in large quantities of lactate, which needs to be
transported out of tumor cells to maintain the intracellular pH. The
monocarboxylate transporters, MCT1 and MCT4, regulate the transport of
lactate in tumor cells and here we report the effect of overexpression or
knockdown of these transporters on metabolism, growth and response to
therapy in prostate cancer cell lines.METHODSHuman prostate cancer cell
lines were stably transfected, using lentiviral vectors, to show
overexpression of MCT1 (DU145, LNCaP and PC3), overexpression of MCT4
(LNCaP), or knockdown of MCT4 (DU145 and PC3). Using these stable cell
lines, the effect of overexpression or silencing of MCT1 or MCT4 was
assessed in vitro. A lactate assay was used to investigate the effect on
intra- and extracellular lactate under varying oxygen tensions. Effect on
cell cycle progression was assessed using flow cytometry and toxicity of
docetaxel was determined using MTT and SRB assays. Finally, a metabolome
siRNA screen was carried out to determine if MCT4 expression was related
to sensitivity to toxicity resulting from knockdown of a range of
metabolic proteins.RESULTSExpression levels of MCT1 and MCT4 were
confirmed by western blot and immunofluorescence. Silencing of MCT4 in
DU145 and PC3 cell lines increased intracellular lactate under hypoxic
conditions. No effect on intra- or extracellular lactate was observed in
cell lines with overexpression of MCT1. Changes in expression of MCT1 or
MCT4 did not appear to result in sensitization or resistance to docetaxel
treatment under either normoxic or hypoxic conditions. Overexpression of
MCT1 in PC3 cells caused cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase in both
normoxia and hypoxia. The metabolome screen indicated that, in wild type
LNCaP cells, down-regulation of the protein product of the genes encoding
2,4-Dehydrocholesterol Reductase or Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Phosphatase
Catalytic Subunit 2 was synthetically lethal. Overexpression of MCT4
resulted in protection against these lethal effects.CONCLUSIONSAltering
the expression of MCT1 and MCT4 in human prostate cancer cells had a
variety of effects on cell function. Overexpression of MCT1 caused cell
cycle arrest in PC3 cells which may impact on radiosensitivity as cells
are most vulnerable to radiation treatment when in the G2/M phase. The
identification of two proteins that cause toxicity when silenced in LNCaP
wild-type cells, but not LNCaP cells showing overexpression of MCT4, is
an interesting lead for further investigation.

