Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The miR-888 cluster: a new oncogenic cluster involved in
aggressive prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related death
among men in the U.S. No accurate biomarkers exists that can discriminate
for aggressive PCa and therapeutic options are limited for metastatic
disease. MicroRNAs (MiRNAs) have emerged as promising clinical tools for
cancers. These small non-coding RNAs negatively regulate gene expression
post-transcriptionally. Widespread miRNA dysregulation has been noted in
PCa. However, it is poorly understood how they function in the prostate
to promote cancer progression and metastasis. Our lab recently identified
miR-888 as a novel oncogenic miRNA up-regulated in specimens from
patients with advanced PCa and acts to increase prostate cell
proliferation, migration, & colony formation in vitro (Lewis et al, Cell
Cycle 2014). MiR-888 belongs to a genomic cluster of seven miRNAs on
human chromosome Xq27.3, an area linked to hereditary prostate cancer
(HPCX1). We hypothesize additional members of miR-888 cluster (miR-892c,
-890, -892a, -892b, -891b, -891a) function to promote PCa progression.
Our studies employed paired syngenic human PCa cell lines differing in
their metastatic status and response to androgen (i.e.,
androgen-sensitive, non-malignant RWPE-1 & aggressive WPE1-NB26;
androgen-sensitive LNCaP & aggressive C4-2; hormone-refractory PC3-N &
aggressive PC3-ML) to examine the miR-888 cluster's ability to modulate
prostate cell proliferation (WST-1 assays), colony formation (Soft agar
assays), migration, and invasion (Boyden chamber assays). Profiling miRNA
expression in these cancer lines, we found that all miR-888 cluster
members were preferentially elevated in highly aggressive PC3-ML and
extensively down-regulated in non-aggressive PC3-N cells. Furthermore, we
noted certain members of the miR-888 cluster, most notably miR-891a,
acted in vitro to promote prostate cell proliferation, colony formation,
migration & invasion activities. Interestingly, our results also
suggested that other miR-888 cluster members act conversely to inhibit
these activities - implying the miR-888 cluster functions as a unit to
fine tune and coordinate prostate cancer pathways. Xenograft experiments
are currently ongoing to evaluate in vivo effects of the miR-888 cluster
during tumorigenesis. Preliminary data indicated that miR-888 could
accelerate tumor formation of PC3-N cells subcutaneously implanted into
flanks of NOD/SCID male mice. MiR-888 cluster members are now being
evaluated for their non-cell autonomous effects in the prostate by
exosomal transport. We have successfully isolated exosomes from human PCa
cell lines and are working towards developing these secreted
membrane-bound vesicles as novel miRNA delivery vehicles for PCa. Taken
together, this study offers a more detailed understanding of PCa and
insight into the complexity of miRNA networks involved in cancer
progression.

