Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of neuropilin-2 in the regulation of c-MET-induced
PD-L1 expression in renal cancer cells


Neuropilin-1 and -2 (NRP1 and NRP2) are the transmembrane glycoproteins
that act as co-receptors for class III semaphorins and several members of
the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) family. In conjunction with
VEGF receptors and plexins, NRPs and semaphorins modulate various
biological responses. Recent studies suggest that NRPs are up-regulated
in many types of cancer cells, and may play a major role in tumor growth.
In addition to semaphorins and VEGF, NRP1 and NRP2 can also bind to
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), which is the ligand for the tyrosine
kinase receptor c-MET. c-MET is highly over-expressed in renal cancer
cells; however, the impact of NRPs on c-MET-mediated tumorigenic pathways
have not been studied. Recently, we have reported that HGF-/c-MET-induced
signaling increases the expression of immunosuppressive and
negative-co-stimulatory molecule programmed death-1 ligand (PD-L1) on
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells, and it protects tumor cells from
immune-mediated killing. In this study, we investigated whether NRPs and
its ligands can modulate the expression of HGF-/c-MET-induced PD-L1. We
have observed that NRP2, and to a lesser extent NRP1, is over-expressed
in human RCC cell lines (786-O, ACHN and Caki-1) compared with normal
renal epithelial cells at both mRNA and protein level. siRNA-mediated
silencing of NRP1 and NRP2 promoted apoptosis of renal cancer cells,
suggesting possible role(s) of NRPs in tumor growth. The knock-down of
NRP2 down-regulated the cell surface expression of PD-L1 possibly through
the reduced interaction of growth-promoting ligands (like, HGF) with
NRP2. Interestingly, SEMA3F, a class III semaphorin ligand for both NRP1
and NRP2, has been reported to have anti-tumorigenic effects. We observed
that SEMA3F was significantly down-regulated in RCC cells compared with
normal renal epithelial cells; and when we added SEMA3F to the cultures
of renal cancer cells, it down-regulated both basal and
HGF-/c-MET-induced PD-L1 expression. Together, our findings suggest that
NRPs (primarily NRP2) can play a critical role in regulating
HGF-/c-MET-induced PD-L1 expression in renal cancer cells to mediate
immune escape of tumor cells. Therefore targeting NRP2 and/or its
activation through SEMA3F/synthetic ligands may restrict
c-MET-PD-L1-induced tumor promoting pathways in renal cancer cells.

