Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of circulating tumor-derived microRNA signatures in
osteosarcoma


Introduction:The lack of useful biomarkers is one of the most important
clinical problems of bone and soft tissue sarcomas, although early
detection of recurrent or metastatic disease and early decision making
according to tumor response to chemotherapy is important to improve
patient prognosis. The recent discovery of circulating cell-free
microRNAs (miRNAs) in human blood has represented a new approach for the
diagnostic screening for malignant diseases. In this study, we
investigated whether the serum miRNA levels could be used as novel
biomarkers for osteosarcoma (OS) patients.Methods:Global miRNA profiling
was performed using the serum samples collected from OS patients,
age-matched non-OS patients and healthy volunteers. The expression levels
of extracted miRNA were confirmed in human OS cell lines (SaOS2, U2OS,
HOS, 143B), human mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC), and their culture media.
The miRNA candidates were evaluated using the serum samples of the
validation set.Results:The miRNA expression profile of the serum samples
of 10 OS patients, 10 age-matched non-OS patients, and 10 healthy
controls identified 236 serum miRNAs to be highly expressed in the OS
compared to the non-OS patients and healthy controls. Among these miRNAs,
8 miRNAs were overlapped with the secretory miRNAs in the culture medium
of 7 osteosarcoma cell lines.Quantitative RT-PCR revealed that two
candidates were significantly upregulated in the OS cells and culture
medium, compared to MSCs. The expression of these miRNAs in the culture
media from all OS cell lines increased along with culture time and tumor
cell numbers, indicating that it is an important secretory miRNA derived
from OS cells.The serum concentration of these miRNAs in OS patients was
significantly higher than those in healthy volunteers and non-OS
patients. Our ROC analyses revealed that an AUC value based on the miRNA
expression was 0.868 (95% confidence interval = 0.743 to 0.993), which
was was higher than that of alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Finally, the
detected serum miRNA expression levels markedly decreased at the
postoperative status in operative cases, while gradually decreased during
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, which revealed that serum miRNA expression
levels correlated with the tumor burden and drug
sensitivity.Conclusions:We identified circulating tumor-derived miRNA
signatures in the serum obtained from the OS patients. Furthermore, the
definitive miRNA reflected tumor burden in OS patients. Evaluating the
serum miRNA expression may thus have important clinical implications for
risk stratification and the planning of post-therapeutic surveillance.

