Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction and selection of cancer drug treatments using
personalized tumor models or models with matching genomic profiles


The main purpose of precision medicine is to find the right drug for the
right patient at the right time. Current progress in cancer drug target
identification and development of new targeted drugs has presented many
successful examples. However, for majority of patients, finding
treatments based on the unique mutations in their own tumor cells are
still hard. New approaches for precision medicine are in great needs and
thus being investigated.A mouse avatar, also known as Patient-Derived
Xenograft (PDX) model, is a personalized cancer model derived from a
patient tumor sample and used to test different drugs for the patient.
GIFTS (or Genomic Information Fitting based Therapeutics Selection) is a
method with which a patient's cancer genomic information is compared to
PDX model genomic profiles to find the best genomic fit and related
therapeutic options in GenenDesign Drug Response Database and Genomic
Information database.So far we have successfully derived more than 1000
PDX models from patient tumor tissues of various cancer types including
lung, gastric, liver, esophageal, colorectal, pancreatic and many other
cancers. In some cases, both patients and their avatars were tested with
same cancer drugs including targeted drugs and chemotherapies. By
comparing drug responses in mouse avatars with patient clinical results,
we found high correlations between them in both sensitivity and
unresponsiveness.We have also developed a bioinformatics algorithm to
analyze PDX model genomic and drug response information. Both drug
sensitivity and resistance biomarkers have been used in matching cancer
patient genomic profiles to those of PDX models in GenenDesign database
as a part of our GIFTS method. Our preliminary results show that there
are high degree of similarities in drug response profiles between
patients and their matched PDX models.Avatar and GIFTS methods can
provide predictions of therapeutic effectiveness on both targeted drugs
and chemotherapies. Avatar is a drug screening based method, while GIFTS
is a genomic profile matching based method. Both methods are especially
useful for patients, whose tumors could not be treated with known
targeted drugs.

