Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated expression of hyaluronan synthase 2 associates with poor
prognosis in diffusely infiltrating astrocytomas


Diffusely infiltrating astrocytomas are central nervous system tumors
originating from astrocytic glial cells or their precursor cells. In this
retrospective study we investigated the content of hyaluronan and the
expression of hyaluronan metabolizing enzymes and its cell surface
receptor, CD44, in these aggressive tumors. Hyaluronan is a large
extracellular matrix molecule synthesized by three hyaluronan synthases
(HAS1-3) on the plasma membrane and degraded by two hyaluronidases
(HYAL1-2). In many tumors, aberrant hyaluronan metabolism implicates
aggressive disease progression and metastatic potential.Our material
consisted of 165 diffusely infiltrating astrocytomas (WHO grades II-IV).
Tumor samples were processed into tissue microarray (TMA) blocks. The TMA
sections were stained for hyaluronan, CD44, HAS1, HAS2, HAS3 and HYAL2.
The staining intensity of astrocytomas was evaluated with a four-level
scoring (0-3; no color, weak, moderate and strong) by two independent
observers. The immunostaining results were compared with 2 -test or with
Kruskal-Wallis test for correlation with clinicopathological parameters
and survival analyses were done with Kaplan-Meier log rank test and Cox
regression.Hyaluronan and CD44 were strongly expressed in astrocytic
gliomas but their expression did not correlate with WHO grade, cell
proliferation activity by Ki-67, p53 status, epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) amplification or IDH1 mutation. Whereas HAS2 staining
intensity showed a significant correlation with IDH1 mutation. Tumors
with high HAS2 expression were IDH1 negative (p = 0.003). In addition, in
non-parametric tests increased HAS2 staining intensity showed association
with increased cell proliferation (p = 0.013) and in log rank test with
decreased overall survival of patients (p = 0.001). Variables included in
the multivariable Cox regression analysis were HAS2 staining intensity,
p53 status, EGFR amplification, IDH1 mutation and WHO tumor grade; in
this analysis HAS2 expression turned out to be a significant independent
prognostic factor (p = 0.008). This study indicates that elevated
expression of HAS2 is associated with glioma progression and suggests
that HAS2 has a prognostic significance in diffusely infiltrating
astrocytomas.

