Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of an in vitro co-culture
angiogenesis assay system using hTERT immortalized cells for high
throughput drug screening


Angiogenesis is a multi-step physiological process which is involved in a
large number of normal and disease state processes; In vitro angiogenesis
models provide very useful tools to study these processes, one of which
is the analysis of tubule formation. Tubules formed in co-culture assays
were significantly more heterogeneous and more closely resembled
capillaries than Matrigel tubules. Current co-culture models using
primary cells have donor variability, and inconsistent results due to lot
to lot variation. In this study, we established an in vitro co-culture
model system consisting of an assay ready mixture of an aortic
endothelial cell line TeloHAEC-GFP (hTERT immortalized human aortic
endothelial cell line) and a hTERT immortalized adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cell line hTERT-MSC in a common specially formulated
medium, the AngioReadyangiogenesis medium with VEGF supplement. Both cell
lines were immortalized by hTERT (human telomerase reverse transcriptase)
alone and have been well-characterized showing that the cells retain the
most important characteristic of their parental counterparts. The new
co-culture system forms functional tubular structures in less than 7
days, and in addition, the hTERT-MSC cells which surround the tubular
structures have undergone transformation indicated by elevated positive
SMA staining (a marker of smooth muscle cells),indicating that the system
has physiological relevance. Next, we tested the new system with
compounds that impact angiogenesis, results demonstrated that the
angiogenesis system responds positively to elevated doses of VEGF and
negatively to increasing concentrations of suramin; more importantly, the
tubular formation efficiency is reduced or blocked by well-known cancer
drugs such as Sunitinib (SUTENT) and Bevacizumab (Avastin), both of which
target the VEGF pathway. Notably, our results showed the co-culture
system has minimal lot-to-lot variation indicated by the treatment of
three lots of the Angio-ready system with the cancer drug, Ramucirumab
(Cyramza), which also targets the VEGF pathway. Finally, we used the
Angio-ready system validated 4 HIF-1(hypoxia inducible factors-1)
inhibitors which have anti-angiogenic properties identified by
high-throughput screening methods; data showed the results of the new
system match with other screening methods, what's more, Angio-ready
system screening time can be as short as 3 days. Therefore, the
co-culture models developed by using hTERT-immortalized cell lines
described in this report provide a consistent and robust in vitro system
for studying cardiovascular biology, drug screening and tissue
engineering.

