Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GITR ligand fusion protein (GITRL-Fc) induces T cell mediated
anti-tumor immune response and can combine with anti-PDL1 to enhance
anti-tumor immunity and long-term immune memory


GITRL (Glucocorticoid-Induced Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Ligand,
TNFSF18) is a member of the TNF superfamily and naturally exists as a
membrane-anchored type II protein that self assembles as a trimer. GITRL
activates the co-stimulatory receptor GITR. GITR is found primarily on
activated T effector (Teff) cells and regulatory T (Treg) cells.
Co-stimulation of GITR by agonist agents is hypothesized to promote
anti-tumor immunity by enhancing Teff cell activity and inhibiting Treg
suppression. We generated a novel single-gene GITRL trimer fused to an
immunoglobulin Fc domain (GITRL-Fc). GITRL-Fc activated GITR signaling
more effectively than prototype GITR agonist antibody DTA-1. GITRL-Fc
promoted a robust anti-tumor immune response in multiple syngeneic mouse
tumor models. GITRL-Fc enhanced tumor specific T-cell responses,
particularly of the Th1 type, and also led to reduction in Treg-mediated
immunesuppressive activity. GITRL-Fc displayed single agent activity in
inhibiting tumor growth and promoting complete tumor rejection in the
murine CT26 colon carcinoma model and combination activity with anti-PDL1
as compared to anti-PDL1 and control IgG2a alone. Mice cured with GITRL
or GITRL/anti-PDL1 combination treatments were protected from
re-challenge with tumor cells, suggesting the existence of immunologic
memory. More mice were protected from tumor re-challenge with the
combination of GITRL-Fc and anti-PDL1, as compared to GITRL-Fc alone. Our
results demonstrate that agonist GITRL-Fc induces potent T cell
responses, overcomes Treg inhibition, and promotes anti-tumor activity in
preclinical models as a single agent or in combination with anti PDL1.
The mechanism of tumor eradication and induction of long-term immune
memory response by the combination is under investigation and will be
discussed at the presentation.

