Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological characterization of a novel potent nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) inhibitor with robust in vivo efficacy
and increased therapeutic index with niacin supplementation


Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is an important metabolite and
cofactor for a number of cellular processes including genomic stability
and epigenetic regulation. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT)
is the rate limiting enzyme in NAD+ salvaging from nicotinamide. Many
tumor cells have an increased need for NAD+ and are therefore highly
sensitive to NAMPT inhibition. We have developed a selective and potent
small molecule inhibitor, Cmpd1, which inhibits the NAMPT enzyme with
sub-nanomolar potency. In cells, Cmpd1 treatment leads to an almost
complete reduction of both NAD- and ATP-levels, followed by the induction
of cell death. In order to identify sensitive cancer subtypes and
associated biomarkers, we analyzed cell sensitivity to NAMPT inhibition
in a panel of 240 cell lines. Small cell lung cancer and hematological
malignancies were particularly sensitive to NAMPT inhibition. Overall,
expression levels of NAMPT and NAD+ consuming enzymes correlated well
with sensitivity to NAMPT inhibition.In order to investigate the effect
of niacin on the antiproliferative effect of NAMPT inhibition across the
cell panel, we further analyzed the cell sensitivity in the presence of
niacin. Cells with a functional Preiss-Handler pathway can generate NAD+
from niacin, independent of NAMPT. We found that the antiproliferative
effect of Cmpd1 was neutralized by niacin in 60% of the analyzed cells.
The mRNA levels of nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase 1 (NAPRT1), a
central enzyme of the Preiss-Haendler pathway, predicted well the niacin
rescue status of the cells. In vivo, niacin supplementation led to an at
least 10-fold increase in the maximum tolerated dose of Cmpd1 in mice.
Antitumor efficacy of Cmpd1 was abolished by niacin supplementation in
xenografts derived from NAPRT1 expressing cells, but not in
NAPRT1-deficient models. These data demonstrate that the therapeutic
index of NAMPT inhibitors may be increased in NAPRT1-deficient tumors by
niacin supplementation.

