Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and immune heterogeneity in synchronous melanoma
metastases is associated with differential tumor growth and response to
therapy


There have been significant advances in the treatment of metastatic
melanoma through targeted and immunotherapy, however a significant
proportion of patients still progress on these regimens with many
experiencing mixed responses. Intense research efforts to better
understand resistance are underway, and multiple molecular resistance
mechanisms to targeted therapy have been identified. The appreciation of
genetic heterogeneity as a contributor to resistance to therapy has
grown, though immune heterogeneity has been poorly characterized. The
goal of the present study is to better understand the molecular and
immune heterogeneity in synchronous melanoma metastases at the time of
disease progression. In this study, we prospectively evaluated 32 tumors
from 15 patients who were treatment-nave (n = 4), or had received prior
targeted (n = 4) or immunotherapy (n = 7). Whole exome sequencing
demonstrated between 4-41% of non-synonymous exonic mutations (NSEM) were
restricted to individual tumors within a patient. Deep profiling of
infiltrating immune cell subsets by flow cytometry and
immunohistochemistry analyses confirmed the immune infiltrate between
synchronous metastases to be highly heterogeneous, specifically in
regards to CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes. In aggregate, 92% of these T cell
clones were unique to distinct tumors within the same patient, with
limited overlap with clones detected in the blood. NetMHC3.4 neoantigen
prediction demonstrated a large fraction of predicted neoantigens were
restricted to individual tumors, with over 10% of these presenting
extremely high predicted affinity. Importantly, analysis of RECIST
measurements of individual lesions within the same patient suggested this
molecular and immune heterogeneity could contribute to differential tumor
growth and response to therapy within the same patient. This has
important clinical implications, and suggests a single tumor biopsy may
not be sufficiently representative of the molecular and immune landscape
of multiple tumors within the same individual.

