Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation of canonical and non-canonical circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) by negative depletion using the Harpoon CTC Isolator and Chip


Today, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) can provide important prognostic
information about a patient. However, to one day help guide decisions for
precision medicine, more and increasingly sophisticated information will
have to be extracted from each patient blood sample. We describe a new
microfluidic CTC isolation technology, the Harpoon CTC Isolator and Chip
(Hrp Isolator). From a single sample the Hrp Isolator can enable the
analysis of plasma components such as ctDNA, as well as the ability to
enrich all circulating tumor cell types, regardless of their antigenic
expression. To enrich the CTCs from 7.5 mL of whole blood, the Hrp
Isolator removes the red blood cells and platelets based on their small
size and the white blood cells by negative depletion using magnetic
particles. The time required to process 7.5 mLs of blood is approximately
90 minutes. In contrast, the CELLSEARCH CTC Test (CS), the only US
FDA-cleared test, uses antigens expressed by CTCs to target the CTCs and
positively select them out of blood. To enumerate CTCs from patient
samples, the output from the Hrp Isolator was then loaded into and run on
the CELLSEARCH System using the CS test (Hybrid method). CTCs were
enumerated from 37 breast and prostate cancer patients by CS and by the
Hybrid method. At least 1 CTC was found in 23 (62%) patient samples by
the Hybrid method versus 17 (46%) by CS. The product of the Hrp Isolator
enrichment contained on average the same numbers of CTCs as were found by
CS (mean = 13.3 18 by CS versus 12.0 16 by Hybrid) in patient samples
having 75), the Hybrid method may have underestimated the total Hrp
Isolator CTC count. An important feature of the Hrp Isolator is its
ability to enrich CTCs that are negative or low expressers of epithelial
cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) or cytokeratin (CK). These cells could
have been missed by positive-selection technologies such as CS and may
not have been counted using the Hybrid method. CTC spiked samples were
run on the Hrp Isolator and the CTC enriched product was spun onto
microscope slides, stained, and examined using a Vectra Multispectral
Imaging System (Hrp+Vec method). Using the Hrp+Vec method, 79% to 100% of
spiked CTCs were recovered depending on the slide fixation method used.
Also, using Hrp+Vec we confirmed the ability of the Harpoon Isolator to
enrich EpCAM-/CK+ and EpCAM+/CK- CTCs from patient samples. This
establishes the existence of non-canonical tumor cell types in
circulation and adds to the biological diversity of the CTC population in
circulation. These results emphasize the need to further characterize all
tumor cell populations and to determine what, if any, clinical
significance may be assigned to these diverse CTC types.

