Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing prostate cancer immunotherapy by reducing vaccine
induced PD-1 expression


Through early phase clinical trials we have shown that a plasmid DNA
vaccine can elicit antigen-specific CD8 T-cells that can persist for
years. However, the persistence of antigen-expressing prostate tumors
demonstrates that mechanisms of tumor escape are at play. To investigate
these mechanisms we have focused on vaccine strategies using the synovial
sarcoma, X breakpoint 2 (SSX2) protein as a model target antigen and
utilized mice which express HLA-A2 but not murine MHC-I. We have shown
that immunization with a DNA plasmid encoding SSX2 elicits robust CD8+
cells and that altering HLA-A2 affinity can augment this response. High
affinity altered peptide ligand (APL)-encoding DNA vaccines elicited a
greater frequency of specific T-cells; however, they fared worse in
anti-tumor studies due to increased PD-1 expression on T-cells, an effect
which could be abrogated with PD-1 blockade. Our current research has
focused on why high-affinity epitopes elicit higher PD-1 expression, and
whether this might be modulated at the time of antigen presentation. To
that aim we have used the OT-1 mouse model, in which T-cells express a
T-cell receptor that is specific for the dominant ovalbumin epitope
SIINFEKL. We generated APLs of SIINFEKL and used them to stimulate OT-1
splenocytes ex vivo. The high affinity SIINFEKL epitope resulted in high,
sustained expression of PD-1 following activation, while lower affinity
APLs resulted in less, transient expression. However, lowered PD-1
expression can be indicative of T-cells that receive weaker signals via
the T-cell receptor (TCR) and likewise display lowered effector function,
therefore we also analyzed cytokine production and the in vivo effects of
the APLs. In immunization experiments using B6 mice carrying adoptively
transferred OT-1 T-cells the lower affinity peptide again resulted in
transient PD-1 expression while the high affinity peptide led to
sustained levels of PD-1 expression. One week after vaccination with the
low affinity APL, PD-1 on tetramer+ CD8 T-cells had returned to baseline
while cells from mice immunized with SIINFEKL maintained PD-1 expression.
Furthermore, 38(8)% of tetramer+ cells from the SIINFEKL immunized group
were PD-1+ 4-1BB- indicating that PD-1 expression is maintained even
after activation in vivo. We are currently assessing the ability of
immunization with each peptide to prevent B16-OVA tumor growth in vivo.
To assess the mechanism by which PD-1 is regulated after stimulation with
each peptide we used a combination of live cell imaging and RNA
sequencing to observe APC/T-cell interactions and T-cell gene expression
respectively. This research indicates that while increasing antigen
affinity may generate a more robust T-cell response it does not always
result in better anti-tumor immunity and provides a model in which we can
study the biology underlying PD-1 expression.

