Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCA bind to EGFR/EGFRvIII/PDK1 and affect the proliferation and
growth in TMZ resistant glioblastoma model


Glioblastomas are characterized by amplification of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR).Approximately half of the GBM tumors with EGFR
over-expression also express a constitutively active ligand independent
EGFR variant III (EGFRvIII). This phenotype represents a tumor specific
target correlating with a high growth potential. Despite advances in
treatment, whether surgery, chemotherapeutics or molecular targeted
therapies, very few have shown promise. Temozolomide (TMZ), as standard
of care alkylation therapy, demonstrates improved survival when
administered with concomitant radiotherapy. Unfortunately, acquired TMZ
chemo-resistance is observed in more than 90% of recurrent GBMs. To
understand the mechanisms in the context of TMZ resistance, we generated
an in vitro TMZ resistant model by continuous exposure of U373 cells
constitutively expressing EGFRvIII (U373vIII) to 150uM TMZ for 6 months
(U373vIIIR). Dicholoroacetate (DCA) is a known metabolic inhibitor of
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1). Its application to cancer has
recently been revived in the realm of metabolic oncology, where reversal
of the Warburg effect has resulted in decreased tumor growth. Treatment
of U373, U373vIII, and U373vIIIR GBM cell lines with DCA was found to
induce cytotoxicity and reduced cell survival across all cell lines.
Further, micro array studies conducted on U373vIII or U373vIIIR and their
subsequent treatment with DCA revealed that PDK1 is the sole target in
TMZ resistant tumors expressing EGFRvIII. Additionally, we demonstrated
that 1mM DCA induced mitochondrial membrane potential change as evidenced
in JC-1 staining and electron microscopic studies confirming
mitochondrial apoptosis. Consistent with our previous findings that EGFR
interacts with PDK1, our computational analysis revealed that DCA aligns
itself to the binding sites of both EGFR and EGFRvIII with strong binding
affinity apart from its binding to PDK1. Clinically, expression of
EGFRvIII correlated with PDK1 when compared to EGFR in GBM surgical
specimens. Collectively, our studies demonstrate that principles of
metabolic oncology and DCA are active in GBM treatment despite resistance
providing new insight into the development of alternative treatment in
TMZ failure.

