Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: First-in-class cell-penetrating proteins targeting Mcl-1 induce
tumor cell apoptosis and inhibition of tumor growth in vivo


We have developed Cell Penetrating Alphabodies (CPABs), a novel and
unique therapeutic class of proteins engineered to efficiently enter
cells. In vitro, uptake in a range of tumor and non-tumor cell types
occurs rapidly with cytosol levels of up to 1 M concentration after 2
hours of CPAB exposure. Early forms of these CPABs suffered from rapid
serum clearance, thereby limiting their efficacy in vivo and amenability
to drug development. The incorporation of an albumin binding region in
the body of the protein has allowed extension of serum half-life in mice
from a few minutes to more than one hour. These CPABs have been shown to
be efficiently delivered to xenograft tumors in mice after IV bolus
injection by tissue ELISA and immunohistochemistry. CPABs can be used to
target and interfere with intracellular protein-protein interactions
involved in tumor survival in a highly specific way.The anti-apoptotic
protein Myeloid Cell Leukaemia-1 (Mcl-1) promotes through its interaction
with Bak, the survival of a range of different tumor types including
myeloid leukemia, breast cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. Moreover,
Mcl-1 overexpression is often associated with chemotherapeutic resistance
and disease relapse. Mcl-1, however, has proven difficult to target using
the conventional small molecule approach.Alphabodies which bind to Mcl-1
were engineered by a combination of rational design and phage display
library screening. The affinities for Mcl-1 ranged between 18 pM and 750
pM with binding to the closely related proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL being
below the limit of detection for the assay. In a Mammalian Two Hybrid
assay, these Alphabodies inhibited Bak-Mcl-1 but not Bak-Bcl-XL
interactions. Anti-Mcl-1 CPABs were shown to efficiently kill the Mcl-1
dependent multiple myeloma cell line NCI-H929 with IC50s ranging from 0.5
M to 2 M as monitored in cell viability assays. The dose responsive cell
killing correlated with caspase-3/7 activation in NCI-H929 cells. Other
Mcl-1 dependent tumor cell types including non-small cell lung cancer
(NCI-H23) and Burkitt's lymphoma (Raji) or tumor cell types with high
Mcl-1 expression such as ovarian cancer (A2780) and colorectal
adenocarcinoma (COLO-320DM) were also killed efficiently using anti-Mcl-1
CPABs. Despite its short half-life, daily intraperitoneal administration
of a prototype Mcl-1 targeting CPAB (without half-life extension) at 30
mg/kg for 14 days resulted in tumor inhibition of 33% as compared to
vehicle control. Experiments are underway in mouse models using the more
optimal CPABs with extended serum half-life and tumor exposure.CPABs
represent the best-in-class cell penetrating protein therapeutics both in
terms of efficiency of uptake and amenability to conversion to viable
drugs opening unprecedented opportunities to tackle intracellular
protein-protein interactions critical to diseases with unmet medical need.

