Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role and signaling of desmosomal DSP and PKP1 in ovarian cancer


Identification of driver genes/proteins in EOC tumorigenic processes is
critical to increase the cure rate for late stage epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC), which has not been in improved over several decades. We
have developed a highly aggressive EOC cell line (ID8-P1 or P1) from
ID8-P0 (without in vivo passage, or P0) through in vivo passage inC57BL6
mice. Two genes encode important desmosome components, desmoplakin (Dsp)
and plakophilin 1 (Pkp1) were found to be significantly over-expressed in
P1vs. P0 cells, as well as human EOC cells. DSP is an obligate component
of functional desmosomes that anchors intermediate filaments to
desmosomal plaques. Pkp1 encodes a member of the arm-repeat (armadillo)
and plakophilin (PKP) gene families. Our understanding of the functions
of desmosomes in cancer is just emerging and the role of desmosomes in
EOC is totally unknown. Our data showed the novel functions of DSP in
anoikis-resistance and SRC activation using shRNA-mediated DSP-knocked
down (KD) stable cell lines. In addition, we found that ID8-P1 cells
formed spheroids and P0 cells tended to be single cells when they were
cultured in suspension. KD-Dsp dissociated spheroids, suggesting that
desmosomes play an important role in spheroid formation, which may be
directly related to anoikis-, drug-resistance, and/or the cancer stem
cell (CSC) concepts. Moreover, we found that enhanced glycolysis was
involved in the increased anoikis-resistance of ID8-P1 cells and an
inhibitor of glycolysis, shikonin (SHK) was a potent anoikis-resistance
inhibitor and P1 cells gained more drug-resistance, when compared to P0
cells, with the IC50s were 1.7 and 7.4 M for P0 andP1 cells,
respectively. Similarly, the IC50s were 2.4 and 8.1 M for human EOC PE01
and PE04 cells, respectively. PE01 and PE04 cell lines are identified to
represent high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), which were derived
from the same patient before (PE01) and after (PE04) the onset of drug
resistance to cis-platinum (CDDP), chlorambucil, and 5-fluorouracil. PP2
(a SRC nhibitor) and SHK were able to dissociate the cell-cells
aggregates/spheroids in EOC cells. The previously unknown role of DSP
and/or PKP1 in EOC may be related to their signaling activities outside
desmosomes. Cells staining of PKP1 protein showed its cytosolic and
perinuclear location, providing supporting and proof-of-concept data.
Together, our data have suggested the novel links among DSP, PKP1,
anoikis-resistance, SRC activation, cell-cell-aggregation,
anddrug-resistance. These data provide a basis for developing new
modalities for EOC treatment.

