Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carfilzomib demonstrates antiproliferative and proapoptotic
activities in preclinical triple-negative breast cancer models


BACKGROUND: The proteosome is clinically validated as a target for cancer
therapeutics. Carfilzomib (CFZ) is a proteasome inhibitor that
selectively and irreversibly binds to its target and has been approved in
the US for treatment of relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma. Phase
1/2 studies of CFZ reported signals of clinical activity in solid tumors.
The aim of this study was to investigate the activity of CFZ in triple
negative breast cancer models. METHODS: A diverse panel of human triple
negative breast cancer cell lines was used to investigate the anti-tumor
activity of CFZ. Cell viability following CFZ treatment was assessed
using MTT assay. Proliferation was monitored both with IncuCyte Zoom
real-time imaging system and 3D-ON-TOP clonogenic assay. Annexin-V flow
cytometry was used to measure apoptosis. Apoptotic protein levels were
measured with Western blot and proteome profiler array. MCL1 and Ki67
expression were also assessed using immunocytochemistry. RESULTS: CFZ had
marked anti-proliferative activity in MDA-MD231, MDA-MB468, BT20, and
SUM149 TNBC cell lines, with IC50 values following 96-hour exposure from
8 nM to 25 nM by MTT assay. The anti-proliferative activity of CFZ was
observed by 3D-ON-TOP clonogenic assay. The anti-proliferative activity
of CFZ was also demonstrated with IncuCyte proliferation assay.
Proliferation was inhibited by low nanomolar concentrations in both
MDA-MB468 and BT20 cells. Western blot analysis of CFZ-treated BT20,
MDA-MB231 and MDA-MB468 cells showed cleavage of poly ADP ribose
polymerase (PARP) and CASPASE-3, indicative of apoptosis, and induction
of microtubule-associated protein-1 light chain-3B (LC3B), indicative of
autophagy. However, expression level of anti-apoptotic protein MCL1 was
increased in RAS-RAF mutated cells (MDA-MB231) but not in PTEN-null
MDA-MD468 cells following the treatment of CFZ. Double
immune-fluorescence staining of MDA-MB231 cells following the treatment
of CFZ showed higher expression of MCL1 but no change in Ki67 expression.
Interestingly, a combination of CFZ and TOR kinase inhibitor (MLN0128)
enhanced cleaved CASPASE3 and BIM expression with a concomitant increased
induction of apoptosis (annexinV expression) in MDA-MB231 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: CFZ demonstrated anti-proliferative activity in TNBC cell
lines in vitro. Flow cytometric analysis of annexin V-positive cells and
Western blot expression of cleaved CASPASE 3, cleaved PARP and BIM
indicated that CRZ -induced TNBC cell death through an
apoptosis-dependent manner.

