Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyunsaturated fatty acids alter the epigenetic landscape in
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in US
women. The lack of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and
human epidermal growth factor receptor II (HER2) in basal-like breast
cancer subtypes, commonly referred to as triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC), account for 10-20% of cases and are associated with the poorest
short-term prognosis due to a lack of targeted therapies. Epigenetic
therapies are currently of interest to target TNBC, as many theorize
epigenetic reprogramming is required for malignant transformation and
invasion.Research has shown omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6, n-3) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA;
C20:5, n-3) inhibit tumorigenesis, whereas linoleic acid (LA; C18:2, n-6)
has been shown to promote neoplastic growth; supporting the association
of increased cancer incidence with omega-6 PUFA dietary intake.
Arachidonic acid (AA; C20:4, n-6) is associated with pro-inflammatory
signaling processes, and therefore tumorigenesis; however, conflicting
results exist in the literature across tumor types. PUFAs are bioactive
nutrients known to have epigenetic effects within normal cells and
recently, the ability of PUFA to alter DNA methylation and histone
acetylation was reported in HCT-116 colon carcinoma (Cho, Y. et al,
2014).Current research focuses on the potential of dietary intervention
in TNBC as an epigenetic therapy. This study monitors epigenetic
alterations in MDA-MB-231 TNBC in response to DHA, LA, EPA and AA. DHA,
EPA and AA all elicit similar levels of apoptosis in MDA-MB-231, while LA
promotes tumorigenesis. Initial results demonstrate promoter methylation
changes (pBreast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in US women. The lack of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor II (HER2) in
basal-like breast cancer subtypes, commonly referred to as
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), account for 10-20% of cases and are
associated with the poorest short-term prognosis due to a lack of
targeted therapies. Epigenetic therapies are currently of interest to
target TNBC, as many theorize epigenetic reprogramming is required for
malignant transformation and invasion.Research has shown omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6,
n-3) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA; C20:5, n-3) inhibit tumorigenesis,
whereas linoleic acid (LA; C18:2, n-6) has been shown to promote
neoplastic growth; supporting the association of increased cancer
incidence with omega-6 PUFA dietary intake. Arachidonic acid (AA; C20:4,
n-6) is associated with pro-inflammatory signaling processes, and
therefore tumorigenesis; however, conflicting results exist in the
literature across tumor types. PUFAs are bioactive nutrients known to
have epigenetic effects within normal cells and recently, the ability of
PUFA to alter DNA methylation and histone acetylation was reported in
HCT-116 colon carcinoma (Cho, Y. et al, 2014).Current research focuses on
the potential of dietary intervention in TNBC as an epigenetic therapy.
This study monitors epigenetic alterations in MDA-MB-231 TNBC in response
to DHA, LA, EPA and AA. DHA, EPA and AA all elicit similar levels of
apoptosis in MDA-MB-231, while LA promotes tumorigenesis. Initial results
demonstrate promoter methylation changes (p<0.05) with a decrease in
PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxidase synthase 2), and SOCS1(suppressor of
cytokine signaling 1) and an increase in CDX2 (caudal type homeobox 2),
HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1), SPARC (Secreted Protein, Acidic,
Cysteine-Rich (Osteonectin)), TSC1 (tuberous sclerosis 1), and WIF1 (WNT
inhibitory factor 1) post DHA treatment. Studies are on-going to assess
if the promoter methylation changes result in transcriptome and proteome
level fluctuations. We are also investigating global gDNA methylation
alterations, including 5-methylcytosine, in response to treatment. DHA,
EPA, LA and AA exhibit dose-dependent effects on histone acetylation and
HDAC class I/II activity. There is an increase in HDAC class I/II
activity with the EC75, but not with the EC50 treatment for all PUFAs.
Histone 3 global acetylation is decreased for all PUFA treatments at the
EC75 versus EC50 dose. However, only LA and DHA have decreased H3
acetylation with an EC75 dose whereas EPA and AA have increased
acetylation levels compared to the control. Research is ongoing to define
a possible mechanism, but current data suggests PUFA may be useful as
epigenetically-targeted cancer therapeutic agent or adjuvant.

