Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional landscape of drug response guides the design of
potent and synergistic drug combinations


Transcriptional profiling of drug-treated cells yields high dimensional
response signatures that allow drugs to be compared with each other. For
example, the Connectivity Map collects signatures that are aggregated
across multiple cell types. However, most therapeutic drugs are effective
only against a subset of disease genotypes, particularly in the case of
anti-cancer drugs. Here we ask how transcriptional signatures vary across
cell lines and dose and correlate these signatures to the phenotypic
response (growth inhibition). Using these cell line specific signatures,
we inferred which signaling pathways are perturbed by specific kinase
inhibitors and identified synergistic drug combinations.We treated 6
breast cancer cell lines with more than 100 targeted inhibitors at 6
doses and measured their transcriptional response at 2 time points. We
focused on inhibitors targeting key the PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways,
as well as receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs); many of them are currently studied in clinical trials. We
identified that 40% of the perturbations induce a significant difference
in their gene expression profile. Clustering revealed the signatures are
time point specific. Some clusters contain perturbations from multiple
cell lines, like CDK inhibitors that down regulate genes related to the
cell cycle in all six lines. In contrast, clusters comprising inhibitors
of the PI3K and MAPK pathways are specific to each cell line and pathway.
The perturbations induced by RTK and non-RTK inhibitors cluster with
either the PI3K or the MAPK inhibitors depending on the cell line. Thus,
the transcriptional response allows us to identify differences in pathway
usage between cell lines, in particular to which pathway RTKs signal
predominantly.We found that the significance of the transcriptional
signature is not necessarily related to growth inhibition. In particular,
some inhibitors have little effect on growth, yet induce a significant
transcriptional signature. The most striking case is the inhibition of
MEK and EGFR in BT20 that induces strong transcriptional and biochemical
responses but inhibits growth by only 20%. Based on the transcriptional
signature we inferred and validated experimentally that FoxO, which is
generally regulated by the PI3K pathway, is partially activated by MEK or
EGFR inhibition. This suggests that EGFR and PI3K inhibitors act
synergistically in BT20, which we validated experimentally both at the
level of FoxO activation and growth inhibition. We validated the most
promising drug pair by treating xenografts.We have shown how we can use
measurements of expression signatures and cellular phenotypes following
single drug perturbations to identify drug combinations that are
synergistic in individual cell lines. This approach is a step toward the
rational design of co-drugging strategies with differential effect and
larger therapeutic windows.

