Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melphalan and XPO1 inhibition are synergistic in pre-clinical
models of multiple myeloma


Introduction:Multiple myeloma (MM) accounts for about 10% of all
hematologic malignancies, with estimated numbers of new cases and deaths
for 2015 in the US at 26,850 and 11,240, respectively. Significant
increases in response/survival have been seen over the past several
years; however, MM remains incurable and patients ultimately die from
progressive disease refractory to anti-myeloma therapy. There is clearly
a need for additional effective therapies.Materials and Methods:Human MM
parental and melphalan (MEL) resistant cell lines were treated with XPO1
inhibitors (XPO1i) KPT330 or KPT8602 +/- MEL and assayed for apoptosis
and viability by flow cytometry. Treated cells were assayed for DNA
damage by comet assay and phospho-H2AX protein expression. XPO1/MEL
treated cells were assayed for p53, NFkB, IKK, FANCF, and FANCL by
Western blot. Cells from patients with newly diagnosed or
relapsed/refractory MM treated with XPO1i/MEL were assayed for apoptosis.
NOD/SCID-gamma mice with MM tumors were treated with XPO1i/MEL and
assayed for tumor growth, survival, and toxicity.Results:MM cell
viability was decreased synergistically and apoptosis increased by
XPO1I/MEL treatment in all MM cell lines tested. XPO1/MEL drug
combination significantly increased DNA damage when compared to either
MEL or XPO1 alone, as shown by comet assay and increased phospho-H2AX
expression. Western blot showed that XPO1i treatment of MM cells
increased p53 and decreased NFkB, IKK, FANCF, and FANCL. MEL-resistant MM
cell lines were found to be sensitized by XPO1i to MEL as shown by
apoptosis assay (20-fold). CD138+/light chain+ MM cells from newly
diagnosed and relapsed/refractory MM patients were also sensitized (5-10
fold) by XPO1i to MEL (apoptosis assay). NOD/SCID-gamma mice challenged
with MM tumors demonstrated a strong synergistic antitumor effect in
XPO1i/MEL-treated mice, with increased survival and no significant
toxicity.Conclusions:XPO1i's improved the response of human MM cell lines
and patient MM cells to MEL in vitro and ex vivo. It is possible that
this synergy may be due to increased nuclear p53 in combination with
decreased NFkB and IKK and decreased DNA repair proteins FANCL and FANCF
reversing MEL resistance by the Fanconi Anemia/BRCA pathway. These
preliminary data suggest that XPO1i's augment MEL-induced DNA damage and
may also block the repair of the DNA damageboth of which could result in
synergistic cell kill. Combination therapies using XPO1i, especially the
clinical compounds KPT330 (selinexor) and KPT8602 +/- MEL, may
significantly improve the treatment outcomes of MM.

