Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Linking the molecular profile of colorectal tumors to germline
genetic and environmental risk factors


The completion of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project for colorectal
cancer (CRC) has enabled a new, focused phase of sequencing tumor samples
for which genome-wide genetic, epidemiological, clinical and lifestyle
data have been collected. By combining somatic mutational profiles with
these aforementioned data, we may identify and report effective
prevention and treatment approaches for a broader population of
individuals. The advent of targeted deep sequencing approaches using DNA
obtained from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissues has made possible
the genetic characterization of the large numbers of patients needed to
make such an effort relevant.As a first step, we describe a custom gene
panel designed from large-scale studies for targeted deep sequencing, and
its application to over 4,200 CR tumors, collected by the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO). This study is
designed to identify recurrent somatic mutations and copy number
alterations (CNAs) for association testing with germline genetic and
lifestyle and environmental risk factors for CRC, and thereby identify
relevant approaches to impact cancer prevention.The targeted CRC panel
includes 205 genes. Genes were primarily selected as significantly
mutated genes identified from the Nurses Health Study and Health
Professional's Follow-up Study (n = 700), and TCGA (n = 525). We also
included 15 genes associated with high penetrance germline mutations and
augmented the list to include genes in pathways of somatically altered
genes, identified by literature review, from public databases and known
to be associated with loss of heterozygosity. For these 205 genes,
amplification primers were designed to include all coding regions of
transcripts that are listed in the UCSC Genome Browser.For regions with
CNAs, the TCGA dataset was analyzed to include regions with greater than
or equal to 2 copy focal gains or losses that were found in more than 4
or 3 tumors, respectively. Candidate genes in regions with significant
CNAs from the TCGA CRC publication (Nature 2012) were also included. For
CNAs, 6 to 12 amplicons were designed for each of the 56 selected regions
(32 gains and 24 losses).Additional target regions include: 1) 25
microsatellite loci previously used to identify defective DNA mismatch
repair and 212 homoploymer repeats. These include microsatellite loci
recommended by the NCI Consensus Panel for identifying MSI; 2) amelogenin
(for gender); and 3) Fusobacterium to detect a putative CRC-associated
pathogen in tumor biopsies.At the AACR annual meeting, we expect to
present results for deep sequencing (1,000X) of the first 1,000 CR
tumors, including any preliminarily identified pathways and subtypes that
may provide the basis for association testing with germline genetic and
lifestyle and environmental risk factors needed for inferring better
approaches to prevention and treatment of CRC.

