Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages orchestrate early dissemination of HER2+ cancer cells


Metastatic dissemination was proposed to occur only in invasive cancer.
However, detection of cancer cells in the bone marrow of patients with
pre-invasive breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) showed that
dissemination could, through unknown mechanisms, take place earlier. Late
evolved invasive breast cancer cells disseminated by recruiting
circulating monocyte-derived tumor associated macrophages (TAMs). We
therefore investigated whether macrophages might actively participate in
early dissemination. We show that pre-malignant cancer cells in MMTV-HER2
mice produced CCL2 in an NFkB dependent manner and thereby recruited
resident mammary tissue macrophages into the duct, months before
monocyte-derived TAMs arrived. Intra-epithelial mammary tissue
macrophages induced an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in early
HER2+ cells in a Wnt-dependent manner and thereby drove early
dissemination. Consequently, depletion of macrophages from pre-malignant
MMTV-HER2 mice significantly reduced early dissemination of pre-malignant
cancer cells as measured by reduction in levels of circulating cancer
cells and disseminated cancer cells in lungs. Interestingly, macrophage
depletion during pre-malignant stages alone was sufficient to reduce the
onset of late metastasis in MMTV-HER2 mice, indicating that early
disseminating cancer cells contributed to late metastasis formation. In
humans DCIS samples we frequently found intra-epithelial macrophages
inside of ducts and their presence correlated with reduced E-Cadherin
levels. Finally, a first pilot study indicated that those patients whose
DCIS lesions contained macrophage +/E-Cadherin low microenvironments
frequently had DCCs in the bone marrow. Taken together, we reveal that
resident mammary tissue macrophages can promote early dissemination, and
unravel a mechanism how early cancer spread might proceed in breast
cancer patients and in other cancers where metastasis are diagnosed and
the primary tumor is never detected (cancer of unknown primary). We also
propose that early DCCs play a long-term causal role in metastasis
development when patients are diagnosed in late stages, implying that the
heterogeneity of metastases is higher than we might anticipate.

