Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell DNA sequencing identifies a late dissemination model
in metastatic colorectal cancer


Metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is a devastating disease with only
11% 5-year survival rate for stage IV patients. The genomic basis of
metastasis has been difficult to study, in part due to the extensive
intratumor heterogeneity at both the primary and metastatic tumor sites.
Previous studies have applied bulk next-generation sequencing (NGS)
methods, which have limited ability to resolve intratumor heterogeneity.
To address this problem, we developed a highly-multiplexed single cell
DNA sequencing method that combines flow-sorting of single nuclei,
multiple-displacement-amplification, low-input library preparation,
library barcoding, targeted capture and NGS to generate high-coverage
data from single tumor cells. To increase throughput, we performed
targeted single-cell DNA sequencing using a panel of 201-cancer genes to
analyze single cells from primary tumors and liver metastases from two
mCRC patients. In each patient, we sequenced 90 single tumor cells from
the primary and metastatic tumor, to delineate the clonal architecture of
the tumor and reconstruct their phylogenetic lineages. In addition, we
sequenced populations of tumor cells at high coverage depth (200X).Our
data identified a large number of nonsynonymous mutations that evolved in
the root nodes during the earliest stages of primary tumor evolution and
were maintained in all single cells during the clonal expansion of the
tumor mass. We also identified a small number of mutations that were
specific to the liver metastases, which are likely to play an important
role in metastatic dissemination. Using the single cell data, we
constructed phylogenetic trees, which revealed branched evolution at both
organ sites. Collectively, our data suggest that both mCRC patients are
consistent with a late-dissemination model, in which the primary tumors
evolved for a long period of time prior to the dissemination of clones to
distant organ sites. This model has important clinical implications, by
suggesting that surgical intervention or therapeutic treatment of the
primary CRC tumor can prevent metastasis, since single tumor cells do not
disseminate at the earliest stages of tumor growth

