Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of Interleukin-22 on K-ras mutant lung tumor
microenvironment and stemness properties


Oncogenic K-ras mutations found in 30% of all non-small cell lung cancers
are associated with chemoresistance and poor prognosis. Using a K-ras
induced lung cancer mouse model, CC-LR, we previously showed that K-ras
mutant lung tumors have intrinsic inflammatory characteristics with
activation of NF-kB pathway, release of inflammatory cytokines IL-6, and
activation of the IL-6 responsive transcription factor STAT3. We have
further shown that IL-6/STAT3 pathway, and IL-17 producing CD4 helper T
cells (Th17 cells) through their main cytokine, IL-17A, play critical
roles in promotion of lung cancer in this model. IL-22 is another
effecter molecule secreted by Th17 cells which is highly expressed in our
K-ras mutant mouse model. IL-22 is a unique cytokine, which seems to act
exclusively on nonhematopoietic cells, with basal IL-22R expression in
the epithelial cells and fibroblast, and mostly signals through STAT3
pathway. Here we found that genetic ablation of IL-22 in CC-LR mice
(CC-LR/IL22-KO mice), causes significant reduction in lung surface tumor
numbers by 54% (2.1-fold). Histopathological analysis of lung sections
confirmed a reduction in number and size of tumors in CC-LR/IL22-KO mice,
which was associated with significantly lower tumor cell proliferation,
angiogenesis and STAT3 activation. IL-22 ablation also reduced the
numbers of inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and
decreased the expression of pro-tumor inflammatory cytokines such as
IL-6, IL-17 and TNF. This was associated with increased expression of
anti-tumor Th1 cells -specific transcription factor (Tbet) and their
activation markers, IFN, and GZB, and decreased expression of pro-tumor
Th17- (ROR) and T regulatory (FOXP3+) specific transcription factors.
Recent studies have shown an association between IL-22 and stem-cell like
properties in colon cancer. In lung cancer, cell populations expressing
NANOG, SOX2, Oct4 and/or aldehyde dehydrogenase activity are enriched
with stemness properties. Interestingly, in CC-LR/IL22-KO mice we found
significant reduction in expression of these stemness genes. Thus, we
conclude that IL-22 promotes K-ras mutant lung tumorigenesis by inducing
a pro-tumor inflammatory microenvironment with proliferative and
angiogenic properties as well as protecting stemness characteristic in
epithelial/tumor cells. Therefore, we propose pharmacological targeting
of IL-22 as a potential therapeutic strategy in combination with
conventional cytotoxic therapy, immune check point blockade, or other
targeted therapies (e.g. MEK inhibition) for lung cancer patients with
K-ras mutation.

