Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy for breast cancer bone metastases using mRNA
engineered mesenchymal stem cells


Bone is a primary metastatic site in breast cancer, and bone metastases
are associated with poor survival and a dramatic decrease of patient's
quality of life. Current treatments lack specificity for bone metastatic
niches, leading to poor drug delivery and systemic toxicity. Mesenchymal
stem/stromal cells (MSCs) represent ideal trophic vehicles for drug
delivery to bone metastases as they are readily available, easy to
expand, and display a natural, although inefficient, homing to bone and
tumor sites. This work aimed to develop MSCs that are engineered through
simple mRNA transfection with both bone vasculature-homing ligands and
therapeutics to improve targeted delivery and efficacy. The transfection
of protein-coding mRNA is an effective tool to engineer simultaneously
and transiently cells with multiple factors to control the fate of
transplanted cells, while mitigating risks associated with viral-based
engineering.Human bone marrow-derived MSCs from healthy donors were
engineered with synthetic mRNA to express homing ligands P-selectin
glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1)/Sialyl Lewis X (sLeX), and anti-tumor
agents cytosine deaminase (CD) and osteoprotegerin (OPG). PSGL-1/sLeX
allow MSCs to efficiently target bone tumor vasculatures that overexpress
P- and E-selectins. CD is a convertase that locally converts inactive
pro-drug 5-Fluorocytosine (5-FC) to active drug 5-Fluorouracil. OPG is a
natural decoy receptor for one of the main bone resorptive factors
expressed in bone metastases, RANKL (Receptor activator of nuclear factor
kappa-B ligand), and thus blocks the vicious cycle existing between tumor
growth and bone resorption.First, we demonstrated that MSCs could be
efficiently engineered through mRNA transfection to express
simultaneously homing ligands PSGL-1 and sLeX, CD and OPG. We evaluated
improved cell homing and anti-tumor functions of engineered stem cells in
vitro. Expression of PSGL-1 and sLeX increased MSC rolling and tethering
on an activated endothelium under shear flow condition. When co-cultured
with human breast cancer cells MDA-MB231 in presence of 5-FC, engineered
MSCs induced both breast cancer and MSC death within 5 days. Finally,
secreted OPG is able to prevent osteoclastogenesis in vitro using murine
osteoclast precursors. We are currently evaluating biodistribution,
homing to bone metastatic niches and anti-tumor efficacy of engineered
MSCs in vivo using establish models of breast cancer bone metastases
(intratibial and intracardiac injection of MDA-MB-231 cells). As bone
metastases are osteolytic lesions, bone remodeling will also be measured
using histomorphometry.To conclude, our engineered MSCs can potentially
be safer vectors to effectively target and treat bone metastases, thus
decreasing off-target systemic toxicity. This next-generation of
engineered MSCs has the potential to address an unmet challenge for bone
metastases treatment.

