Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics of tocilizumab in
a nonhuman primate model


Background: Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) is a life-threatening
complication of effective immunotherapies, particularly chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) T-cells. CRS is characterized by fever, hypotension,
cardiac dysfunction, and at times end organ dysfunction and is mediated
by elevated cytokines including IL-6, IFN-, and TNF. A mainstay treatment
for severe CRS is intravenous (IV) tocilizumab, a humanized, monoclonal
antibody against membrane-associated and soluble IL-6 receptor. Most CRS
symptoms resolve within hours of a single dose of IV tocilizumab in
contrast to neurotoxicities, which are exacerbated or develop de novo
after tocilizumab by a mechanism that is not well understood. IL-6 is
elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with CRS and
neurotoxicity. The CSF penetration of tocilizumab is unknown. The
objective of this study is to determine the CSF penetration of
tocilizumab after IV administration in a nonhuman primate model.Methods:
Four adult male rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) each received 10 mg/kg
tocilizumab IV (human equivalent dose of 8 mg/kg). The macaques have an
implanted CNS ventricular reservoir for CSF collection and two central
venous lines; one for drug administration and a second for sample
collection. Serial, paired blood and CSF samples were collected 0-8
hours, 1-3 days, 5 days, & 10 days post-infusion. A fluorescence bridging
ELISA was used to determine serum and CSF levels of free tocilizumab (AbD
Serotec).Results: Three of the four animals were evaluable. Mean serum
Cmax = 1.55 M (1.20-2.13) and mean CSF Cmax = 0.00065 M
(0.00037-0.00083). Mean serum and CSF Tmax were 10 hours and 48 hours,
respectively. Mean serum and CSF half-life were 127 and 339 hours,
respectively. Serum AUC (mean) = 63 M/hour (25-130) while CSF AUC (mean)
= 0.099 M/hour (0.07-0.125). CSF penetration was low with mean CSF:plasma
AUC ratio of 0.26%. All samples and standards were plated in triplicate
and had a coefficient of variation less than 20%. In one animal,
tocilizumab concentrations were markedly lower with no detectable
tocilizumab in the serum after 4 hours; results from this study were
considered unevaluable.Conclusion: Studies in this nonhuman primate model
reveal low CSF penetration of tocilizumab and delayed time to maximum
concentration in the CSF, potentially explaining the persistent
neurologic toxicity observed in patients with CRS treated with
tocilizumab. However, tocilizumab has a long half-life in the CSF,
suggesting alternate means of delivery may be beneficial. Free
tocilizumab concentrations were extremely low in one out of four animals
and may have been due to preexisting inhibitors. Intranasal delivery of
tocilizumab may result in significantly higher CSF exposure and provides
a convenient route in patients that are otherwise critically ill. Studies
of intranasal tocilizumab are ongoing and will be presented.

