Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NTF2 regulates nuclear size in mammalian cells and may contribute
to altered nuclear size in melanoma


Nuclear size and morphology are distinct cancer features that
pathologists use for diagnostic purposes. Proteins that regulate nuclear
size have been identified in Xenopus, where nuclear import rates
correlate with nuclear size. The levels of two nuclear import factors,
importin and NTF2, were shown to be particularly important in nuclear
size regulation. It has also been shown that importin 2 is a potential
biomarker in non-small cell lung cancer, as well as importin 1 in breast
cancer. Our data implicate that NTF2 is a possible cancer biomarker.Our
main goal is to analyze how these nuclear scaling factors affect nuclear
size during carcinogenesis and to test how nuclear size impacts cancer
growth characteristics. We find that manipulating the levels of importin
2 and NTF2 in HeLa and MRC-5 cells leads to altered nuclear size,
demonstrating a conserved function for these factors in nuclear size
regulation. To place these results in a cancer context, we are focusing
on melanoma cell lines, including radial and vertical growth primary
melanomas and metastatic melanomas. We find that, compared to normal
melanocytes, the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N/C) volume ratio is increased
in the cancer cell lines. Western blot analysis revealed an inverse
correlation between NTF2 protein levels and nuclear size. We confirmed
these results using a melanoma tissue microarray, finding similar
differences in nuclear size and NTF2 expression levels between benign
nevi and melanomas.We next performed transient transfection experiments
with our melanoma cell lines. Importin 2 knock down led to smaller
nuclear size, while knocking down the levels of NTF2 increased nuclear
size, consistent with our Xenopus results. We also observed reduced
nuclear size when NTF2 was ectopically expressed. Currently we are
generating stable, inducible melanoma cell lines where we can precisely
alter NTF2 and importin expression levels using doxycycline. We will use
these inducible cell lines to examine how altering nuclear size impacts
cell proliferation rates, invasiveness, and apoptosis. We will also
investigate how nuclear size affects gene positioning using FISH,
focusing on genes involved in melanoma formation and metastasis. In the
long term, we plan to move these studies into a mouse model where we can
test how nuclear size affects in vivo metastatic capacity.

