Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-based optimization of small molecule inhibitors of the
protein-protein interaction between menin and mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)


Chromosomal translocations that affect the Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL)
gene result in acute myeloid and lymphoid leukemias. Fusion of MLL with
one of 60 different partner genes generates MLL fusion proteins which
lead to enhanced cell proliferation, up-regulation of Hoxa9 and Meis1
genes and block hematopoietic differentiation, ultimately leading to
acute leukemia. Importantly, the N-terminal region of MLL is retained in
all MLL fusion proteins and represents the interaction site of menin, a
critical oncogenic cofactor for MLL fusion proteins. As a result,
inhibition of the menin-MLL interaction should abrogate the development
and progression of MLL leukemia. Therefore, disruption of the menin-MLL
interaction with small molecule inhibitors might represent a therapeutic
strategy for patients harboring MLL-rearrangements.The development of
potent small molecule inhibitors of protein-protein interactions with
optimized drug-like properties represents a challenging task in the lead
optimization process. Here, we employed structure-based design with
extensive medicinal chemistry efforts to optimize the thienopyrimidine
class of menin-MLL inhibitors represented by the MI-136 compound. Our
efforts resulted in development of MI-538, which represents the most
potent small molecule inhibitor of the menin-MLL interaction developed to
date. MI-538, which binds to menin with a Kd of 6.5 nM demonstrated
superior cellular activity in MLL-AF9 transformed leukemic cells with a
GI50 = 83 nM. In a mouse xenograft model utilizing MV4:11 human MLL
leukemia cells, treatment with MI-538 significantly reduced tumor growth.
Overall, systematic exploration of substituents on MI-136 led to the
identification of MI-538 with improved activity, selectivity, polarity
and pharmacokinetic profile, making it suitable for in vivo studies.
Interestingly, we found that simultaneous incorporation of multiple
substituents optimized for each site on the cyanoindole ring of MI-136
does not always positively affect the activity or drug-like properties of
these compounds. This study demonstrates challenges in optimizing
inhibitors of protein-protein interaction for potential therapeutic
applications.

