Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pilot study of DNA microseeding to activate immune rejection of
canine melanoma


Background: Canine malignant melanoma provides a model to study DNA
vaccine delivery systems. A xenogeneic human tyrosinase (huTYR) DNA
vaccine delivered by Biojector2000 received United States Department of
Agriculture licensure when it appeared to prolong survival of dogs with
melanoma compared to historical, stage-matched controls and to stimulate
immune responses in some dogs. The current study evaluates toxicity,
transgene expression, and antibody responses to huTYR in companion dogs
with spontaneously developing melanoma following delivery of huTYR DNA to
the skin via a modified tattoo device, a method termed DNA
microseeding.Methods: Five companion dogs with melanoma were scheduled to
receive huTYR DNA at two sites (Site A and Site B) on the inner thigh by
DNA microseeding every 2 weeks for 4 administrations at a range of huTYR
DNA doses; 2 dogs (50 g [Site A] and 100 g [Site B]); 2 dogs (200 g [Site
A] and 400 g [Site B]); and 1 dog (83 g [Site A] and 83 g commercial
huTYR plasmid [Site B]). Vaccine site biopsies were obtained to determine
transgene expression 24 hours after the 1st and 3rd vaccination
time-points, and 48 hours after the 2nd and 4th vaccination time-points.
Blood samples were obtained at baseline and 2 weeks after the 2nd, 3rd,
and 4th vaccinations to quantify TYR-specific antibodies via indirect
ELISA.Results: No toxicity, beyond local site irritation, related to the
vaccine administration was observed. The 3 dogs with known disease at
study entry received 3, 1 and 4 treatments before discontinuation of
treatment due to progressive disease. The 2 dogs without evidence of
disease at study entry received all 4 planned treatments and remained
without evidence for recurrence after treatment for the duration of the
study (6 weeks). Only rare huTYR+ cells with macrophage-like morphology
were observed in some vaccine site biopsies. A significant increase in
anti-huTYR IgG was detected at Day 57 compared to pre-treatment in 2 of
the 4 evaluable dogs (p = 0.03 Wilcoxon Mann Whitney), and these were the
2 dogs without evidence of disease at study entry. Baseline anti-huTYR
IgG levels were also greater compared to IgG levels against an irrelevant
control antigen.Conclusions: While microseeding of huTYR plasmid DNA
resulted in only rare transgene expression at DNA doses up to 400 g,
humoral responses against huTYR were substantially boosted in 2 of 4
evaluable dogs. Additional testing is needed to determine if DNA
microseeding enhances huTYR DNA vaccine immunogenicity compared to
Biojector delivery.

