Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsp90 inhibition results in GR, AR and JAK protein degradation,
decreased triple-negative breast cancer proliferation and increased
paclitaxel sensitivity


Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activity in triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) is associated with cell survival and chemotherapy resistance.
Targetable molecular drivers for TNBC have been difficult to identify and
therefore standard treatment remains limited to chemotherapy. Recently,
new-generation small molecule Hsp90 inhibitors (e.g. ganetespib and
NVP-AUY922) have proven to be both potent inhibitors of Hsp90 client
proteins and far less toxic than previous Hsp90 inhibitors. Moreover,
favorable clinical responses have been observed in some TNBC patients
enrolled in a phase II clinical trial of ganetespib monotherapy. A
ganetespib and paclitaxel clinical trial is ongoing in breast cancer;
however, it is not known which Hsp90 client proteins contribute to
increased tumor chemotherapy sensitivity.Recent studies in our lab found
that inhibition of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activity plays an
important role in Hsp90 inhibitor-mediated sensitization of TNBC cells to
paclitaxel-induced cytotoxicity. However, we also observed that following
significant shRNA-mediated GR depletion, ganetespib still provided some
sensitization of TNBC cells to paclitaxel. This suggests that
inactivation of additional anti-apoptotic Hsp90 client proteins play a
role in mediating ganetespib effects. Proteins closely associated with GR
function that are also key Hsp90 inhibitor client proteins include the
androgen receptor (AR, implicated in TNBC proliferation and apoptosis)
and JAK, a component of JAK/STAT signaling pathway implicated in TNBC
tumorigenesis and chemoresistance. Here we hypothesize that AR and
JAK/STAT signaling have overlapping but distinct roles in Hsp90-mediated
chemotherapy sensitization of TNBCs. Western blot analysis of TNBC
xenografts treated with ganetespib +/- paclitaxel showed depletion of AR
as well as JAK1 and 2. Ganetespib treatment also led to decreased levels
of TMPRSS2 gene expression, an AR target gene. Additionally Western blot
analysis showed decreased levels of activated phosphorylated STAT3
transcriptional factor, a downstream mediator of JAK, following
ganetespib treatment of TNBC cell lines. These results suggest the
involvement of AR and JAK in mediating ganetespib mechanism of action. We
are currently beginning to determine how AR and JAK/STAT signaling
pathways may interact with GR signaling by establishing CRISPR/Cas9
knockouts of GR, AR, and/or JAK in TNBC cells treated with ganetespib +/-
paclitaxel. Understanding the relative roles of Hsp90 client proteins in
TNBC is predicted to lead to a more rational selection of patients with
TNBCs likely to benefit from Hsp90-inhibitor treatment.

