Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferases
(UGTs) by SAFB1 and SAFB2: Strategy to reduce DHT levels in prostate
cancer cells


Backround: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is a first-line option for
prostate cancer (PC) treatment. While there has been some progress
inhibiting AR activation by focusing on DHT synthesis, other mechanisms
to reduce intracellular DHT have not been exploited for drug development.
The UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes UGT2B15 and UGT2B17
inactivate DHT in the prostate by adding a bulky UDP-glucuronic acid
moiety to the hormone. These reactions are irreversible and therefore
represent a prominent mechanism for depletion of intratumoral androgen in
vivo. Here we show evidence that the chromatin scaffolds SAFB1/2 activate
expression of UGT2B15/17. This is a novel activity for these proteins,
which are known primarily as inhibitors of nuclear receptors
(Oesterreich, S. et al. Molecular Endocrinology, 2000 and Debril, MB. et
al. Molecular Endocrinology, 2005). We previously showed that SAFB1 can
act as an AR suppressor that cooperates with the MST1 kinase and the EZH2
methyltransferase to modify chromatin at AR-responsive genes
(Mukhopadhyay et al. Oncogene, 2014).Methods: Enforced expression,
silencing, RNA profiling, quantitative PCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and ChIP-Seq, mass spectrometry and luciferase gene reporter
assays.Results: SAFB1/2 is genomically inactivated in a high percentage
(28%) of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). SAFB1/2 silencing,
which emulates SAFB1/2 downregulation/gene inactivation, potently
down-regulates UGT2B15/17 in LNCaP and 22RV1 cells. Conversely, enforced
expression of SAFB1 upregulates UGT2B15/17. Genomic effects of SAFB1 loss
on the AR cistrome in LNCaP cells by ChIP-seq are shown. Computational
analysis indicates that SAFB1 regulates AR and EZH2-regulated genes, but
not exclusively, indicating that gene regulation by SAFB1 independently
of AR and EZH2 also occurs in prostate cells. SAFB1 silencing resulted in
increases in several androgen species in LNCaP cells. Finally, SAFB1 is
recruited to the UGT2B15/17 promoters and its effect on promoter
luciferase constructs is analyzed.Conclusions: This is the first
identification of a molecular mechanism of regulation independent of
androgen of the UGT2B15/17 genes in prostate cells. Our findings indicate
that SAFB1 is an essential node where several oncogenic pathways converge
onto chromatin to regulate gene expression in PC in a manner that can
affect androgen degradative mechanisms.

