Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 - HER2 transactivation: Role
of fbroblasts in the acquisition and maintenance of anti-Her2 target
therapies resistance in breast cancer


INTRODUCTIONMechanisms underlying tumor progression after chemotherapy
are not well understood. Therapeutic treatments can favor the clonal
selection of cells with unique properties and different fitness for a
given microenvironment. Indeed, tumor cells can induce changes in the
structure and composition of the microenvironment to support their growth
and spread.Our aim is to study if clonal selection induced by target
therapies like Trastuzumab and Lapatinib favors the outgrowth of cells
with different microenvironmental crosstalk capability, and in particular
the role of fibroblast in the selection of these particular
clones.MATERIALS AND METHODSWe developed different cell lines resistant
to these drugs from the parental SKBR3, BT474 and MDA-MB-453 Her2+ cells
lines. We determined their molecular profile and investigated the changes
in the expression of selected genes codifying soluble factors known to
induce stromal changes, like chemokines, cytokines, matrix
remodeling-related enzymes, angiogenic and neurogenic factors.To study
the role of fibroblast in the selection of the resistant clones, and the
crosstalk between these two populations, we developed fibroblast
immortalized lines derived from breast cancer tumors and normal breast
tissue, and study the effect of the fibroblasts in resistant induction,
as well as the effect of resistant clones in the fibroblast
activation.RESULTS AND DISCUSIONWe found that factors secreted by
fibroblast can support cancer growth and progression by influencing and
promoting the resistant phenotype. In our proposed model, HER2 positive
BC cell lines resistant to Trastuzumab and Lapatinib have an active FGFR2
signalling pathway, able to maintain HER2 signalling by receptor
transactivation. This bypasses HER2 inhibition and contributes to the
maintenance of the cellular addiction to HER2 pathways even when the
protein is being targeted, promoting cell proliferation and survival.
Moreover, resistant cell lines secreted factors induced fibroblast
activation and also modulated fibroblasts tumour promoting factors
secretion pattern. As a result, after exposure to resistant cell lines
secreted factors, fibroblasts become more efficient on promoting BC cell
lines resistance. Similarly, the supernatant derived from fibroblasts
isolated from HER2+ tumours was able to induce the activation of HER2 and
FGFR2 pathways. The same effect was found in vivo, were coinjection with
HER2+ tumour associated fibroblasts promoted tumour aggressiveness and
resistance through HER2 and FGFR2 activationCONCLUSIONThese results
highlight the importance of microenvironment in supporting tumor
progression after chemotherapy.

