Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcl-Xl over-expression is a poor prognostic marker in papillary
thyroid cancer and can be therapeutically targeted to induce apoptosis
and autophagy


Bcl-Xl is a member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins that are divided into
either pro-apoptotic proteins or anti-apoptotic proteins on the basis of
their functionality. All the members of the Bcl-2 family share common
domains known as Bcl-2 Homology (BH1-4) domain. The pro-apoptotic family
members include proteins that only contain the BH-3 domain and include
Bax, Bak, Bid, PUMA, NOXA, Bim and Bad while the anti-apoptotic proteins
include members such as Bcl-2, Bcl-Xl and Mcl-1. In normal conditions,
there is a balance between the pro- and anti-apoptotic members of the
Bcl-2 family. Because of their important role in cell survival, there has
been lot of interest in utilizing dysregulation of Bcl-2 family members
to counter cancer growth and induce apoptosis. Bcl-Xl is an
anti-apoptotic protein that has found to be over-expressed in various
cancers including lung cancer, DLBCL and breast cancer. However, the role
of Bcl-Xl in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) from Middle Eastern region
has not been fully illustrated. In order to investigate the role of
Bcl-Xl in PTC, we examined the expression of Bcl-Xl in a cohort of 1022
PTC clinical cases by immunohistochemistry in a tissue microarray format
and found that Bcl-Xl was over-expressed in 51.7% of PTC cases. Bcl-Xl
over-expression was significantly associated with aggressive high
proliferative markers such as older age (p = 0.0009), extra-thyroidal
extension (pBcl-Xl is a member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins that are
divided into either pro-apoptotic proteins or anti-apoptotic proteins on
the basis of their functionality. All the members of the Bcl-2 family
share common domains known as Bcl-2 Homology (BH1-4) domain. The
pro-apoptotic family members include proteins that only contain the BH-3
domain and include Bax, Bak, Bid, PUMA, NOXA, Bim and Bad while the
anti-apoptotic proteins include members such as Bcl-2, Bcl-Xl and Mcl-1.
In normal conditions, there is a balance between the pro- and
anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. Because of their important
role in cell survival, there has been lot of interest in utilizing
dysregulation of Bcl-2 family members to counter cancer growth and induce
apoptosis. Bcl-Xl is an anti-apoptotic protein that has found to be
over-expressed in various cancers including lung cancer, DLBCL and breast
cancer. However, the role of Bcl-Xl in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC)
from Middle Eastern region has not been fully illustrated. In order to
investigate the role of Bcl-Xl in PTC, we examined the expression of
Bcl-Xl in a cohort of 1022 PTC clinical cases by immunohistochemistry in
a tissue microarray format and found that Bcl-Xl was over-expressed in
51.7% of PTC cases. Bcl-Xl over-expression was significantly associated
with aggressive high proliferative markers such as older age (p =
0.0009), extra-thyroidal extension (p<0.0001), tumor size (p = 0.0081),
nodal involvement (p = 0.0067), metastasis (p = 0.0013) and showed a poor
overall 5 year survival (0.0438). Bcl-Xl over-expression was was also
found to be significantly associated with p-AKT (pBcl-Xl is a member of
the Bcl-2 family of proteins that are divided into either pro-apoptotic
proteins or anti-apoptotic proteins on the basis of their functionality.
All the members of the Bcl-2 family share common domains known as Bcl-2
Homology (BH1-4) domain. The pro-apoptotic family members include
proteins that only contain the BH-3 domain and include Bax, Bak, Bid,
PUMA, NOXA, Bim and Bad while the anti-apoptotic proteins include members
such as Bcl-2, Bcl-Xl and Mcl-1. In normal conditions, there is a balance
between the pro- and anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. Because
of their important role in cell survival, there has been lot of interest
in utilizing dysregulation of Bcl-2 family members to counter cancer
growth and induce apoptosis. Bcl-Xl is an anti-apoptotic protein that has
found to be over-expressed in various cancers including lung cancer,
DLBCL and breast cancer. However, the role of Bcl-Xl in papillary thyroid
cancer (PTC) from Middle Eastern region has not been fully illustrated.
In order to investigate the role of Bcl-Xl in PTC, we examined the
expression of Bcl-Xl in a cohort of 1022 PTC clinical cases by
immunohistochemistry in a tissue microarray format and found that Bcl-Xl
was over-expressed in 51.7% of PTC cases. Bcl-Xl over-expression was
significantly associated with aggressive high proliferative markers such
as older age (p = 0.0009), extra-thyroidal extension (p<0.0001), tumor
size (p = 0.0081), nodal involvement (p = 0.0067), metastasis (p =
0.0013) and showed a poor overall 5 year survival (0.0438). Bcl-Xl
over-expression was was also found to be significantly associated with
p-AKT (p<0.0001), XIAP (pBcl-Xl is a member of the Bcl-2 family of
proteins that are divided into either pro-apoptotic proteins or
anti-apoptotic proteins on the basis of their functionality. All the
members of the Bcl-2 family share common domains known as Bcl-2 Homology
(BH1-4) domain. The pro-apoptotic family members include proteins that
only contain the BH-3 domain and include Bax, Bak, Bid, PUMA, NOXA, Bim
and Bad while the anti-apoptotic proteins include members such as Bcl-2,
Bcl-Xl and Mcl-1. In normal conditions, there is a balance between the
pro- and anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. Because of their
important role in cell survival, there has been lot of interest in
utilizing dysregulation of Bcl-2 family members to counter cancer growth
and induce apoptosis. Bcl-Xl is an anti-apoptotic protein that has found
to be over-expressed in various cancers including lung cancer, DLBCL and
breast cancer. However, the role of Bcl-Xl in papillary thyroid cancer
(PTC) from Middle Eastern region has not been fully illustrated. In order
to investigate the role of Bcl-Xl in PTC, we examined the expression of
Bcl-Xl in a cohort of 1022 PTC clinical cases by immunohistochemistry in
a tissue microarray format and found that Bcl-Xl was over-expressed in
51.7% of PTC cases. Bcl-Xl over-expression was significantly associated
with aggressive high proliferative markers such as older age (p =
0.0009), extra-thyroidal extension (p<0.0001), tumor size (p = 0.0081),
nodal involvement (p = 0.0067), metastasis (p = 0.0013) and showed a poor
overall 5 year survival (0.0438). Bcl-Xl over-expression was was also
found to be significantly associated with p-AKT (p<0.0001), XIAP
(p<0.0001) and proliferative marker Ki67 (p = 0.0041). In vitro,
targeting Bcl-Xl expression in PTC cell lines using a small molecular
inhibitor of Bcl-Xl; AB141657 (Z36) showed a dose dependent inhibition of
cell viability and induction of apoptosis after 48 hours treatment. Using
5 and 10M Z36, we found that PTC cells not only underwent apoptosis
detected by flow cytometry, inactivation of AKT and activation of
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway but also autophagy as detected by
up-regulation of LC1-3, inactivation of p-mTOR1 and p-mTOR2 and their
downstream targets. These data clearly indicate a role of Bcl-Xl in the
pathogenesis of PTC as well as the importance of targeting Bcl-Xl using
Z36 to induce both; apoptosis and autophagy in Bcl-Xl over-expressing PTC
cells.

