Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1, SLC22A1) as
transporter for sorafenib


The multikinase inhibitor sorafenib is approved for the treatment of
advanced clear-cell renal and hepatocellular carcinomas, yet, patients
survival is prolonged for only several months (Wilhelm et al., Mol Cancer
Ther 2008). The understanding of this poor efficacy remains incomplete.
One reason for treatment failure may be the high interindividual
variability in pharmacokinetics of the orally-given sorafenib. Membrane
transporters may contribute to pharmacokinetics of sorafenib and its
metabolites as recently reported for the hepatic solute carrier (SLC)
organic anion transporter family member 1B1 (OATP1B1) and OATP1B3
(Zimmerman et al, Clin Cancer Res 2013). In contrast, the role of organic
cation transporter 1 (OCT1), which is also a major hepatic uptake
transporter (Nies et al, Handb Exp Pharmacol 2011), for cellular uptake
of sorafenib is controversial (Hu et al, Clin Cancer Res 2009; Swift et
al, Drug Metab Dispos 2013; Herraez et al, Hepatology 2013). We therefore
sought to comprehensively elucidate the impact of OCT1 on cellular
sorafenib uptake by using a combination of different in vitro cell
culture models and in vivo approaches involving experiments with Oct1
knockout (-/-) mice. Firstly, we analyzed cellular accumulation of
radiolabeled sorafenib by the mammalian cell line HEK293 stably
expressing OCT1. Despite overexpression of a functional OCT1 transporter,
cellular uptake of neither sorafenib nor its active metabolite sorafenib
N-oxide was increased. Next, we studied sorafenib and sorafenib N-oxide
pharmacokinetics in mice with a homozygous genetic deletion of the Oct1
transporter. The deficiency of Oct1 had no influence on plasma and
hepatic sorafenib and sorafenib N-oxide concentrations. Finally, we
investigated sorafenib transport into the human hepatocellular carcinoma
cell lines HepG2 and HuH7. Although neither OCT1 mRNA nor protein was
detected, a considerable cellular accumulation of sorafenib was observed
in both cell lines. Expression profiling of a panel of 55 relevant SLC
drug uptake transporters identified several potential novel candidates
mediating sorafenib accumulation.We conclude from these findings that
cellular uptake of sorafenib and sorafenib N-oxide is independent of OCT1
and that other, as yet unidentified, transport mechanisms are responsible
for cellular sorafenib uptake.Supported by the Robert Bosch Foundation,
Stuttgart, Germany and the ICEPHA Grant Tbingen-Stuttgart, Germany.

