Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-pronged approach to establish control standards for somatic
mutations in next generation sequencing (NGS) oncology test


In recent years, somatic mutation testing via Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) has emerged as a powerful tool to detect targetable mutations in
diseases such as cancer. These include mutations such as BRAF V600E,
which can lead to targeted drug therapy; therefore, improving the
standard of care in cancer diagnostics. To generate clinically meaningful
results, we need to define standards that can be applied to laboratories
performing somatic testing on tumor samples. With ongoing debate about
the use of positive or negative controls in somatic testing assays, we
designed an experiment to test the concordance of clinically actionable
mutations commonly seen in tumor testing. We use cell line controls and
commercially engineered DNA to validate concordance of mutations at
specific allelic ratios. Our results depict an experiment design to
determine if a genomic test can detect actionable mutations with high
levels of accuracy and precision.In this study, we designed a
multi-pronged approach to evaluate the need for control standards by the
ICG100 clinical NGS panel. To establish a baseline negative control, we
performed concordance testing on the NA12878 cell line. We compared SNPs,
insertions and deletions found using our methodology to the variants
reports by NIST. We found our results to be concordant with NIST at a
sensitivity of 92% and a specificity of 93%. To establish a baseline for
positive controls, we utilized commercially engineered DNA which contains
variants spiked-in at known allelic frequencies. This allowed us to
determine if the ICG100 panel was able to retrieve specific somatic
mutations. We were able to detect high confidence somatic mutations, such
as BRAFV600E, as well as BRAF V600G which was spiked in at a lower expect
allelic frequency of 4%. Moreover, we are able to detect with high
confidence mutations such as ALK F1174L, EGFR G719S, PIK3CA H1047R, and
MET Y1247D, and we were able to reproduce the results across multiple
cell lines. Overall, our results show the need to utilize controls as
standard protocol which can help assess the proficiency of a clinical
assay. With rapid advances is NGS testing methodologies, there is a need
for establishing standardized controls that asses the performance of a
somatic tumor testing.

