Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABT-165 is a first-in-class therapeutic Dual Variable Domain
Immunoglobulin (DVD-IgTM) that targets DLL4 and VEGF for the treatment of
cancer


The first generation anti-angiogenic drugs designed to block the
VEGF/VEGFR pathway lend modest clinical benefit for cancer patients.
Other than VEGF, DLL4 is the only known angiogenic factor with a
haploinsufficiency phenotype, underscoring its essential role in vascular
function. Indeed, both the VEGF/VEGFR and the DLL4/Notch signaling axes
are known to cooperate during pathological angiogenesis. DLL4 is also
implicated in VEGF-independent pathways, cancer stem cell survival, and
immune suppression that could collectively contribute to tumor cell
resistance. Given both intrinsic and acquired patient resistance
mechanisms exist, targeting the DLL4/Notch pathway represents a unique
opportunity for a combination strategy to improve upon current VEGF/VEGFR
pathway inhibitor therapies. To this end, ABT-165 was developed as a
first-in-class dual specific biologic using AbbVie's proprietary
dual-variable domain immunoglobulin (DVD-IgTM) technology. ABT-165 is
capable of simultaneously binding to DLL4 and VEGF with nanomolar
affinities and blocking the cognate ligand-receptor interactions that
result in the potent inhibition of DLL4-mediated Notch1 activation and
VEGF-stimulated endothelial cell proliferation. ABT-165 is functionally
superior in vitro compared to the combination of parental anti-VEGF and
anti-DLL4 antibodies. In human tumor xenograft models, ABT-165 induced
significant inhibition of tumor growth and survival benefit compared to
single anti-DLL4 or anti-VEGF antibody treatments at equivalent doses.
Mechanistically, this enhancement of anti-tumor efficacy is due in part
to the disruption of new tumor vasculature coupled with blockade of
vessel perfusion. Furthermore, ABT-165 in combination with cytotoxic
chemotherapy agents induced tumor regression, which outperformed
bevacizumab plus chemotherapy in both human breast and colon xenograft
models. ABT-165 displays non-linear, dose-dependent pharmacokinetic
profiles in mice and cynomolgus monkeys, with an apparent terminal
half-life > 5 days in both species at a target saturation dose. In a GLP
monkey toxicity study, ABT-165 at doses up to 200 mg/kg was
well-tolerated with non-adverse treatment-related histopathology findings
limited to the liver and thymus. In contrast, adverse and non-adverse
findings were observed in the hearts of rats and monkeys, respectively,
with an in-house proprietary anti-DLL4 antibody. Given that coupling of
anti-DLL4 with anti-VEGF activities into a DVD-Ig may lend improved
safety and/or efficacy profiles compared to antibodies, ABT-165 was
advanced into a Phase 1 clinical trial.Disclosures: All authors are
employees of AbbVie. The design, study conduct, and financial support for
this research were provided by AbbVie.AbbVie participated in the
interpretation of data, review, and approval of the publication.

