Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of stem cell markers Oct3/4 and Nanog in the head and
neck squamous carcinoma cells and its clinical implications for delayed
neck metastasis in stage I/II tongue squamous cell carcinoma


Background: The side population (SP) of cancer cells is reportedly
enriched with cancer stem cells (CSCs), however, the functional role and
clinical relevance of CSC marker molecules upregulated in the SP of head
and neck squamous carcinoma (HNSCC) cells are yet to be elucidated.
Patients with clinical stage I/II (T1-2N0M0) tongue squamous cell
carcinoma (TSCC) typically undergo partial glossectomy alone; however,
development of delayed neck metastasis (DNM) tends to reduce their
survival. In the present study, we aimed to determine the CSC markers in
the SP of HNSCC cells along with their functions in cellular behaviors,
and to clarify the association of these markers with DNM.Methods: Flow
cytometry was applied to isolate SP from main population (MP) in HNSCC
cells (SCC4, SAS, and HSC4). The expression of the CSC markers was
examined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry. In vitro
proliferation, migration, and invasion assays were performed to assess
cellular behaviors. Clinicopathological factors and immunohistochemical
expressions of Oct3/4 and Nanog were evaluated using surgical specimens
from 50 patients with stage I/II TSCC who underwent partial glossectomy
alone.Results: SPs were isolated in all three cell lines examined.
Expression levels of Oct3/4 and Nanog were higher in SP cells than MP
cells. Additionally, cell migration and invasion abilities were higher in
SP cells than MP cells, whereas there was no difference in proliferation.
Univariate analysis showed that expression of Oct3/4 and Nanog, vascular
invasion, muscular invasion, and mode of invasion were significantly
correlated with DNM. Multivariate logistic regression revealed that
Oct3/4 expression (risk ratio = 14.78, p = 0.002) and vascular invasion
(risk ratio = 12.93, p = 0.017) were independently predictive of DNM.
Regarding the diagnostic performance, Oct3/4 showed the highest accuracy,
sensitivity, and negative predictive value of 82.0%, 61.5%, and 86.8%,
respectively, while vascular invasion showed the highest specificity and
positive predictive value of 94.6% and 71.4%, respectively.Conclusion:
These results suggest that Oct3/4 and Nanog represent probable CSC
markers in HNSCC, which contribute to the development of DNM in part by
enhancing cell motility and invasiveness. Moreover, along with vascular
invasion, expression of Oct3/4 in the primary cancer cells can be
considered a potential predictor for selecting patients at high risk of
developing DNM.

