Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM) in breast cancer
patients represents a stem cell niche; likely mediated by the Wnt pathway


Cell surface biomarkers CD44, CD24, CD133 and intracellular biomarker
ALDH1 have been used to identify breast cancer stem cells (BCSC). BCSC
are clinically significant because they are resistant to chemotherapy and
in very small numbers can initiate tumor growth and metastasis. Recent
studies suggest that juxtacrine signaling from monocytes and macrophages
support the BCSC niche. Macrophages represent one of the components of
the micro-anatomical sites of hematogenous dissemination of breast cancer
cells called Tumor MicroEnvironment of Metastasis (TMEM) which are
predictors of metastatic outcome in patients. We hypothesize that TMEM
rich tumor microenvironments support BCSCs which are a prerequisite for
systemic metastatic outgrowths.We used flow cytometry to quantify
CD44high/CD24low cells, as well as mRNA fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) and qRT-PCR to quantify CD133 and ALDH1 expression in breast
cancer cells from 50 invasive ductal carcinomas obtained from patients
cancer excisions by fine needle aspiration (FNA) before formalin
fixation. Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue from each sample was
also analyzed for TMEM score using triple immunohistochemistry and the
stem cell marker expression was compared to TMEM scores for each
corresponding cancer excision.We observed very strong correlation between
the percentage of CD44high/CD24low cells and TMEM scores (r = 0.91), as
well as the percentage of CD133 and ALDH1 expressing cells with TMEM
scores (r = 0.88 and 0.86 respectively). FISH results were validated
using qRT-PCR and showed very strong correlation with TMEM scores (r =
0.76 and 0.73 for CD133 and ALDH1 respectively).Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway is involved in stem cell generation and pathogenesis of various
types of cancer. Aberrant activation of Wnt-signaling pathway in normal
stem cells can promote their transformation into cancer stem cells. We
hypothesize that interactions between cancer cells and macrophages, and/
or cancer cells and endothelial cells (i.e. both interactions among the
cellular components of TMEM) induce cancer stemness via Wnt/- catenin
pathway. Indeed, co-culture of mouse macrophages (BAC) with MCF-7 cells,
as well as human endothelial cells (HUVEC) with MCF-7, significantly
increased the percentage of cells expressing stem cells markers, while
salinomycin, selective inhibitor of breast cancer stem cell growth and
progression, significantly reduced BAC or HUVEC induced increase in the
percentage of cancer stem cells.Our findings indicate that TMEM-rich
microenvironments support breast cancer stem cells likely via Wnt
signaling involving juxtacrine cancer cell-macrophage and cancer
cell-endothelial cell interactions.

