Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A DNA damage response deficiency (DDRD) group in breast cancer is
associated with activation of the STING innate immune pathway and PD-L1
expression


We have previously identified a DNA damage response deficient (DDRD)
subgroup in breast cancer, associated with loss of the Fanconi
Anemia/BRCA DNA repair pathway. The 44-gene DDRD signature developed to
prospectively identify this subgroup has been validated as predictive of
response to DNA damaging chemotherapy in the treatment of breast cancer.
This subgroup is defined by immune signalling, with immune genes, such as
the chemokines CXCL10 and CCL5, and immune checkpoints IDO1 and PD-L1
(CD274) overexpressed within the signature and subgroup. Here we report
innate immune pathway activation in this subgroup, and association with
PD-L1 expression.Methods: We used isogenic cell line models to identify
and model pathways constitutively active in DDRD cancer cells. CD4+, CD8+
T-cell infiltration and PD-L1 expression was identified by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on a previously described breast TMA of 191
breast tumor samples, of which 65 were in the DDRD subgroup. DNA
microarray data from FFPE samples was used to identify other immune
checkpoints associated with this subgroup.Results: CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell
infiltration, and PD-L1 expression were significantly associated with
DDRD breast tumors on IHC analysis. In addition, expression of immune
checkpoints such as IDO1, TIM-3 and LAG-3 were associated with the DDRD
subgroup. Increased migration of peripheral blood mononuclear cells was
identified into media conditioned by DDRD cells, this was dependent on
chemokines secreted by DDRD cells. Endogenous activation of the innate
immune pathway STING/TBK1/IRF3 was identified in DDRD cancer cells, and
required for expression of chemokines CXCL10 and CCL5. This chemokine
expression was associated with cytosolic DNA detected by cGAS and
activation of the innate immune pathway STING/TBK1/IRF3. Importantly,
this pathway was cell cycle related with upregulation of chemokine
expression in S-phase of the cell cycle. Chemokine expression could be
induced by S-phase DNA damaging chemotherapy but not by taxanes.
Similarly, PD-L1 was induced by treatment with DNA damaging agents in
cancer cells dependent on STING.Conclusions: We have identified
constitutive activation of the innate immune STING pathway in a DNA
damage response deficient subgroup of breast cancer, which is associated
with CD4+, CD8+ infiltration and PD-L1 expression. We propose activation
of the STING pathway as an important signal for lymphocytic infiltration,
independent of tumor-associated neoantigens. The DDRD signature could
identify patients with innate immune activation in response to endogenous
DNA damage, which may allow stratification for immune checkpoint targeted
treatments. Moreover, S-phase DNA damaging agents activate PD-L1
expression, and a combination approach of immune checkpoint inhibitors
and S-phase specific chemotherapy may be synergistic in the clinic.

