Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GM-CSF and MMP9 are key regulators of the effect of adipose
progenitor cells over breast cancer onset and metastatic progression in
obesity


We recently described a human cell population with progenitor-like
phenotype (CD45-CD34+), resident in the white adipose tissue (WAT) and
able to promote local and metastatic breast cancer (BC) progression and
angiogenesis (Orecchioni et al., 2013). The molecular mechanism involved
in this interaction has been so far elusive. An extensive screening of
candidate molecules related to angiogenesis, inflammation, motility and
invasiveness revealed that two proteins are significantly up-regulated in
WAT-derived progenitors following culture with BC cells:
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and Matrix
metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9). In vivo, both proteins were overexpressed in
orthotopic models of human BC co-injected with human WAT progenitors. The
inhibition of GM-CSF by a monoclonal antibody in diet-induced, obese BC
mice led to a reduced intratumor vascularization and a strong impairment
of WAT immunosuppressive microenvironment, targeting mainly myeloid cells
such as macrophages and myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in
peritumoral WAT. Circulating levels of monocytes and of
CD4+CD25brightCD127low/neg T-regulatory cells (T-regs) were also reduced
in treated mice. Similarly, soluble immunosuppressive factors, such as
IL-10 and IL-5, and CD274 (PD-L1) were reduced in tumors and WAT
collected from immune competent mice neutralized for GM-CSF, confirming
the crucial role of the factor in promoting tumor immune escape. This
resulted in a significantly reduced local BC growth and lower metastatic
progression in vivo. All these findings challenge the clinical use of
GM-CSF. In the same syngeneic model, MMP9 inhibition reduced neoplastic
angiogenesis and significantly decreased local and metastatic tumor
growth, without altering immune cells composition in tumor
microenvironment. The combined inhibition of GM-CSF and MMP9 was synergic
in impairing angiogenesis, local and metastatic BC growth in diet-induced
obese orthotopic BC models, indicating a potential complementary role in
tumor spread. As we recently reported that Metformin targets both BC
cells and the neoplastic WAT environment (Orecchioni et al., 2015), we
investigated Metformin effect over GM-CSF and MMP9 expression. Metformin
inhibited GM-CSF and MMP9 up-release from WAT progenitors in vitro.
Circulating GM-CSF was significantly impaired in BC xenografts
administered with Metformin and MMP9 expression was also affected by the
treatment. Collectively these results indicate GM-CSF and MMP9 as key
candidates involved in the pro-tumorigenic effect of WAT progenitors on
BC in a setting of obesity. The comparison between Metformin and
GM-CSF/MMP9 specific inhibition is currently under investigation.

