Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER-2 isoform interaction in mammary carcinoma onset and
progression


Human breast cancer cells express full-length HER-2 along with proteins
resulting from mutation, alternative splicing, alternative initiation of
translation and post-translational modification. The Delta16 splice
variant, lacking exon 16, has the properties of an activated oncogene,
but it could also play beneficial roles in the response to targeted
therapeutic agents. To study mammary carcinogenesis in a mouse model that
mimics human coexpression of full-length HER-2 and Delta16 isoforms, we
produced hybrid mice bearing heterozygous copies of both human transgenes
(F1 mice), and we compared them to parental mice (Delta16 and HER-2
transgenic mice, respectively). Tumor onset in F1 and Delta16 mice was
much faster than in HER-2 mice (30 vs >80 weeks), but the growth of
established tumors and metastatic spread were not enhanced. Each mammary
carcinoma of F1 mice expressed both isoforms at variable ratios. Most
(80%) expressed high levels of Delta16 and low levels of full length
HER-2, a few (5%) expressed full-length HER-2 and little, if any, Delta
16, and the remainder (15%) coexpressed at high level both isoforms. The
study of tumor vascularization showed that full-length HER-2 tumors
mainly contained few large vessels or vascular lacunae, whereas Delta16
tumors were perfused by numerous endothelium-lined small vessels. F1
tumors with high full-length HER-2 expression made few large vessels,
whereas tumors with low full-length HER-2 and high Delta16 contained
numerous small vessels and expressed high levels of both VEGF and VEGFR2.
Administration of trastuzumab to young F1 mice effectively prevented
mammary carcinoma onset in 85% of mice at 1 year of age. The preventive
effect of trastuzumab was stronger in F1 mice than in both parental
strain. To analyze the intrinsic sensitivity of F1 mammary carcinoma
cells to targeted drugs in 3D, we established cell lines expressing
different HER-2 isoform ratios. High Delta16 expression caused high
sensitivity to HER-2 inhibitors (trastuzumab, neratinib, lapatinib),
whereas high full-length HER-2 was associated with a lower sensitivity.
Interestingly, high levels of both isoforms was associated with
resistance to trastuzumab, but sensitivity to small molecule inhibitors.
In conclusion, the coexpression of full-length HER-2 and Delta16 controls
several determinants of mammary carcinoma development, progression and
sensitivity to targeted agents, as revealed by the study of F1 mice.

