Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis and comparison of somatic copy number alterations in
gastric cardia adenocarcinoma and gastric non-cardia adenocarcinoma


Gastric adenocarcinoma is one of the most common cancer type worldwide.
Anatomically it may raise from the cardia or non-cardia part of the
stomach and previous studies have shown differential susceptibilities
loci and prognosis between gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA) and
gastric non-cardia adenocarcinoma (GNCA). To better understand the
genomic alterations that drive gastric adenocarcinoma and to investigate
the differences of genetic aberration between GCA and GNCA, we analyzed
somatic copy-number aberrations in 205 gastric adenocarcinomas resected
samples, including 114 GCAs and 91 GNCAs using Illumina Human
OmniZhongHua BeadChips. We identified 49 significantly recurrent focal
alterations in gastric adenocarcinoma. In addition to those previously
reported in stomach cancer, several novel focal changes were also
observed, including gain of 11p11.2, 6q23.3, 12p11.1, 5p15.33 and loss of
8p11.22, 9p22.2, 18q22.1, 15q21.2, 17q23.3. A few known or potential
oncogenes such as TERT, MYB, and IRS2, were included in the focal
amplified regions that were not reported in gastric cancer before. Also,
a few potential tumor suppressors were seen in these focal loss regions,
including DOK6, BRIP1 and NDST4. Especially, HDC, a gene involved in
gastric acid secretory, was harbored in the newly identified focal loss
region, 15q21.2. Three focal changes, loss of 20p12.1 (containing
MACROD2), 6q26 (containing PARK2), and gain of 11p11.2 (containing CRY2),
were identified to correlate to the post-surgery overall survival, which
may deserve to be further investigated as the potential prognosis
markers. Comparison of somatic copy number alternation patterns revealed
that in chromosome arm level, 16p and 5q had distinct copy number status
between GCA and GNCA samples. The frequencies of three novel focal
changes were significantly different between GCA and GNCA. Furthermore,
KRAS amplification, a well characterized gastric adenocarcinoma prognosis
marker was associated with worse clinical outcome in GNCA, but not in
GCA.Taken together, these results provided novel candidate oncogenes or
tumor suppressors for gastric adenocarcinoma and different features in
structural alterations between GCA and GNCA, which potentially inform
novel opportunities for targeted therapeutic interventions.

