Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual defects of MDM2/MDMX-p53 pathways cause global metabolic
disruption and enhance tumorigenesis


Although recent discoveries have linked the tumor suppressing functions
of p53 to its regulation on cellular metabolism, the exact signaling
pathways underlying how p53 is activated in response to various
metabolism stresses, and how p53 coordinates the systemic metabolism
homeostasis and further blocks tumorigenesis remain largely unclear.
Previous studies have shown that the mice containing a single knock-in at
cysteine residue 305 of MDM2 (MDM2C305F) is defective in ribosomal stress
(RS) induced p53 activation and display severe nutrient shortage-induced
hepatosteatosis. And very recently we found that in response to metabolic
stress (MeS), AMPK directly phosphorylates serine 342 of MDMX, leading to
p53 activation, which is defective in MDMX3SA mice harboring a mutant
MDMX with S341A, S367A and S402A mutations. In the current study, we want
to determine if the dual defects in the MDM2/MDMX-p53 pathways might
thoroughly impair p53's ability to regulate metabolic homeostasis and
thus favor metabolism-related tumorigenesis, by generating a double
knock-in (DKI) MDMX3SA/MDM2C305F mouse line. Our results indicate that
DKI mice on normal chow diet exhibit mild, but significant, metabolism
abnormalities, including increased body weight, higher fasting-glucose
level and impaired glucose tolerance, which is exacerbated by
high-fat-diet feeding. Consistently, MEFs isolated from DKI mice possess
higher capacity of differentiation into adipocytes, and less beige fat is
induced in the subcutaneous white adipose tissue of DKI mice after
chronic cold exposure. Furthermore, we observe that the survival rate of
DKI mice is significantly lower compared to either control or single
knock-in groups, which may be due to the higher morbidity of cancers in
DKI mice, including hepatoma, lymphoma and lung carcinoma. Because of
these observations, we further specifically investigate if dual defects
of these p53 activation pathways will accelerate hepatocellular
carcinogenesis or not. We indeed find that treatment of carcinogen DEN
causes more and bigger tumor nodules in the liver of DKI mice. These
results suggest that both RS-MDM2-p53 and MeS-MDMX-p53 pathways play
important roles in regulation of global metabolism, and dual defects of
these pathways benefit metabolism-related tumor formation and growth.
Further study is required to establish the direct effect of the p53
pathway defects-mediated metabolic disruption on tumorigenesis, and
determine the underlying mechanisms.

