Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-coding RNA regulation of eribulin response in neuroblastoma


Introduction: Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common cancer in infants and
the most common extracranial solid tumor in children, accounting for 15%
of all childhood cancer deaths. The overall prognosis for those with
high-risk or relapsed disease remains poor despite the standard therapies
of surgery, radiation, and high dose chemotherapy. We have previously
shown that altering levels of specific microRNAs (miRNAs) can improve
cellular response to microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs) and that
exposure to MTAs results in dramatic changes in microRNA
expression.Methods: Libraries of chemically synthesized ncRNA mimics and
inhibitors, including both miRNAs and lncRNAs, are screened to identify
ncRNAs that regulate neuroblastoma cell viability or sensitize
neuroblastoma cells to specific microtubule-targeting agents. Candidate
targets are validated using qRT-PCR, protein quantification, and
luciferase reporter assays. The response of neuroblastoma cells to
perturbations in candidate ncRNA levels is assessed through flow
cytometric analysis of cell cycle phase distribution, density and
anisotropy of microtubule bundles, and through colony formation and
caspase activation assays, and validated in mouse xenograft models.
Networks of miRNAs, mRNAs and lncRNAs are derived from combining
complementary cellular response with potential regulatory
interactions.Results: We previously reported the identification of miRNAs
and lncRNAs that significantly decrease or increase neuroblastoma cell
viability. Here, we extend those observations to drug response. We first
demonstrate that the microtubule-targeting agent eribulin has both
short-term and long-term effects, as reflected by a significant
alteration in microtubule structure in response to high doses for short
times and arrest at the G(2)/M phase of the cell cycle in response to low
doses for long times. We next show that altering intracellular levels of
ncRNAs that sensitize cells to eribulin both alters microtubule density
and anisotropy and recapitulates the effect of eribulin treatment.
Finally, we show that complementarity of effect between miRNAs and
lncRNAs is accompanied by potential regulatory interaction.Conclusions:
Taken together, our results suggest that the response of neuroblastoma
cells to eribulin is mediated by a regulatory network that includes
different coding and non-coding RNA species. While these RNAs may have
intrinsic value as biomarkers or therapeutic agents, either individually
or in combination, the vulnerabilities that they uncover may be exploited
with pathway-specific perturbations.This project was supported by NIH R01
CA129632 and CPRIT Training Grant RP140105.

