Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation load measured using a 315 gene panel predicts genome-wide
mutation load


High tumor mutation load has been associated with better response to
immunotherapy. Measuring mutation load via whole-genome DNA sequencing
can be cost prohibitive and requires extensive analysis and data
management. Targeted genomic, on the other hand, are an appealing
alternative. However it is unclear how mutation load assessed using a
sample of hundreds of genes relates to genome-wide mutation burden. Here
we use mutation data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to investigate
if the exonic mutation load in a small set of genes can be used to
predict the genome-wide exonic mutation load.Using a gene panel composed
of 315 genes, we observed a strong (R = 0.72) positive correlation
between the total mutation burden and the gene panel mutation burden. To
determine whether these genes allow high and low mutation burden samples
to be accurately identified, we derived various classifiers on a training
set of TCGA samples and evaluated their performance on held-out test
data. High mutation load was defined as greater than 181 non-synonymous
mutations. This threshold best distinguished microsatellite instable
(MSI) high training set samples from MSI low and microsatellite stable
(MSS) samples (95% true positive rate and 15% false positive
rate).Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis revealed
that the 315-gene panel had excellent power to discriminate high and low
mutation samples, with the area under the ROC curve evaluated on held-out
test data ranging from 0.85 to 0.97 across indications. Our analysis
suggests that the optimal threshold for identifying high mutation load
samples may vary by indication.Our models were trained and tested using
data generated by the TCGA consortium on pre-treatment patient biopsies.
Direct application of our classifiers to clinical data would assume
similar mutation calling sensitivity between platforms and similar
underlying patient populations. To test these assumptions, we compared
the mutational loads between TCGA and clinical samples within the same
indication. We further performed a sensitivity analysis using a
simulation-based approach which showed how deviations from these
underlying assumptions would be expected to affect classification
performance.These results demonstrate the feasibility of using mutation
burden in a cancer related gene panel as a biomarker for genome-wide
mutation load. This approach may be useful in identifying patients more
likely to respond to cancer immunotherapies, but may require development
be tailored to the specific sequencing platform and patient-population of
interest.

