Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Ref-1/APE1 pathway inhibition in pancreatic cancer using
APX3330 for clinical trials


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the 4th leading cause of
cancer-related mortality in the US. Most patients present with advanced
disease and 95% die within five years, with most surviving less than six
months. Targeted therapies including Gemcitabine (GemzarTM), FOLFIRINOX
(5-FU/leucovorin/irinotecan/oxaliplatin), and sustained release,
nab-paclitaxel (AbraxaneTM) offer modest improvement in survival, albeit
at an increase in side effects and unwanted toxicities. Data is presented
on redox factor-1 (Ref-1) and specific Ref-1 inhibitor APX3330.Ref-1
regulates multiple transcription factors involved in pancreatic cancer
survival signaling due to its redox-coactivator activity on HIF-1, NFkB,
NRF2 and STAT3. High expression levels of Ref-1 indicate decreased
survival in PDAC as well as other cancers. APX3330 has been shown in
multiple in vitro and in vivo pancreatic cancer models to be effective in
reducing tumor growth and metastases as a single agent. The mechanism of
action has been extensively investigated and characterized for its
specific activity on Ref-1, as well as its preclinical PK/PD and ADME.
The safety and dose administration of APX3330 have been established by
Eisai pharmaceutical company through a previous development program
including toxicology, phase I, and phase II clinical evaluation in
non-cancer patients in Japan. We have partnered with ApeX Therapeutics to
develop APX3330 for cancer treatment (phase I trial anticipated start
date early 2016).While developing APX3330 for single agent use, we
studied interactions of Ref-1, APX3330, convergent pathways; i.e. HIF-1
and STAT3, and downstream targets like CAIX. Initially, we performed in
vivo studies demonstrating single and combination effects of APX3330 with
Gemcitabine (Gem) showing significantly decreased tumor volume in the
APX3330 and Gem combination treatments compared to the single-agents
alone. We also tested single and combination studies of APX3330 in an ex
vivo 3-D tumor-stroma model system using patient derived tumor cells
along with patient derived cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). We used
the CAIX inhibitor SLC-0111 and JAK2 inhibitor, Ruxolitinib; both agents
in clinical trials. In our ex vivo 3D co-culture system, APX3330
decreases the tumor area and intensity in a dose-dependent manner. The
combination of APX3330 with Gem demonstrated an additive enhancement
effect in the tumor. Blocking both Ref-1 redox-signaling activity with
APX3330 and CAIX activity via SLC-0111 demonstrated enhanced tumor
killing in our models. APX3330 along with Ruxolitinib also demonstrated
enhanced tumor killing.These data demonstrate APX3330 single agent
efficacy in our 3D patient PDAC model and enhanced tumor killing when
pathways regulated by Ref-1, HIF-1 and STAT3 are blocked. Additional drug
combinations focused on pathways that are dependent on Ref-1 signaling
will also be presented.

