Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-1: Beyond a marker for basal-like breast cancers


Introduction: Caveolin-1 (Cav1) is associated with basal-like
triple-negative (ER-/PR-/Her2-) breast cancers (TNBC). Its biological
contribution to this subtype has not been fully explored and controversy
persists regarding the molecular role of Cav1 in carcinogenesis.
Experimental Procedures: Thirty-four TNBC (17 Cav1+/17 Cav1-) patients
molecularly-profiled with a commercial assay (Caris Life Sciences, AZ)
were evaluated retrospectively. Cav1 status was determined by
immunohistochemistry (caveolin-1 polyclonal; 2+ 50%). The majority of
specimens (28/34) used for profiling were from primary breast sites and
contained 50% neoplastic cells. The transcriptomes were profiled using
Illumina's HumanHT-12 microarray (v4). Data were normalized using mean
normalization procedure. Differential expression analysis was performed
using R's Limma package. Pathway analysis was carried out using R's
signaling pathway impact analysis (SPIA) package with 69 cancer,
immunity, and cell signaling related KEGG pathways. Results: Using a
cutoff of two-fold and adjusted p-value of 0.05, we identified 954 genes
differentially expressed between Cav1+/- TNBC patients. Included in these
were 31 genes which were found to be up-regulated by over five- fold and
3 genes down-regulated by over five fold in Cav1+ TNBC. Genes of notable
interest for their role in cell signaling, cell adhesion, tumor invasion
and metastasis, included an up-regulation of TGFBR2, SPARC, integrins
(ITGA11, ITGB5, ITGBL1), cell adhesion proteins (LAMB3, COL5A3) and
molecules which facilitate tumor invasion (LAMB3, MMP1, MMP2, MMP9). In
addition, genes found to be down-regulated in Cav1+ patients and notable
for their roles in promoting epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT)
included Claudin 3(CLD3) and CA125/MUC16 (Mucin 16). We also detected an
approximately two-fold down-regulation of CDKN2A in Cav1+ patients. Using
SPIA pathway analysis, 12 pathways were found to be differentially
activated in Cav1+ vs. Cav1- TNBC. The most differentially activated
pathways were the focal adhesion pathway (p = 4.51E-18), PI3k-Akt
signaling pathway (p = 2.01E-6) and TGF- and MAPK signaling pathways (p =
0.005, 0.014, respectively). Conclusions: Differential gene expression
patterns and pathway analyses provide evidence for distinct profiles for
gene expression between Cav1+/- TNBC. Cav1+ TNBC patients exhibit
up-regulation of genes important for cell signaling, extracellular matrix
remodeling and tumor invasion, and down-regulation of genes that may
facilitate EMT and loss of cell cycle control. The focal adhesion
pathway, as well as TGF-, PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways, were
identified as differentially activated among Cav1+/- TNBC. Taken
together, these data support the role of Cav1+ in identifying a subtype
of TNBC that may have a greater risk for invasion and metastasis. The
correlation of this subtype with prognosis and drug response should be
investigated in future studies.

