Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High mast cell density is associated with improved prognosis in
colon cancer patients


Background. Inflammatory cells and inflammatory mediators play an
important role in colon cancer. However, the role of mast cells (MCs) in
colon cancer progression remains unclear. Pro-inflammatory cysteinyl
leukotrienes (CysLTs) have been associated with colorectal cancer (CRC)
development. In particular, previous studies have shown that CRC patients
with increased expression of cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CysLTR1)
have poorer prognoses, and Cysltr1/ mice display fewer intestinal polyps.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the clinical and
prognostic significance of mast cell density (MCD) in patients with CRC
and to determine the significance of CysLTR1 on MCD in a mouse model of
colitis-associated colon cancer (CAC).Materials and methods. A tissue
microarray (TMA) of primary colon cancers from 72 patients was stained
with MC anti-tryptase and anti-chymase antibodies. Mouse colon tissue was
stained with MC anti-tryptase antibody. Immunohistochemistry was used to
identify MCD in cancerous and normal areas of patient tissues and in
polyp/tumour, adjacent and normal areas of mouse tissues.Results. In
patient samples, the mean MCD was significantly higher in normal tissue
than in cancer tissue (p = 0.0009). Patients with a high MCD in cancer
tissue showed better overall survival compared with those with a low MCD
(hazard ratio (HR) 0.575; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.293 - 1.130).
The same result was observed in patients aged 55-75 years (HR 0.332; 95%
CI 0.121 - 0.911) and among patients without distant metastasis at
diagnosis (HR 0.311; 95% CI 0.118 - 0.821). In the CAC mouse model,
Cysltr1/ mice had fewer intestinal polyps and significantly higher MCD in
polyp/tumour areas compared with controls.Conclusion. A high MCD in
cancer tissue correlates with longer patient survival. In Cysltr1/ CAC
mice, a high polyp/tumour MCD also appears beneficial. Thus, these
results indicate that a high MCD is a good prognostic factor.

