Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD269 - A promising target for amanitin based ADCs


Antitumor activity of monoclonal antibodies can be dramatically enhanced
by conjugation to toxic small molecules. Beside the recent approval of
Kadcyla (T-DM1) and Adcetris (SGN-35) more than 30 antibody-drug
conjugates (ADC) have entered clinical trials, promising to strengthen
the therapeutic capabilities for cancer treatment in the next decade.
Surprisingly most ADCs are based on one of few toxic compounds only and
on an even smaller number of toxicity mechanisms: Most antibodies are
coupled to the microtubuli-targeting auristatins and maytansines. Toxins
that operate through such a mechanism could suffer from limited activity
in different cancer indications and in cells expressing resistance
mechanisms. Accordingly the use of new drugs that function via
alternative toxicity mechanisms could enhance the therapeutic potential
of ADCs. Heidelberg Pharma focuses on Amanitin, the most well-known toxin
of the amatoxin family. Amanitin binds to the eukaryotic RNA pol II and
thereby inhibits the cellular transcription at very low concentrations.In
the current study, in vitro and in vivo Data of Amanitin-ADCs targeting
CD269 (B cell maturation antigen) are presented. CD269 is expressed on
cells of the B cell lineage, predominantly on plasma blasts and plasma
cells. It is not expressed on nave B cells, germinal center B cells and
memory B-cells (Darce et al. (2007) J Immunol 179:7276-7286). CD269 is
highly expressed on malignant plasma cells like multiple myeloma, a B
cell non Hodgkin lymphoma of the bone marrow (Novak et al. (2004) Blood
103:689-94). Since multiple myeloma is a usually incurable malignancy of
plasma cells, new therapies are urgently needed. Using ADCs in the cure
of multiple myeloma could be a promising approach, especially by using a
toxin whose mode of action was not applied before, like amanitin based
ADCs.In vitro data of anti-CD269-amanitin ADC showed cytotoxicity on
CD269 positive cell lines in picomolar range, while up to micromolar
concentrations, no cytotoxic activity on CD269 negative cells was
observed. In mouse xenograft models, anti-CD269-amanitin showed clear
anti-tumorigenic potential. A comprehensive data package will be
presented.

