Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline mutations in renal cancer predisposing genes: Analysis of
the Geisinger MyCode population


Renal cell cancer (RCC) is not a single disease but is made up of a
number of cancers, each with a unique histology, biology, clinical course
and response to therapy. Alterations in at least 16 hereditary genes have
been attributed to the risk of developing RCC. In this study, we describe
the prevalence and spectrum of germline variants among these genes and
highlight correlations between germline genotype with tumor phenotype.
Using the Geisinger MyCode cohort, we sequenced the whole exomes of
42,933 subjects. Subjects were divided into those with a renal cancer
diagnosis, other cancer diagnosis and no cancer diagnosis. We analyzed
the DNA sequences of 16 hereditary renal cancer genes from each of these
groups. The damaging mutations was determined by following ACMG
guidelines. Among the 42,933 subjects in the Geisinger MyCode cohort, 168
were diagnosed with RCC. None of these subjects had a family history of
RCC. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) was the most predominant histology (77%),
followed by Type 1 papillary RCC (7%), chromophobe RCC (6%), and Type 2
papillary RCC (5%). Mutations in all the predisposing genes were
identified in all the renal cancer subtypes but only a subset were deemed
damaging. The top 2 ccRCC predisposing genes with damaging or likely
damaging mutations were TSC2 (8%) and SDHD (4%). While TSC2 damaging
variants were also found in the other histologies, novel TSC2 variants
were differentially associated with high grade and metastatic disease in
ccRCC as compared to those with low grade or non-metastatic disease. The
genes harboring damaging or likely damaging variants in Type 1 and Type 2
papillary RCC were MET and FH respectively. Predisposing RCC germline
mutations were found in a significant number of subjects with sporadic
RCC. Family history was unhelpful in predicting the affected subjects.
Knowledge of these mutations would be beneficial in counseling patients
and their families as well as improving our understanding of the disease
to direct patient care.

