Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantifying immune oncology markers across multiple tissue
sections with digital image analysis


Immuno-oncology (IO) approaches requires an understanding of the types of
immune cells present in the tumor microenvironment (TME) as well as the
precise localization of these immune cells. However, the acquisition of
spatial IO information is technically challenging, due to the requirement
for multiplex labeling of immune cells and the need to categorize their
location and biomarker content simultaneously. Additionally, the
multiplex biomarker panel must be engineered in advance based on a priori
assumptions about the correct marker combinations and their location
(such as the tumor epithelial nests, TME, or specifically the
tumor-stroma interface). This limits the ability to implement novel,
scientifically driven assessments into an existing clinical trial which
already has defined immunohistochemistry endpoints. To meet the needs of
IO clinical trials, Flagship Biosciences has developed a proprietary
image analysis platform, FACTS (Feature Analysis on Complementary Tissue
Sections), to deduce both the necessary multiplex staining information
and the spatial context of IO markers based on the utilization of
existing monochrome or multiplex stained slides from a clinical trial. In
this study, we demonstrate the utility of this approach to deliver
biologically relevant endpoints important for IO clinical trials. First,
we performed single IO biomarker staining for CD4, CD8 and FoxP3 in
colorectal cancer patient samples and developed a novel image analysis
approach that allowed for the accurate quantification of multiple IO
markers within specific margins of the tumor microenvironment across
multiple tissue sections. For each biomarker the positive cell
populations were binned based on distance from the tumor-TME boundary
(i.e.% positive cells within 100M, 200M or 500M of the tumor-TME
boundary). Next, we used computational alignment for evaluating the
co-localization of multiple immune cell biomarkers from serial sections
with single stains for CD4, CD8 or FoxP3. We demonstrate that the
information extracted from multiple single stained serial sections can be
used to generate co-localization information for multiple IO markers in a
given patient sample. Lastly, we developed multiplex chromogenic assays
for these same markers, analyzed the multiplex-stained slides with image
analysis, and derived the same analysis endpoints for the multiplex
slides to the digitally aligned individually labeled sections. The study
found that similar interpretation of the inflammatory landscape was
possible with multiplex-stained slides and digital alignment of
monoplex-stained slides. In summary, this study demonstrated a novel
image analysis approach that allows for quantification of IO markers
utilizing clinically relevant wet assay technologies and existing IHC
stained slides derived from an immune-oncology clinical trial.

