Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rebalancing of Bcl-2 family proteins mediate the vulnerability of
pevonedistat-treated acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells towards MEK/ERK
pathway inhibition


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the leading cause of cancer-related
death in children and the relapse rate in adult ALL patients is about
50%, highlighting the need for new therapeutic strategies. Data from our
laboratory and others showed that ALL cells are sensitive to drugs that
induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress/unfolded protein response (UPR).
In search for novel strategies to target the ER stress/UPR in ALL, we
tested the efficacy of the NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) inhibitor
pevonedistat (MLN4924, pevo) in ALL. We found ALL cells exhibited
significant in vitro and in vivo sensitivity to pevo-induced ER
stress/UPR. Specifically, proteotoxic/ER stress was observed in
pevo-treated ALL cells secondary to their inability to halt protein
translation following pevo-induced activation of the mTOR pathway and
concomitant de-phosphorylation of p-eIF2 (S51). In addition, aberrant
activation of MEK/ERK has been correlated with resistance/relapse in
pediatric ALL (Blood 2014; 124: 3420-3430). In our Bp- and T-ALL cell
line models, we found consistent induction of p-ERK1/2 (T202/Y204)
following pevo treatment, suggesting phosphorylation of ERK1/2 as a
compensatory survival mechanism in response to pevo's cytotoxicity.
Supporting this hypothesis, we observed significant in vitro synergy
between the MEK inhibitor selumetinib (SEL) and pevo (CI = 0.017). On
this basis, we tested the in vivo efficacy of pevo + SEL in NSG mice
injected with NALM6 cells expressing the luciferase gene (NALM6/LUC).
Engrafted NSG mice were treated with pevo (s.c., 66 mg/kg) and SEL (p.o.,
50 mg/kg) twice daily on weekdays and once per day on weekends.
Bioluminescence analysis of animals 21 days post ALL injection revealed
significant reduction of tumor burden in mice treated with pevo alone or
pevo + SEL (pAcute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the leading cause of
cancer-related death in children and the relapse rate in adult ALL
patients is about 50%, highlighting the need for new therapeutic
strategies. Data from our laboratory and others showed that ALL cells are
sensitive to drugs that induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress/unfolded
protein response (UPR). In search for novel strategies to target the ER
stress/UPR in ALL, we tested the efficacy of the NEDD8-activating enzyme
(NAE) inhibitor pevonedistat (MLN4924, pevo) in ALL. We found ALL cells
exhibited significant in vitro and in vivo sensitivity to pevo-induced ER
stress/UPR. Specifically, proteotoxic/ER stress was observed in
pevo-treated ALL cells secondary to their inability to halt protein
translation following pevo-induced activation of the mTOR pathway and
concomitant de-phosphorylation of p-eIF2 (S51). In addition, aberrant
activation of MEK/ERK has been correlated with resistance/relapse in
pediatric ALL (Blood 2014; 124: 3420-3430). In our Bp- and T-ALL cell
line models, we found consistent induction of p-ERK1/2 (T202/Y204)
following pevo treatment, suggesting phosphorylation of ERK1/2 as a
compensatory survival mechanism in response to pevo's cytotoxicity.
Supporting this hypothesis, we observed significant in vitro synergy
between the MEK inhibitor selumetinib (SEL) and pevo (CI = 0.017). On
this basis, we tested the in vivo efficacy of pevo + SEL in NSG mice
injected with NALM6 cells expressing the luciferase gene (NALM6/LUC).
Engrafted NSG mice were treated with pevo (s.c., 66 mg/kg) and SEL (p.o.,
50 mg/kg) twice daily on weekdays and once per day on weekends.
Bioluminescence analysis of animals 21 days post ALL injection revealed
significant reduction of tumor burden in mice treated with pevo alone or
pevo + SEL (p<0.05 for both vs. control). Kaplan-Meier curves showed a
significant survival advantage for mice treated with pevo + SEL compared
with the control group (pAcute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the
leading cause of cancer-related death in children and the relapse rate in
adult ALL patients is about 50%, highlighting the need for new
therapeutic strategies. Data from our laboratory and others showed that
ALL cells are sensitive to drugs that induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress/unfolded protein response (UPR). In search for novel strategies to
target the ER stress/UPR in ALL, we tested the efficacy of the
NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) inhibitor pevonedistat (MLN4924, pevo) in
ALL. We found ALL cells exhibited significant in vitro and in vivo
sensitivity to pevo-induced ER stress/UPR. Specifically, proteotoxic/ER
stress was observed in pevo-treated ALL cells secondary to their
inability to halt protein translation following pevo-induced activation
of the mTOR pathway and concomitant de-phosphorylation of p-eIF2 (S51).
In addition, aberrant activation of MEK/ERK has been correlated with
resistance/relapse in pediatric ALL (Blood 2014; 124: 3420-3430). In our
Bp- and T-ALL cell line models, we found consistent induction of p-ERK1/2
(T202/Y204) following pevo treatment, suggesting phosphorylation of
ERK1/2 as a compensatory survival mechanism in response to pevo's
cytotoxicity. Supporting this hypothesis, we observed significant in
vitro synergy between the MEK inhibitor selumetinib (SEL) and pevo (CI =
0.017). On this basis, we tested the in vivo efficacy of pevo + SEL in
NSG mice injected with NALM6 cells expressing the luciferase gene
(NALM6/LUC). Engrafted NSG mice were treated with pevo (s.c., 66 mg/kg)
and SEL (p.o., 50 mg/kg) twice daily on weekdays and once per day on
weekends. Bioluminescence analysis of animals 21 days post ALL injection
revealed significant reduction of tumor burden in mice treated with pevo
alone or pevo + SEL (p<0.05 for both vs. control). Kaplan-Meier curves
showed a significant survival advantage for mice treated with pevo + SEL
compared with the control group (p<0.05). Mechanistic studies showed that
pevo led to induction of NOXA and BIM whereas Mcl-1 levels were
stabilized, suggesting sequestration of the pro-survival activity of
Mcl-1 by NOXA/BIM. Indeed, co-IP analysis demonstrated that binding
between NOXA and/or BIM with Mcl-1 was enhanced in pevo-treated ALL
cells. Further, significant downregulation of Mcl-1 was observed in ALL
cells co-treated with pevo + SEL. We found that the synergy of this
combination was prevented by co-treatment with the pan-caspase inhibitor
Z-VAD, but observed persistence of Mcl-1downregulation whereas BIM
expression remained unchanged. We conclude that MEK/ERK pathway
inhibition rebalances the Bcl-2 family proteins in favor of synergistic
apoptotic death in ALL cells treated in vitro and in vivo with the NAE
inhibitor pevonedistat. Our data supports further investigations of
agents targeting NAE and the MEK/ERK pathway in relapsed/refractory ALL.

