Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eugenol potentiates the effect of cisplatin on cancer stem-like
cells through targeting the NF-B pathway


Triple-negative subtype of breast cancer (TNBC) contains exclusively
tumorigenic and often endowed with self-renewing and resistance to
cytotoxic chemotherapy, such as, paclitaxel resulting in relative
increases in CSCs phenotype. Signaling through NF-kB may be essential for
the CSCs self-renewal and could present potential target for novel
treatment in breast cancer patients. We explored the possible involvement
of NF-kB pathway that contribute to the functions and maintenance of
breast CSCs and targeting this pathway by cisplatin combining with a
natural product eugenol both in vitro and in vivo, using estrogen
dependent (MCF-7) and independent (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and BT-20) cell
lines and xenografted both subcutaneous and orthotopic (fat pad) sites in
nude mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was utilized to
assess the NF-kB associated DNA binding capacity in promoter region.
Surprisingly, neither cisplatin nor eugenol was capable of complete
diminishing the CSCs populations. Cisplatin alone administration
partially diminished apoptosis, mammospheres formation, aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) activity, invasion and growth on nude mice. We
observed cisplatin-induced activation of NF-kB associated with survival
and regrowth of mamospheres. For effective elimination of CSCs phenotype
by cisplatin, we cotreated cells with eugenol. Combination of eugenol and
cisplatin significantly eradicated cisplatin induced NF-kB DNA binding
capability assed by EMSA and ChIP assays, which was associated with
abrogated apoptosis, mammospheres formation, ALDH1 activity and invasion.
In vivo, combination therapy reduced the tumor size in synergistic
manner. This was possibly due to induction of apoptosis, inhibition of
proliferation, angiogenesis and downregulation of cisplatin-induced
expression of proteins of NF-kB target genes. Although treatment of
mammospheres by cisplatin partially induced the CSCs population through
interleukin (IL)-6 pathway, however, only coadministration of eugenol and
cisplatin reduced the numbers of CSCs to virtually undeletable levels in
vitro and in vivo. Our data suggest that eugenol may be well suited to
increase targeting of breast CSCs by cisplatin.

