Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of discoidin domain receptor 2 mutation and
expression in squamous cell lung cancer


The treatment strategy for lung cancer has been rapidly progressed,
especially in molecular targeted therapy. However, most treatments are
established for adenocarcinoma of lung, but not squamous cell carcinoma
(SQCC). SQCC occupies approximately 30% among entire lung cancer
patients, but the prognosis is worse than that of adenocarcinoma
patients. Discoidin domain receptor (DDR) 2 mutations have been recently
reported as one of the candidates of molecular targets for lung SQCC, and
they are associated with sensitivity to dasatinib, which is already
applicable to treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia. However, precise
roles of DDR2 on SQCCs of lung have not been clarified. We performed
Sanger sequencing of DDR2 gene in a set of 44 primary lung SQCC samples
and 7 lung SQCC cell lines, and identified a novel mutation (T681I) in a
lung SQCC patient and a lung SQCC cell line, EBC-1. Endogenous protein
expression level of DDR2 measured by Western blot technique was high in a
lung SQCC cell line, PC-1. Overexpression of wild type and T681I of DDR2
promoted cancer cell invasion of a human lung SQCC cell line, H226B. In
animal model, lung metastasis was enhanced and survival was shortened
after transplantation of DDR2 wild type overexpressing cells into
NOD/SCID/Jak3null (NOJ) mice, which exhibit deficiencies in NK cell
activity, macrophage and dendritic cell function, and complement
activation, as well as T and B cell deficiencies. Using the cDNA
microarray and protein phosphorylation array assay, we found that ectopic
expression of DDR2 induced TGF-1 protein and mRNA expression accompanied
with phosphorylation of c-Jun, p38 MAP kinase, and MMP1 elevation. During
the process of metastasis, TGF- pathway plays pivotal roles especially on
disruption of basement membrane through induction of MMPs from
fibroblasts mediated through both Smad and non-Smad pathways. Since
phosphorylations of c-Jun and p38 MAPK were reported to be involved in
non-Smad pathway, DDR2 would induce TGF- mainly through non-Smad pathway,
resulting in cancer invasion and metastasis. Taken together, elevation of
DDR2 protein might contribute on tumor progression as well as some of
DDR2 mutations in lung SQCC.

