Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SVV-001 prolongs animal survival in PDOX adult GBM models


Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most malignant and aggressive brain
tumor, and survival of patients affected by GBM has remained virtually
unchanged over numerous years. GBM is only minimally responsive to
aggressive standard therapies including radical surgery and concurrent
chemo-radiation treatment with temozolomide (TMZ). Seneca Valley virus
(SVV-001) is a non-pathogenic oncolytic virus that can be systemically
administered and can pass through the blood-brain barrier. In this study,
we developed a new panel of patient derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX)
models to examine the therapeutic efficacy of SVV-001 combined with
irradiation. In addition, we explored the mechanism of tumor cell
infection with SVV-001 in malignant gliomas.Material and Methods:
Surgical GBM tumor samples were obtained from 17 patients and directly
implanted into the right cerebrum of NOD/SCID mice (1105 cells suspended
in 2 uL growth medium). Once tumor formation was confirmed, we performed
H&E staining and IHC to determine the pathologic characteristics of the
PDOX models over serial in vivo passages and compared with the matched
patient tumors. In vitro antitumor activities of SVV-001 were examined in
primary cultures, pre-formed neurospheres, and monolayer cells derived
from PDOX models. In vivo therapeutic efficacy was examined by single
I.V. injection of SVV-001 alone or administered in combination with
radiation treatment of pre-formed xenograft tumors in permissive
models.Results: 8 out from 17 samples had confirmed tumor formation in
mouse brains; 4 of these samples have since been serially
sub-transplanted for a total of 5 generations, while 4 intracerebral
xenografts are in generation 2. The tumorigenicity of 8 additional
samples is pending. These xenograft models precisely replicated
histopathologic characteristics of their parental human tumors. SVV-001
at a multiplicity of infection of 0.5 to 25 replicated in and effectively
killed primary cultures, pre-formed neurospheres, and monolayer glioma
cells derived from adult glioma xenograft models in vitro. A single I.V.
injection of SVV-001 (1 1011 viral particles/kg) administered immediately
after radiation or 1 week after radiation led to the infection of
orthotopic xenografts without harming normal mouse brain cells and
resulted in significantly prolonged survival in permissive mouse models.
Additionally, SVV-001 injected immediately after radiation significantly
improved the overall survival of animals compared to administration of
the virus 1 week after radiation, indicating that dose timing was crucial
for full efficacy of the combinatory therapy.Conclusion: Our results
demonstrated that SVV-001 possesses potent anti-tumor activity against
adult malignant high-grade gliomas. Because this study was performed in a
panel of patient tumor-derived orthotopic xenograft models, it provides a
pre-clinical rationale that supports the consideration of SVV-001 for
clinical trials against adult gliomas.

