Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Building better cell models for screening oncology compounds


The NCI60 screen is a valuable compound screening service offered to
researchers for 20+ years. The screen allows the submission of small
molecules, biologics and natural products for testing in the NCI60 cell
line panel (60 cell lines covering 9 major tumor types). Sophisticated
tools such as COMPARE allow stratification of compounds based on pattern
of cell line response and these tools elucidated several compounds with
differential specificity for a disease type (e.g. breast cancer over
melanoma).Since inception the NCI60 screen has been performed in 96-well
plates on monolayer cultures of cells. SulfoRhodamine B was used to
measure cell viability after a 48h exposure to the compounds at either a
single concentration or 5 point concentration response assay. However,
recent work has suggested that cells in 3D culture may respond
differently to compounds than in 2D. 3D culture systems produce tumor
cell spheroids that exhibit features seen in vivo including greater
cell-cell contact, and gradients of nutrients and oxygen between the
periphery and the center of the spheroid. We sought to optimize the NCI60
cells for use in a 3D spheroid model that would be suitable for screening
compounds. By varying NCI60 cell plating density and incubation times, we
optimized the formation of spheroids of a given diameter (500um) in Ultra
Low Attachment (ULA) plates. Spheroids were imaged using a high content
imaging plate reader and classified into 4 categories based on their
apparent morphologies. Comparisons were made in drug sensitivity between
2D and 3D model systems using the NCI60 and cells derived from PDX
samples. Data on the optimal cell densities of the NCI60 lines used for
spheroid formation as well as concentration response effects of select
agents compared in 2D and 3D models are presented. These data will allow
others to rapidly utilize these 3D models to determine the differential
drug sensitivity of select cell types. Funded by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E.

