Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt pathway dynamics in breast cancer progression


Background: The canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway directs
self-renewal cues for stem cells in multiple tissues. Through alternative
receptors, noncanonical Wnt/-catenin-independent pathways exist,
mediating cellular processes that include planar cell polarity,
convergent extension, actin/cytoskeletal rearrangements, and in some
contexts, antagonism of canonical Wnt signaling. How different Wnt
pathways cooperate within heterogeneous cellular landscapes in breast
cancers remains an outstanding question. Within the current study, we
investigated the role of the alternative Wnt receptor, Ror2, in mediating
Wnt/-catenin-independent functions during tumor progression.Experimental
design and methods: A TP53 null transplantable GEM model was used in the
current study, which exhibits subtype-specific molecular signatures
characteristic of human breast cancers. A lentiviral-based shRNA strategy
was developed for gene silencing of noncanonical Wnt pathway components
in vivo, with emphasis on the alternative Wnt receptor, Ror2. This
strategy was combined with pathway-specific Wnt reporters to survey the
interplay of canonical and noncanonical Wnt pathways in vivo.Results:
TP53 null mammary tumors differentially expressed the noncanonical Wnt
receptor Ror2, with the highest levels of expression evident in
basal-like tumors relative to luminal and claudin-low subtypes analyzed.
Basal-like tumors also displayed Wnt/-catenin active populations, which
were inversely correlated with Ror2 expression. Lentiviral shRNA
silencing of Ror2 within 3 independent basal-like models (T1, T2, 2225L)
resulted in elevated Wnt/-catenin activity along with various phenotypic
outcomes, including squamous differentiation. Ror2, therefore, functions
to restrain Wnt/-catenin-dependent signaling in vivo. Despite the
similarity in Wnt/-catenin-dependent signaling outcome upon Ror2
depletion, gene expression profiling of Ror2-intact (shLUC) vs.
Ror2-depleted (shRor2) tumors unveiled diverse gene expression changes
within basal-like tumor models. Intriguingly, Ror2 silencing within 2225L
basal-like tumors resulted in a change in the composition of tumor cell
subpopulations. Additionally, gene expression analysis of shLUC vs.
shRor2 tumors revealed that genes upregulated in shRor2 tumors were
associated with claudin-low features, while genes downregulated were
associated with basal-like features, reflecting changes in the cellular
landscape upon Ror2 loss. Gene ontology analysis also revealed
alterations in actin/cytoskeletal- and cell adhesion-associated genes
upon Ror2 depletion.Conclusion: The current study highlights the
differential effects of Ror2 loss within TP53 null basal-like models. In
particular, Ror2 can regulate the plasticity between basal-like and
claudin-low states, impacting cytoskeletal and cell adhesion dynamics.
Current efforts are focused on how these changes impact tumor progression
and metastasis.

