Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput image cytometry-based screening method for the
cytotoxic effect of drug compounds on 3D tumor spheroid


Cancer is a disease caused by uncontrolled proliferation or division of
abnormal cells in an organism. Traditionally, cancer cell proliferation
is measured using a two-dimensional (2D) in vitro model by culturing and
treating the cells in standard microplates to study inhibition and
cytotoxicity effect of the drug compounds. After further testing the
potential cancer drug candidates in the 2D environment, the investigation
is often transferred to an in vivo model by measuring the change in
three-dimensional (3D) tumor sizes in animals. Although the drug
candidates can demonstrate promising inhibitory or cytotoxicity results
in a 2D environment, similar effects may not be observed in a 3D
environment, which physiologically has a closer resemblance to a human
body. Therefore, cancer drug discovery research has demonstrated poor
translation from in vitro to in vivo.Previous publications have
demonstrated that growing cancer cells in the form of 3D tumor spheroids
can be more predictive of the in vivo study outcomes comparing to the 2D
cell culture method. Therefore, by investigating the effect of cancer
drugs on 3D tumor spheroids, may improve the successful translation rate
to in vivo animal study. In this work, we developed an image-based
high-throughput screening method for 3D tumor spheroids on 384-well
ultra-low attachment (ULA) round bottom microplates using the Celigo
image cytometer. In order to validate this screening method, five
experiments were conducted demonstrating comparable results in both 3D
and 2D models. First, optimal cell seeding density for tumor spheroid
formation is determined by investigating U87MG (glioblastoma) cell
seeding number in respect to the desired spheroid size. Second, the dose
response effect of 17-AAG in respect to spheroid size is measured to
determine the IC50 value. Third, the effect of 17-AAG on the viability of
tumor spheroid is investigated in a time-course study. Next, the
developed high-throughput method is used to perform dose response
measurement of 4 drugs (17-AAG, Paclitaxel, TMZ, and Doxorubicin) in
respect to the spheroid size. Finally, the effect of the 4 drugs on tumor
spheroid viability is measured. Each experiment is performed
simultaneously in the 2D model, where 384-well flat bottom microplates
are used. In the 2D adherent cell model, confluence percentage and direct
cell count-based viability results are generated to compare to the 3D
model. This proposed method allows an efficient process for more
qualified drug candidates, which can reduce time and the financial burden
of animal testing, as well as the overall time of the cancer drug
discovery project.

