Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel anti-PD-L1/IL-15 bifunctional immunotherapeutics potentiates
antitumor immunity


Target-based immunocytokine approaches have been reported to be
efficacious in the control of tumor growth in preclinical and clinical
studies. By targeting cytokines-activated immune effectors to local tumor
sites, an antibody-based immunocytokine is able to achieve antitumor
immunity in the tumor microenvironment while reducing cytokines-mediated
systemic side effects. Recently, immune checkpoint antagonists to
PD-1/PD-L1 have shown success in certain clinical settings across
multiple cancer types. However, the full potential of the checkpoint
inhibitor is limited due to impaired overall antitumor immunity. It is
therefore desirable to develop immunotherapeutics with the capacity of
simultaneously inhibiting immunosuppressive pathways and stimulating
immune effector cells to potentiate innate and adaptive immune responses
against tumor growth. To this end, we generated a bifunctional fusion
protein, KD033, composed of an antibody specific for PD-L1 and IL-15 as a
novel immunocytokine for achieving better immunotherapeutic efficacy
against tumors. Previously, we demonstrated that KD033 has an enhanced
immunological activity and stronger antitumor efficacy in some syngeneic
mouse tumor models in comparison to single agents. In the present report,
we show that the mechanisms of actions of the bifunctional protein in the
enhancement of antitumor immune responses results from an increase in Th1
cytokine secretion, the expansion and cytotoxicity of CD8 T-cells and NK
cells and a decrease in immunosuppressive cells, i.e. regulatory T cells
and myeloid derived suppressive cells in a number of preclinical
experimental models. In the preclinical studies, KD033 regimens, with the
unique immunological properties, led to stronger anti-tumor efficacy in
controlling primary tumor growth and prolonging the survival of tumor
bearing mice in a number of mouse tumor models including PDX and GEMM
tumor models. Importantly, the PD-L1-targeted IL-15 bifunctional protein
had significantly less cytokine-related toxicity when compared to
non-targeted full IgG antibody-IL-15 fusion protein in vivo. These
results further elucidate the capacity of targeting IL-15-stimulated
innate and adaptive immune effector cells into tumor microenvironment,
thereby effectively controlling tumor progression while having minimized
adverse effect in vivo. These encouraging preclinical results of the
novel immunotherapeutics suggest further advancement of this innovative
therapeutic candidate towards clinical development for cancer treatment.

