Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KLF4 promotes self-renewal by repressing DYRK2-mediated
degradation of c-Myc in leukemic stem cells: development of targeted
therapy


Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is the first blood cancer known to
originate from a single hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) by expression of
BCR-ABL, a product of the chromosomal translocation t(9;22), that slowly
progress to a lethal fast-growing leukemia caused by malignant
reprogramming of progenitor cells (blast crisis). Although CML can be
successfully managed with targeted therapy by suppressing BCR-ABL kinase
activity with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), patients remain in
remission as long as they adhere to a lifelong treatment. The leukemic
stem cell (LSC) population emerges as a key CML reservoir that escapes
TKI therapy by developing BCR-ABL-independent mechanisms of self-renewal
and survival. LSC still remains an elusive target because of our poor
understanding of specific self-renewal mechanisms and inability to
selectively eliminate LSC without damaging normal hematopoiesis. Thus,
there is a need for alternative drugs for relapse patients to prevent
reactivation of BCR-ABL-positive LSC after stopping chemotherapy or
emergence of chemoresistance and as frontline therapy to achieve
treatment-free remission. We found that somatic deletion of the
transcriptional factor Krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) in
BCR-ABL(p210)-induced CML severely impaired disease maintenance. This
inability to sustain CML in the absence of KLF4 was caused by attrition
of LSCs in bone marrow and the spleen and impaired ability of LSCs to
recapitulate leukemia in secondary recipients. This data suggest that
KLF4 promotes self-renewal of LSCs whereas serial transplantation
indicates that KLF4 restricts stress self-renewal of normal HSCs and thus
inhibition of KLF4 function would impair LSC self-renewal without
altering blood production. Analyses of global gene expression in purified
LSCs and genome-wide binding of KLF4 in a murine CML cell line revealed
that KLF4 represses the gene encoding for the dual-specificity
tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation regulated kinase 2 (DYRK2). Immunoblots
revealed elevated levels of DYRK2 protein in KLF4-deficient LSCs purified
from the bone marrow of CML mice. Because phosphorylation of c-Myc and
p53 by DYRK2 induces proteosomal degradation and cell death,
respectively, we found that DYRK2 upregulation in KLF4-deficient LSCs was
associated with a reduction of c-Myc protein and increased cleavage of
PARP. As a proof-of-principle of the therapeutic potential of this
finding, we explored the efficacy of vitamin K3 to eradicate LSCs by
inhibiting the ubiquitin E3 ligase SIAH2 in charge of DYRK2 degradation.
Vitamin K3 efficiently reduced cell viability in a panel of human-derived
CML cell lines by inducing Dyrk2 expression and apoptosis. The
identification of Dyrk2 as a critical mediator of LSC downfall is an
innovative paradigm poised to support the development of LSC-specific
therapy to induce treatment-free remission in CML patients.

