Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NCI Office of Cancer Genomics: Generating publicly available data
and resources for the advancement of precision medicine


The Office of Cancer Genomics (OCG), within the National Cancer
Institute, supports cutting-edge genomics and translational research to
advance the molecular understanding of cancer, with the ultimate goal of
improving clinical outcomes through precision medicine. OCG-supported
cancer research initiatives generate and analyze comprehensive genomics
datasets, and translate these data into tools, resources, and
clinically-relevant information. OCG currently supports three
complimentary initiatives, each uniquely collaborative and innovative.The
Cancer Genome Characterization Initiative (CGCI) and the Therapeutically
Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) Initiative
collect high quality, clinically annotated, tumor and normal matched
tissue samples for both discovery and validation cohorts. These
initiatives aim to identify therapeutic targets and biomarkers in some
malignancies prevalent in HIV-positive individuals and high-risk
pediatric cancers. Samples are analyzed by whole genome, whole exome, and
transcriptome sequencing and datasets are available to the research
community in ways that protect patient privacy.The Cancer Target
Discovery and Development (CTD2) Network combines computational
approaches, high-throughput functional assays, and high content small
molecule and genetic screens to accelerate the translation of genomic
data into discoveries that will inform patient-specific cancer
treatments. The Network develops bioinformatics and analysis tools,
generates diverse datasets, and further validates subsets of these data.
All resources, datasets (https://ctd2.nci.nih.gov/dataPortal/), and
validated results (http://ctd2-dashboard.nci.nih.gov/) are openly
available to the research community.Data, analytical tools, and resources
generated by OCG initiatives are made publicly available and can be
accessed through the OCG website (https://ocg.cancer.gov/). Investigators
can use and analyze the data according to their research interests. In
addition, datasets generated by OCG-supported programs can serve as
valuable resources for those seeking to validate genomic findings. For
this poster presentation we will present the most up-to-date information
about what data and resources are available, and how to access them. The
use of OCG datasets and resources by the research community will further
the collaborative goal of enabling precision medicine in the clinic.

