Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined contrast enhanced ultrasound and photoacoustic imaging
reveals both functional flow patterns and dysfunctional vascular pooling
in tumor models


The tumor vasculature and its hypoxic microenvironment are constantly
undergoing changes. These alterations are key attributes associated with
aggressive cancer phenotypes, raising the need for non-invasive methods
to track these changes. Similarly, in many cases, various cancer
treatments also affect tumor vasculature, and preferably should be
monitored. Dynamic contrast-enhance ultrasound (DCEUS) and photoacoustic
(PA) imaging are two promising candidates. DCEUS has the ability to
measure functional tissue perfusion, whereas multispectral PA imaging can
be used to evaluate tissue oxygenation related parameters. This study
investigates the relationship between blood perfusion, oxygen saturation
levels and hemoglobin concentration in two hind-limb tumor models, and
evaluates the ability of these two modalities to image vascular
structures and functions.Xenograft tumors were induced in SHO mice using
either LS174T human colorectal cancer cells (n = 6), or PC3 human
prostate cancer cells (n = 6). Tumors were grown to a depth of 4-6 mm
before imaging was performed using a laser integrated high-frequency
ultrasound system (VevoLAZR, VisualSonics Inc.). Contrast enhanced images
were collected after a 50L bolus injection of MicroMarker ultrasound
contrast agents (VisualSonics Inc.) using non-linear contrast imaging.
Perfusion parameters were quantified after applying wavelet denoising to
the DCEUS clips. PA images were acquired using a 21MHz linear array
transducer with fiber optical bundles integrated to each side, used to
deliver light from a 680-970 nm tunable laser. Oxygen saturation levels
and hemoglobin concentration were estimated from the PA measurements
using spectral un-mixing. Tumor vascularity and hypoxia were confirmed
with immunohistochemistry staining for CD31 and CA9.Reasonable
correlations were found between corresponding pixels in the DCEUS
perfusion maps and oxygen saturation maps (R = 0.63 and R = 0.5 for
LS174T and PC3 respectively). In contrast, the correlation between blood
perfusion and hemoglobin concentration was nil for LS174T tumors (R =
-0.1), and low for PC3 tumors (R = 0.34). This discrepancy was explained
by the presence of blood pools in LS174T tumors, observed in tumor
histology. The presence of hemoglobin inside regions of hemorrhage
together with the limited capability to separate hypoxic and necrotic
regions, impeded the ability of PA imaging to detect blood vessels inside
tumors. Compared to PA imaging, DECUS provides better detection of
functional vasculature and enables the visualization of single blood
vessels around the tumor core, without including blood pools.This study
demonstrates that a multi-modality imaging scheme combining DCEUS and PA
imaging can provide both distinctive and complementary information on
tumor microenvironment in experimental animal studies.

