Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct assessment of sequence heterogeneity in human cancers by
Duplex Sequencing


The extent of heterogeneity in DNA sequence within human cancers has been
difficult to fully assess, due to the absence of methods with sufficient
sensitivity to detect minority variants. For example, next-generation
sequencing could in principle detect sub-clonal mutations at any genomic
position; however due to amplification errors and inaccuracies in the
sequencing platform itself, such approaches are limited to detection of
mutations present in >1% of cells. We have overcome this limitation by
developing an approach, Duplex Sequencing, which improves the accuracy of
next-generation sequencing by >100,000 fold. Duplex Sequencing is based
upon separately tagging and sequencing the two strands of single
molecules of duplex DNA. True mutations are present at the same position
in both DNA strands and are complementary, whereas artifacts arising from
amplification or sequencing errors are seen in only one strand. The
calculated error rate of our approach is less than one artifactual
mutation per billion nucleotides sequenced (ref. 1). We have also
developed an enrichment approach based on sequential rounds of
hybridization to biotinylated probes which enables efficient sequencing
of targeted regions of the genome (ref. 2). Duplex Sequencing thereby
enables exceptionally sensitive detection of sequence heterogeneity
within any set of genes. We have now applied Duplex Sequencing to study
of sequence heterogeneity in both normal and malignant samples. In acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), we find multiple sub-clonal mutations which fall
below the detection limit of conventional approaches, some of which
encode mutations that can drive chemotherapy resistance and cancer
progression. Our results indicate that prior studies have under-estimated
the burden of sub-clonal mutations in AML by more than 1,000-fold. We
have additionally studied chronic myeloid leukemia (CML); treatment of
CML with inhibitors directed against the Abl kinase represents the
prototypical targeted cancer therapy. With Duplex Sequencing, we find
that Abl mutations are extremely uncommon at the time of CML diagnosis.
In contrast, refractory patients who fail therapy frequently possess
multiple sub-clonal mutations within the Abl kinase, most of which are
below the resolution of conventional approaches but are readily detected
with our method. In ongoing work, we have found multiple sub-clonal
mutations within human prostate cancer and colon cancer, suggestive of
widespread intratumor heterogeneity that may limit the efficacy of
single-agent therapy in these diseases.References:1. Schmitt MW, Kennedy
SR, Salk JJ, Fox EJ, Hiatt JB, Loeb LA (2012). Detection of ultra-rare
mutations by next-generation sequencing. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA. 109(36):14508-13.2. Schmitt MW, Fox EJ, Prindle
MJ, Reid-Bayliss KS, True LD, Radich JP, Loeb LA (2015). Sequencing small
genomic targets with high efficiency and extreme accuracy. Nature
Methods. 12(5):423-5.

