Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained release of PARP inhibitor Talazoparib and
chemotherapeutics from biodegradable implants for treatment of breast and
prostate cancer


Sustained localized delivery of cancer therapeutics is a safe and
effective unique option for non-metastatic cancers. Here we report a
novel biodegradable implant with the capability to encapsulate
therapeutics, molecular agents, or nanoparticles for local intratumoral
delivery. We have successfully demonstrated in vivo the delivery of PARP
inhibitor Talazoparib to treat Brca1-mutated cancers and Docetaxel to
treat localized or recurring prostate cancers. This one-time intratumoral
injection provides a safe vehicle for the sustained release of PARP
inhibitor Talazoparib and chemotherapeutic Docetaxel in contrast to low
bioavailability and toxicity associated with oral or systemic
delivery.Methods: Biodegradable implants of 1-2mm length and 0.8mm
diameter were loaded with 50g Talazoparib (BMN) for BRCA1-mutated breast
cancer (BCa) studies and 500g Docetaxel (DTX) for prostate cancer (PCa)
studies. Implants were characterized using SEM and HPLC, and release
studies were carried out in pH 6.0 PBS buffer at 37C. The IC50's were
determined using an MTS assay in cell lines W0069 and W780 (BCa) and PC3
(PCa). In vivo studies were carried out in Brca1 Co/Co;MMTV-Cre; p53+/
spontaneous tumored mice for BCa studies. Subcutaneous PC3 tumors were
xenografted in nude mice. PCa studies were done with and without
radiation. Implants were injected once intratumorally using an 18G
brachytherapy needle.Results: The release profile of the drug from the
implant in buffer showed a highly sustained release for multiple weeks at
therapeutically relevant doses for both DTX and BMN loaded implants. BCa
cell lines W0069 and W780 were highly sensitive to BMN, most likely due
to Brca1 mutation. Following a one-time intratumoral implantation of BMN,
tumors reduced in size by an average of 50%, while untreated tumors
increased 5X in size. BMN dosing appeared to be well tolerated by the
mice. DTX implants proved to be an effective method for PCa treatment in
vivo with no weight loss observed. The local DTX group showed sustained
tumor inhibition compared to empty implants and an equivalent DTX dose
given systemically. At 40 days 89% survival was observed for mice treated
with localized DTX implants compared with 0% in all other treatment
groups. Histology samples were taken from sacrificed mice and
immunohistochemistry is currently underway.Conclusions: Sustained local
release of therapeutically relevant doses of BMN and DTX were observed in
vitro and in vivo. Therapeutics loaded in implants represent a novel
delivery modality that is well-tolerated. Sustained release of BMN
appears to amplify the therapeutic efficacy of PARP inhibition in BRCA1
mutated breast cancers and sustained release of DTX is an effective
chemotherapy option alone or in combination with radiation therapy. These
results lay a strong foundation for the use of localized biodegradable
implants for the treatment of breast and prostate cancer.

