Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of drug sensitivity according to the induction and
reversion of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines harboring an EGFR mutation


Introduction: EMT phenotype is known to relate to drug resistance and
immune tolerance of cancer. However, mechanism underling these phenomena,
including the mechanism of the induction and reversion of EMT, are not
fully understood.Methods: EGFR mutated human lung adenocarcinoma cell
lines, HCC-827 and PC-9, were treated with TGF- and/or FGF-2 to induce
EMT. EMT was reversed by treating the induced EMT cells with either of
PP242 (mTOR inhibitor), metformin and DMSO. The phenotypic alterations
according to the induction and reversion of EMT were accessed by a wound
healing assay for mobility, flow cytometry for cell cycle, MTT and
apoptosis assays for drug sensitivity to cisplatin and gefitinib, and
RT-PCR and fluorescence IHC for PD-L1 expression.Results: The treatment
with combination of TGF-/FGF-2 showed an efficient increase in
expressions of mesenchymal markers and slug in both cell lines, and a
decrease in E-cadherin expression in HCC827. In immunoblotting analyses,
the Smad3 pathway in PC-9, and the Smad3, MEK/Erk and mTOR pathways in
HCC-827 were involved in the induction of the EMT. The induced EMT was
accompanied by enhanced cell motility and accumulation in the G0/G1
phases in both cell lines. The induced EMT also made the cells less
sensitive to gefitinib in both cell lines, and to cisplatin in HCC-827.
Increased PD-L1 expression was observed in both cell lines. Treatment of
the induced EMT cells with PP242, metformin and DMSO reverted the altered
expressions of epithelial and mesenchymal markers, cell motility and cell
cycle. These agents reverted the EMT to different extents and through
different pathways, depending on the cell lines. Reversion of the EMT
using each of the 3 agents partly restored drug sensitivity, and
suppressed PD-L1 expression.Conclusion: Inducing EMT by treatment with
TGF-/FGF-2 is an effective way to acquire drug resistance and
up-regulation of PD-L1. Reversion of the EMT, therefore, has a potential
to overcome drug resistance and immune tolerance of cancer.

