Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A neighborhood-wide association study (NWAS) in prostate cancer: A
new methodologic approach


Background: Cancer results from complex interactions of multiple
variables at biological, individual and social levels. However,
comprehensive, empirical methods to assess social and neighborhood-level
effects are limited. We propose a Neighborhood-Wide Association
Study(NWAS), analogous to a genome-wide association study(GWAS), to
comprehensively identify neighborhood signatures associated with disease.
Methods: Pennsylvania State Cancer Registry data from 1995-2005 were
linked to the 2000 U.S. Census data. In a successively more stringent
multiphase approach, we evaluated the association between neighborhood
exposures(n = 14,663, standard deviation adjusted census variables) and
prostate cancer aggressiveness (n = 6,416 aggressive Stage>3/Gleason
grade >7 cases vs. n = 70,670 non-aggressive StageBackground: Cancer
results from complex interactions of multiple variables at biological,
individual and social levels. However, comprehensive, empirical methods
to assess social and neighborhood-level effects are limited. We propose a
Neighborhood-Wide Association Study(NWAS), analogous to a genome-wide
association study(GWAS), to comprehensively identify neighborhood
signatures associated with disease. Methods: Pennsylvania State Cancer
Registry data from 1995-2005 were linked to the 2000 U.S. Census data. In
a successively more stringent multiphase approach, we evaluated the
association between neighborhood exposures(n = 14,663, standard deviation
adjusted census variables) and prostate cancer aggressiveness (n = 6,416
aggressive Stage>3/Gleason grade >7 cases vs. n = 70,670 non-aggressive
Stage<3/Gleason gradeBackground: Cancer results from complex interactions
of multiple variables at biological, individual and social levels.
However, comprehensive, empirical methods to assess social and
neighborhood-level effects are limited. We propose a Neighborhood-Wide
Association Study(NWAS), analogous to a genome-wide association
study(GWAS), to comprehensively identify neighborhood signatures
associated with disease. Methods: Pennsylvania State Cancer Registry data
from 1995-2005 were linked to the 2000 U.S. Census data. In a
successively more stringent multiphase approach, we evaluated the
association between neighborhood exposures(n = 14,663, standard deviation
adjusted census variables) and prostate cancer aggressiveness (n = 6,416
aggressive Stage>3/Gleason grade >7 cases vs. n = 70,670 non-aggressive
Stage<3/Gleason grade<7 controls) in White men. Each phase accounted for
age, year of diagnosis, spatial correlation, and multiple testing. We
used generalized estimating equations in Phase 1 and Bayesian mixed
effects models in Phase 2 to calculate odds ratios(OR) and credible
intervals(CI). Variables meeting statistically significant thresholds
after Bonferroni adjustment were identified and used in subsequent
phases. In Phase 3, principal components analysis grouped correlated
variables.Results: From 14,663 census variables, 17 variables that were
most significantly associated with prostate cancer aggressiveness were
identified. The top two hits related to transportation (OR = 1.05;CI =
1.001-1.09) and poverty (OR = 1.07;CI = 1.01-1.12). Significant
associations between prostate cancer and income, housing, employment, and
immigration were also found.Conclusions: This NWAS methodology addresses
gaps in neighborhood and cancer research by proposing a standardized,
agnostic evaluation of neighborhood using readily accessible data from
the U.S. Census. This approach has implications for health disparities
research and can be applied broadly to large-scale, public health data.

