Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin refractory lung cancer cells exhibit an increased
autophagic flux at baseline and following exposure to cisplatin


Introduction: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death.
Platinum-based therapy is a standard treatment for advanced lung cancer.
However, most patients develop resistance to treatment within few months.
Autophagy is a catabolic degradation process whereby cellular proteins
and organelles are engulfed by autophagosomes, degraded in lysosomes, and
recycled to sustain cellular metabolism. Activation of autophagy in
response to cellular stress enables cancer cell survival, which can lead
to tumor growth and therapeutic resistance.Materials and Methods:
Cisplatin-resistant (cisR A549) lung cancer cells, obtained by treating
parental A549 cells with incremental concentrations of cisplatin, were
kindly provided by Dr. Martin Barr. To measure autophagy, cells were
stained for CytoID and mounted on the Cellometer vision CBA platform, an
automated image-based fluorescence microscope equipped with bio-analysis
system. Autophagy was confirmed by immunoblotting for LC3II/I and p62 in
cell lysates. Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) was detected
after loading lysosomes with FITC-dextran 40KDa and detecting dextran
leakage into the cytosol on confocal microscopy. Cell viability was
evaluated using CellTiter blue assay.Results: We observed an increase in
baseline autophagic flux in cisR A549 lung cancer cells as compared to
parental cells in full media condition. This was demonstrated by an
increase in LC3II/I ratio, and reduction in p62 level in untreated cells.
Compared with untreated cells, cisplatin induced a time-dependent
increase in autophagosome formation in cisR A549 cells as manifested by
the enhanced cytoID signal. To examine whether the increase in CytoID
signal was due to autophagic flux stimulation or autophagosome
accumulation secondary to blockage of the last step of autophagy, cells
were treated with cisplatin in combination with chloroquine, a known
lysosomal inhibitor. This had led to a significant increase in cytoID
signal as compared to each drug alone, suggesting that autophagy was
induced following exposure to cisplatin in cisR cells. Interestingly,
increased CytoID signal following exposure to cisplatin was less
pronounced in cisplatin-sensitive cells, suggesting that autophagy
stimulation following exposure to the drug is inherent for resistant
cells. Inhibition of autophagy using chloroquine sensitized resistant
cells to cisplatin. Chloroquine was found to induce LMP. Indeed,
neutralization of leaked lysosomal proteases with E64, a pan-protease
inhibitor, attenuated the synergistic effect of chloroquine. Further
works evaluating whether specific autophagy inhibition employing siRNA
ATG3 or 3-MA can restore susceptibility to cisplatin are
ongoing.Conclusion: Our findings suggest that increased autophagy may be
involved in acquired resistance to cisplatin in lung cancer. Targeting
autophagy is a viable strategy to reverse chemoresistance.

