Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of DNMT and HDAC inhibitors reprogram cancer stem cell
signaling to overcome drug resistance


In recent years, impressive technical advancements have been made in the
isolation and validation of the mammary stem cells (MaSCs) and cancer
stem cells (CSCs). However, the signaling pathways that regulate stem
cell self-renewal are largely unknown. Further, CSCs are believed to
contribute to resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. However,
an effective therapeutic strategy to overcome this resistance is yet to
be identified. We have recently discovered that the DNA
methyltransferases, especially DNMT1, play critical role in MaSCs and
CSCs self-renewal and targeted deletion of this gene impaired mammary
tumor formation by inhibiting CSCs formation. However, the molecular
mechanism(s) by which DNMTs control CSCs and the therapeutic relevance of
DNMTs inhibitors in regulation of CSCs and overcome drug resistance are
also largely unknown. In this study, using MMTV-Neu-Tg mouse mammary
tumor model, we found that both luminal progenitor and basal stem cells
are susceptible to genetic and epigenetic modifications, which leads to
activation of un-activated Neu-Tg into transformed tumor forming
phenotype. Combination of 5-Azacytidine, a DNMT inhibitor, and butyrate,
a HDAC inhibitor, markedly reduces CSCs and consequently increases the
overall survival of the animal. RNA-seq analysis of the CSCs treated with
5-AzaC+butyrate provides evidence that combined inhibition of DNMTs and
HDACs reduces CSCs pool in the mammary gland by blocking growth-promoting
signaling molecules like RAD51AP1 and SPC25. RAD51AP1 and SPC25, which
are known to play a key role in DNA damage repair and kinetochore
assembly, are significantly overexpressed in breast tumor tissues and
associated with decreased overall patients survival. Further, these two
genes are overexpressed in Tamoxifen and Taxol resistant human breast
cancer cell lines. Functional inactivation of these genes in breast caner
cells facilitates chemotherapy-induced apoptosis and reduces tumor
growth. Overall, our studies provide strong evidence that breast CSCs
(both basal stem cells and luminal progenitor cells) are susceptible for
genetic and epigenetic modifications and associated with resistance to
chemo- and radiotherapy. Thus, combination of DNMT and HDAC inhibitors
can serve as an effective therapeutic strategy to block mammary tumor
growth and to overcome drug resistance by inhibiting CSCs.

