Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genome and transcriptome structural analysis of a
breast cancer cell line using single molecule sequencing


Genomic instability is one of the hallmarks of cancer, leading to
widespread copy number variations, chromosomal fusions, and other
structural variations in many cancers. The breast cancer cell line
SK-BR-3 is an important model for HER2+ breast cancers, which are among
the most aggressive forms of the disease and affect one in five cases.
Through short read sequencing, copy number arrays, and other
technologies, the genome of SK-BR-3 is known to be highly rearranged with
many copy number variations, including an approximately twenty-fold
amplification of the HER2 oncogene, along with numerous other
amplifications and deletions. However, these technologies cannot
precisely characterize the nature and context of the identified genomic
events and other important mutations may be missed altogether because of
repeats, multi-mapping reads, and the failure to reliably anchor
alignments to both sides of a variation.To address these challenges, we
have sequenced SK-BR-3 using PacBio long read technology. Using the new
P6-C4 chemistry, we generated more than 70X coverage of the genome with
average read lengths of 9-13kb (max: 71kb). Using Lumpy for split-read
alignment analysis, as well as our novel assembly-based algorithms for
finding complex variants, we have developed a detailed map of structural
variations in this cell line. Taking advantage of the newly identified
breakpoints and combining these with copy number assignments, we have
developed an algorithm to reconstruct the mutational history of this
cancer genome. From this we have characterized the amplifications of the
HER2 region, discovering a complex series of nested duplications and
translocations between chr17 and chr8, two of the most frequent
translocation partners in primary breast cancers. We have also carried
out full-length transcriptome sequencing using PacBio's Iso-Seq
technology, which has revealed a number of previously unrecognized gene
fusions and isoforms. Combining long-read genome and transcriptome
sequencing technologies enables an in-depth analysis of how changes in
the genome affect the transcriptome, including how gene fusions are
created across multiple chromosomes. This analysis has established the
most complete cancer reference genome available to date, and is already
opening the door to applying long-read sequencing to patient samples with
complex genome structures.

