Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kisspeptin regulates the invasiveness of endometrial cancer cells
through FAK/ Src signaling-dependent activation of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2


Introduction:More than 25% of patients diagnosed with endometrial
carcinoma have an invasive primary cancer accompanied by metastasis. The
kisspeptin has an important role in reproduction. In mammals, kisspeptin
may regulate tumor progression of endometrial cancer. FAK and Src
signaling have been considered important components of tumor progression.
MMPs are largely implicated in promoting angiogenesis and tumor
metastasis. In the present study, we examined the action of
kisspeptin-promoted motility of endometrial cancer cells and the
mechanisms of the action in endometrial cancer.Materials and
methods:Endometrial cancer cell line Ishikawa and ECC-1 were derived from
an endometrial adenocarcinoma. Kisspeptin agonist and antagonist were
synthetic peptides. Cell motility was estimated by invasion and migration
assay. The activities of MMP-2 was assessed by gelatin zymography.
Immunoblot analysis was done to study the expression of kisspeptin
receptor and the effects of kisspeptin in the activation of FAK,Src and
MMP-2. Human FAK siRNA and Src siRNA were used to knock down the
expression of FAK and Src to evaluate the effects of FAK and Src. MMP-2
inhibitor (OA-Hy) was pretreated for 30 min to evaluate the effects of
MMP-2 in cell motility.Results:The kisspeptin regulated cell motility in
a dose-dependent manner. Kisspeptin activated the phosphorylation of FAK
and Src signaling and the phosphorylation was abolished by FAK siRNA and
Src siRNA. Kisspeptin-regulated cell motility was suppressed in cells
pretreated with FAK siRNA and Src siRNA. Moreover, FAK siRNA and Src
siRNA abolished kisspeptin-induced activation of MMP-2. Inhibition of
MMP-2 with 10M OA-Hy suppressed cell motility in response to
kisspeptin.Conclusion:Our study shows that the kisspeptin regulated the
cell motility of endometrial cancer cells through the kisspeptin
receptor, and the phosphorylation of FAK and Src-dependent activation of
MMP-2. Our findings represent a new concept regarding the mechanisms of
kisspeptin-regulated cell motility in endometrial cancer cells,
suggesting the possibility of kisspeptin analogues as a potential
therapeutic intervention for the treatment of human endometrial cancer.

