Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering mechanisms of circulating tumor cells in breast cancer
dormancy


More than 67% of deaths in breast cancer patients occur after the initial
5-year survival period while residual disease can be dormant for periods
longer than 20 years. Patients are asymptomatic because circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) remain dormant and are undetectable by current clinical
tools. Dormant CTCs may retain their long-term tumor-initiating (LTI)
potential by adhering to their original genome, unlike rapidly cycling
cancer cells that are known to have increased genomic instability. We
hypothesized that hyperactive mechanisms of DNA repair preserve the
genomic make-up of dormant CTCs allowing them to retain their LTI
potential, ultimately causing disease relapse.We isolated and
characterized EpCAM-negative breast cancer CTCs by mutiparametric flow
cytometry and DEPArrayTM. Individually isolated breast cancer CTCs had a
large proportion (>40%) of dormant (Ki67-/PCNA-) cells. Dormant CTCs had
a lower incidence of double-strand DNA breaks (DSB) than proliferating
cells as assessed by the phosphorylation status of Serine139 on gamma
H2AX. This observation was further validated in a panel of eight
genetically distinct breast cancer cell lines. Second, to understand
whether dormant cells are inherently more resistant to DSB, we induced
DSB in breast cancer cells by UV radiation and bleomycin treatment, and
measured residual DSB at regular intervals. Results showed that besides
being more resistant to DSB de novo, dormant breast cancer cells were
also more efficient in repairing their DNA. There are two distinct phases
of DSB repair - early [within 2 hours of DSB using Non-Homologous End
Joining (NHEJ) methods] and late [evident after 24 hours using Homologous
Recombination (HR)]. Unlike proliferating (S-G2M) cells, dormant (G0)
cells lack the sister chromatid and repair their DNA exclusively by NHEJ
methods. Therefore, and third, we investigated key players of the NHEJ
pathway and examined their roles in maintaining genomic integrity. We
found that the human telomere-associated protein RIF1, a mediator of
alternative NHEJ, was significantly up-regulated in a dormant CTC subset.
Dormant sub-populations of breast cancer cells confirmed RIF1 foci
formation in areas of DNA damage. Fourth, mis-sense mutation of RIF1 in
CAMA-1 cells (RIF1 E1598K) attenuated resistance of the dormant subset to
UV and bleomycin treatment.Collectively, these findings suggest that RIF1
may play functional roles in maintaining the genomic integrity of dormant
CTCs. Further investigations are being pursued to assess RIF1
contributions to retain CTC LTI potential leading to CTC-driven
metastasis.

