Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating structure-activity relationships of SIRT2 and
fluoroalkyl chain length to identify the lead candidate substrate
radiotracer for PET imaging


Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a pivotal role in epigenetic regulation
through post translational modifications of histone core and other
critical proteins in cellular pathways. The HDACs class III, sirtuins
(SIRTs) 1-7, possess limited deacetylase activity. Each of these
nicotinamide dinucleotide (NAD+) dependent enzymes have unique structures
of catalytic sites that prefer larger lysine-modifying groups as
substrates (i.e., glutaryl, succinyl, lipoyl, crotanyl, myristoyl).In
particular, SIRT2 is a key regulator of nuclear H4K16 and cytoplasmic
alpha-tubulin proteins, thereby acting as a mitotic exit regulator. From
the literature, it is clear that SIRT2 plays a pivotal role in the
regulation of cancers, so much so that it may switch between tumor
suppressor and regulator at different stages of tumor progression. For
this reason, SIRT2 has been identified as a possible target for cancer
therapy but due to the pleiotropic roles of SIRT2 under normal and
pathologic conditions, it is important to assess its activity during
pharmacomodulation (i.e. activation or inhibition). Therefore,
non-invasive PET imaging using SIRT2-specific substrate-type radiotracers
may aid in the development of new SIRT2 inhibitors for therapy of
cancer.Herein, we report novel synthesis of a focused library of
compounds to assess the structure activity relationship (SAR) of SIRT2
with fluoroalkyl chain length varying between 3 and 16 carbons. The
preliminary screening was performed with the
tert-butyloxycarbonyl-lysine-aminomethylcoumarin (Boc-lys-AMC) backbone
and Fluor-de-lys assay [1] to determine the chain length for optimal
SIRT2 catalytic efficiency. Based on the analysis of Michealis-Menten
kinetics of each substrate, myristoyl (14-carbon carboxylic acid) was
cleaved most efficiently, followed by 12-fluorododecanoic and
10-fluorodecanoic acids (kcat/km = 4E-3, 1E-4, 8.9E-5 s-1uM-1,
respectively). For in vivo PET imaging radiotracer development, we linked
the 12-fluorododecanoic acid with the aminohexanoicanilide (AHA) backbone
[2]. This compound was developed with a terminal bromine (precursor),
iodine, fluorine, and F-18 (12-[18F]DDAHA). In vitro cellular uptake
studies demonstrated a three-fold increase in accumulation of
12-[18F]DDAHA in U87 glioma cells as compared to MiaPaCa, MDA-MB-231, and
MCF10A cell lines. The increased accumulation in the U87 glioma cells
indicates that this compound may prove useful for detection of brain
gliomas and for monitoring therapies with novel SIRT2 specific
inhibitors. This insight into the catalytic activity of SIRT2 provides a
basis for the development of a SIRT2-specific PET imaging agent to
further probe the role of SIRT2-mediated epigenetic regulation in normal
physiology and cancer.

