Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fast and scalable software for comparative variant analysis and
visualization of massive next-generation sequencing data


Next-generation sequencing (NGS) techniques produce high quantities of
DNA and RNA sequencing data, enabling variation analysis at a whole
genome level. Due to the massive availability of NGS data, the processing
and analysis now constitute a serious challenge for research in life
sciences. This necessitates the development of novel, user-friendly and
scalable software tools, which are able to jointly handle large NGS data
sets in order to break the bottleneck that has already moved from data
generation to data analysis in high-throughput biology.Here we introduce
a highly efficient NGS analysis and visualization software tool
(Rikurator), which is designed for researchers who are struggling with
NGS data analysis and may not have access to a dedicated bioinformatics
team. Rikurator can be applied to a multitude of genomic analysis tasks,
including discovery of pathogenic mutations in familial or sporadic
sample sets, analysis of structural variants and somatic characterization
of cancer genomes. To these ends the software implements interactive
variant filtering and annotation methods based on sample comparison,
control data (e.g. ExAC), amino acid changes and quality scores, which
provide an intuitive view at the studied samples. Shared candidate genes
in a set of dozens of individuals can be discovered in a matter of
minutes with an ordinary laptop computer. Importantly, the software is
able to analyze hundreds of whole-genome sequenced samples using only a
modest amount of RAM. The tool also visualizes and integrates genes,
variants (VCF file format), sequence reads (BAM) and user defined
features (BED/GFF). In addition, Rikurator is not limited to human
studies, supporting reference genomes and genome annotations in standard
formats. The software supports targeted (e.g. exome), whole-genome, RNA,
Oxford Nanopore and PacBio sequencing data.Rikurator can be run on
Windows, Linux and Mac, and it will be freely available after publication.

