Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunofluorescence chromatographic assay of tumor cells in dried
blood spot


Blood droplet, when desiccated on a surface, forms a ring-like deposit,
akin to the coffee ring left after a coffee spill. When blood, coffee, or
other aqueous suspensions of the colloidal particles, evaporate with
contract line pinned on the underlying hydrophilic surface, a capillary
force is generated by the evaporative flux, which drags nearly all the
particles to the edge. As the evaporation extends, the volume of the
droplet decreases, and the sol-gel transition occurs. The gelation
gradually moves inward from the edge to the center, eventually
immobilizes all particles, and develops the ring effect. Because smaller
sized particles diffuse much more quickly and efficiently than the larger
ones, smaller particles tend to preferentially accumulate on the rim,
forming multi-layered self-assembly. Contrarily, the majority of the
larger particles congregate in the central area. This natural phenomenon
simply presents a size-dependent chromatography of variously sized
particles in solution. Separation of normal blood cells or break-free
tumor cells has been widely utilized for blood disease diagnosis and
cancer prognosis. Traditional preparation via blood smear and advanced
separation by the external driving forces, e.g. centrifugation and
powered microfluidics, could be limited by the technical difficulty,
assay complexity, and cell integrity. Coffee-ring based blood cell
separation and detection, namely dried spot biopsy, is however a
hand-free, cell-harmless, spontaneous process. To perform a dried spot
biopsy, 31 inch microscope slides were first cleaned to remove surface
impurities and residues. 200 uL of freshly collected, anti-coagulated
whole blood, bearing fluorescent microbeads (1 and 10 um sized) or
pre-stained breast tumor cells (MDA-MB-231, 15 um sized), was dispensed
onto the slide and allowed to dry statically or acceleratedly on a moving
stage at controlled temperature and humidity. Three hydrophilic coatings
and five surfactants were examined to balance the outward capillary flow
with the inward Marangoni flow for optimal coffee ring effect. It is
demonstrated that two sizes of microbeads formed separate rings, a few
hundreds of microns in average apart from each other, while tumor cells,
acting differently, concentrated in the central area with random
dispersion, probably because of the diversified cell sizes. The dried
spot biopsy could have a potential for detecting blood borne biomarkers
in the form of dried blood specimens that poses longer shelf life, less
biohazardous risk, and easier transportation protocol than the liquid
form. Additionally, specific cells of interest from microscopic regions
of dried blood film can be retrieved by laser microdissection for
downstream analyses. Particularly, this method could be valuable for use
in low-resourced regions and countries.

