Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation and gene expression analysis of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) enriched and retrieved by a sensitive microfluidic device


Molecular characterization of CTCs is hindered by low sensitivity and
high level of background leukocytes of currently available CTC enrichment
devices and assays. We have developed a novel technology to enrich and
retrieve CTCs from blood samples using a microfluidic chip. The Celsee
PREP100 device captures CTCs with high sensitivity and then allows the
captured CTCs to be retrieved for subsequent molecular analysis. The
Celsee PREP100 system uses the microfluidic chip which has approximately
56,320 capture chambers. Based on differences in cell size and
deformability, each chamber ensures that small blood cells such as red
blood cells and most leukocytes escape while larger CTCs are trapped and
isolated in the chambers. In the work we used the Celsee PREP100 to
capture breast and lung cancer cells spiked into normal donor blood
samples, including SKBR3 and NCI-H1975. We were able to show that the
device can capture 20 cells with high reproducibility. The captured CTCs
were retrieved from the microfluidic chip and further purified with
anti-CD45 magnetic beads. Our results suggest that the cell recovery rate
of this back-flow procedure is greater than 80% and the level of
remaining background leukocytes is very low (about 100 cells). Work in
progress to extract DNA and RNA. The resulting DNA samples are subjected
to mutation analysis of a panel of cancer markers by using PCR and
sequencing. The resulting RNA samples are converted to cDNAs, and gene
expression analysis of selected cancer markers are carried out by using
RT-QPCR. Specific DNA mutations such as EGFR exon 21 (L585R) in NCI-H1975
and mRNA expression markers including CK-19, TTF1 are tested in the
retrieved cells. The sensitive and easy-to-use Celsee PREP100 system
represents a promising technology for CTC capturing and molecular
characterization. Clinical blood samples from patients with metastatic
cancer are being tested on the Celsee PREP100 device and the results will
be discussed.

