Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages promote the progression of premalignant mammary gland
lesions through activation of the Axl signaling cascade


Infiltrating inflammatory cells, including tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs), have been shown to promote breast cancer cell invasion and have
been correlated with metastasis and poor prognosis. While it is
well-established that macrophages are recruited to the invasive fronts of
established tumors to exert pro-tumor signals, their role in
premalignancy remains poorly understood. Using a novel p53/ syngeneic
transplantable model of premalignancy, we show that inflammatory cells,
including macrophages, are indeed recruited to early lesions prior to
invasion. Microarray analysis was performed on two different pre-invasive
lines, termed PN1a, (high tumor-forming potential) and PN1b (low
tumor-forming potential). Interestingly, several pro-inflammatory
chemokines, macrophages markers, and the pro-inflammatory cytokine growth
arrest specific 6 (Gas6) were increased in PN1a lesions as compared to
PN1bs. In a 3-D co-culture system, macrophages were recruited to PN1a
acini and induced invasion, while PN1b cells remained non-invasive,
supporting our in vivo data. Depletion of macrophages in vivo with
clodronate containing liposomes significantly delayed progression of PN1a
lesions to invasive cancer, indicating a critical role for macrophages in
early progression. Gas6 and its receptor tyrosine kinase, Axl, were
highly expressed in PN1a preinvasive lesions, but decline in invasive
tumors, suggesting that this pathway is a key driver of the transition
from pre-invasive to invasive cancer. Further studies using our 3-D
co-culture system with Gas6/ macrophages demonstrated that macrophages
promote the formation of non-polar disorganized structures by activating
Axl. Finally, transplantation of PN1a cells into Gas6 +/ mice resulted in
a delay in tumor formation, indicating that stromal-derived Gas6 (and
potentially macrophage derived) may promote the progression of early
stage lesions through the paracrine activation of Axl. As a plethora of
Axl inhibitors have been developed and are currently in clinical trial,
these studies have critical implications for the prevention and treatment
of invasive breast cancer.

