Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FLASH-dependent post-translational regulation of the EMT activator
ZEB1


Understanding the mechanisms of metastasis initiation and tumor
persistence despite aggressive treatments is paramount to developing new
viable therapeutic targets. Critical to tumor progression is initiation
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a cellular process
characterized by loss of E-cadherin, a critical cell-cell adhesion
molecule, gain of migratory properties and chemoresistance.
Transcriptional repression of E-cadherin and other genes responsible for
maintaining the epithelial phenotype by ZEB1/ZEB2 family is one of the
most significant events occurring at the interface between
non-metastatic/metastatic cancer and chemo-sensitive/chemo-resistant
cancer. Using a novel interdisciplinary high-throughput screen
methodology we uncovered novel regulators of E-cadherin. Caspase 8 -
associated protein 2 (CASP8AP2 or FLASH) a protein involved in apoptosis
and transcriptional control was identified through this screen and we
discovered that FLASH depletion resulted in increased E-cadherin levels
at the plasma membrane through loss of ZEB1 expression. Subsequent
examination of ZEB1 protein expression revealed that ZEB1 is rapidly
degraded in FLASH-depleted cells. This process is blocked by proteasome
inhibitors suggesting that post-translational modifications (PTMs) and in
particular ubiquitination of ZEB1 is responsible for its fast turnover
and decreased protein expression in the absence of FLASH. Indeed,
ubiquitinated ZEB1 was detected in FLASH-depleted cells in the presence
of proteasome inhibitors. Although ZEB1 is degraded through the ubiquitin
pathway, its rapid turnover in the absence of FLASH suggests that
protective mechanisms are in place to delay and/or prevent this process.
Even more, we determined that the atypical ubiquitin E3 ligase complex
Skp1-Pam-Fbxo45 is involved in ZEB1 degradation in the absence of FLASH
and is upregulated in cells depleted for FLASH. Altogether our data
suggests that FLASH can stabilizes ZEB1 indirectly by transcriptional
repression of the ubiquitin ligase responsible for its degradation and
directly by binding to ZEB1 and masking the recognition site of the
ubiquitin ligase. Even more, absence of FLASH reprograms the cells into a
more epithelial-like phenotype which is less invasive and is resistant to
TGF-induced loss of E-cadherin. Not only is FLASH-dependent
post-translational regulation of ZEB1 novel, but is also conserved in
multiple cells lines from various tissues, making this mechanism an
original therapeutic target for cancer metastasis.

