Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying microRNA panels specifically associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma and its different etiologies


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) incidence in the US has increased
dramatically due to hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and the epidemic of
obesity-related nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Many microRNAs
(miRNAs) have been identified as deregulated in HCC, but few results are
consistent in previous studies. In the current study, we integrate
clinical and etiologic data, as well as miRNA profiles from HCC and other
8 types of solid tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Columbia
University Medical Center (CUMC) data to investigate HCC tumor type
specific and tumor common miRNA panels. Aberrant miRNA panels associated
with HCCs of different etiology were also explored. Levels of 33 miRNAs
were significant different between HCC tumor and paired non-tumor tissues
(over 2-fold changes) after Bonferroni correction for multiple
comparisons, and most (28 miRNAs) were down-regulated in HCC tumors.
Using this panel, we well classified HCC tumor tissues with 4
misclassifications among 48 paired tissues. Validating this panel in an
additional 302 HCC tumor tissues, we almost perfectly distinguished tumor
from non-tumor tissues with only two misclassifications (99% of HCC
tissues correctly classified). Evaluating miRNA profiles in 32
independent HCC paired tissues from CUMC, we observed 40 miRNAs
significantly deregulated in HCC with over 2-fold changes; 14 overlapped
with those identified in TCGA. Eight miRNAs were further examined by
quantitative RT-PCR in 66 paired HCC tissues from CUMC; 7 out of the 8
miRNAs showed consistent fold-changes. Subgroup analyses by HCC etiology
found that 4 upregulated and 8 downregulated miRNAs were significantly
associated with alcohol-related HCC. There were 7 and 4 miRNAs
significantly associated with HBV- and HCV-related HCC, respectively. By
comparison with the other 8 types of solid tumors, our data for the first
time revealed that miR-24-1, miR-130a and miR-505 were significantly
down-regulated only in HCC tumors; miR-142 and miR-455 were significantly
down-regulated in HCC, but up-regulated in 5 other solid tumors,
suggesting their HCC tumor type specific characteristics. A panel of 8
miRNAs were identified as tumor common markers including up-regulated
miR-21, miR-182, miR-183, and down-regulated miR-139, miR-144, miR-101-2,
miR-451, miR-486. These findings indicate that aberrant miRNA panels have
HCC tumor type specificity and may be affected by different etiologies.
These candidate miRNAs can be used as markers to improve clinical early
diagnosis of HCC subtypes with specific etiologies and for more precise
prevention and therapy.

