Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MGMT immunohistochemistry (IHC) as a biomarker for response to
combination therapy with capecitabine and temozolomide (C/T) in patients
(pts) with advanced neuroendocrine carcinomas (aNEC)


Introduction: Tumor O6-methylguanine-methyltransferase (MGMT) reverses
temozolomide-induced DNA injury, and low MGMT tumor expression has been
shown as a predictor of response to temozolomide in glioblastoma. C/T
therapy induces partial responses in up to 70% of pts with grade 1-2
pancreatic NEC but the role of MGMT expression as a predictor is unclear.
We evaluated MGMT expression by IHC as a prognostic and predictive
biomarker for pts with aNEC of all grades and primary sites treated with
C/T.Methods: A retrospective review was carried out at Ohio State
University of 29 pts with aNEC who received C/T therapy from 2009 to 2013
and who were evaluable for RECIST response. MGMT expression was assessed
when available by IHC on pre-treatment tumor samples to test the
hypothesis that low MGMT expression (Introduction: Tumor
O6-methylguanine-methyltransferase (MGMT) reverses temozolomide-induced
DNA injury, and low MGMT tumor expression has been shown as a predictor
of response to temozolomide in glioblastoma. C/T therapy induces partial
responses in up to 70% of pts with grade 1-2 pancreatic NEC but the role
of MGMT expression as a predictor is unclear. We evaluated MGMT
expression by IHC as a prognostic and predictive biomarker for pts with
aNEC of all grades and primary sites treated with C/T.Methods: A
retrospective review was carried out at Ohio State University of 29 pts
with aNEC who received C/T therapy from 2009 to 2013 and who were
evaluable for RECIST response. MGMT expression was assessed when
available by IHC on pre-treatment tumor samples to test the hypothesis
that low MGMT expression (<10%) predicts response to C/T therapy vs high
levels (10%).Results: Of 29 pts, primary NEC site was pancreas in 18 pts,
and non-pancreas in 11 pts. Objective response, progression-free survival
(PFS) and overall survival (OS) data are outlined in the Table. Partial
response (PR) rate was 50% in pts with pancreas primary vs 18% for
non-pancreas primary. High PRs were observed in pts with grade 3 NEC
(57%). Median PFS in the MGMT-low group was 16.6 months vs 9.5 months in
the MGMT-high group (p = 0.19). Median OS in the MGMT low group was 42.9
months vs 18.1 months in the MGMT-high group (p = 0.16). There was a
trend toward higher rate of PR (63%) in pts whose tumors had low levels
of MGMT expression compared to those with high levels (17%) (p =
0.18).Conclusion: We observed a trend towards increased PR, median PFS,
and median OS in aNEC pts whose tumors had low MGMT protein expression by
IHC. The small sample size likely limited the statistical significance of
the data. Results of this trial serve as strong rationale for future
prospective trials to clarify role of MGMT expression in choosing C/T
therapy for pts with NEC.
Objective response rate, progression free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS)

