Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperpolarized magnetic resonance metabolic imaging and NMR
metabolomics to assess the progression and aggressiveness of
patient-derived pancreatic cancer xenografts


Pancreatic cancer, the most lethal of solid tumors is an aggressive
disease that develops relatively symptom-free. The absence of early
symptoms has created a critical need for identifying and developing new
noninvasive biomarkers and therapeutic intervention to improve the
survival rate of pancreatic cancer patients. Our goal is to identify
metabolic biomarkers for early detection with an understanding of
pancreatic cancer progression from benign lesions to a malignant state.
Hyperpolarized magnetic resonance imaging (HP-MRI) provides a
>10,000-fold signal enhancement for detecting of endogenous metabolic
substrates to monitor metabolic fluxes through the multiple key
biochemical pathways including glycolysis and citric acid cycle. In
particular, conversion between hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate and
lactate, catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), has been shown to have
a number of potential applications such as diagnosis, staging tumor grade
and monitoring therapy response. Genetic mutation is evident in causing
tumorigenesis and often time these mutations trigger the signaling
pathways that are associated with metabolic transformations. There is
currently tremendous research interest in dissecting the mechanisms of
metabolic transformation as the cancers progress. In this effort, we are
applying high-resolution NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) metabolomics
and the real-time hyperpolarized metabolic imaging of patient-derived
xenograft tumors for probing the underlying mechanism of
altered-metabolism and correlate with pancreatic cancer progression and
its aggressiveness. The protocol detailing heterotopic engraftment of
pancreatic cancer patient tumors into immunodeficient mice and expansion
of direct xenograft tumors was recently reported elsewhere. These
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) were well annotated with original
patient tumors. For the NMR metabolomics study, the fresh-frozen tumor
samples were homogenized, lyophilized, and resuspended in D2O and 1-D
proton NMR spectroscopy was employed to characterize the water-soluble
portion of the metabolome. These data suggest that elevated glycolysis
(production of high lactate) and alterations in choline metabolism may
arise in pancreatic cancer development. Also, the metabolite
concentrations were significantly higher in aggressive tumors compare to
non-aggressive one. The real-time metabolic imaging shows the immediate
conversion of lactate after injection (i.v.) of hyperpolarized 13C
pyruvate and probe the upregulated LDH activity as the cancer progress.
The basic genomic profiling of these tumors is in progress. This model
may provide an excellent platform where mutational status of these
patient tumors can be correlated with both high resolution and
hyperpolarized dynamical metabolomics data for characterizing individual
tumor phenotypes.

