Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mosaic chromosome Y loss is not associated with testicular germ
cell tumor risk


BackgroundTesticular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) affect approximately 6 in
100,000 men with peak incidence in men 15 to 40 years of age. Established
risk factors include family history of disease, undescended testis,
contralateral TGCT, impaired fertility, and 21 GWAS susceptibility loci.
Recent evidence suggests a 1.6 Mb deletion in the AZFc region (gr/gr
deletion) of chromosome Y previously associated with male infertility is
also associated with two- and three-fold increased risks of sporadic and
familial TGCT, respectively. Furthermore, population-based studies have
suggested mosaic chromosome Y loss in blood-derived DNA may be associated
with increased risk of various solid tumors. Our aim was to investigate
if mosaic loss across the entire Y chromosome is a TGCT risk
factor.MethodsWe obtained blood and buccal-derived DNA from two studies:
the NCI Familial Testicular Cancer Study (FTC, Cases = 172, Controls =
163) and NCI's US Servicemen's Testicular Tumor Environmental and
Endocrine Determinants Study (STEED, Cases = 506, Controls = 611). We
designed a quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) with 15 probes
spanning the Y chromosome to assess Y loss. Samples were run in
triplicate across three batches and normalized to a standard curve. We
quantified probe signals as a target to reference (T/R) ratio, and
averaged ratios across the 15 probes to yield an overall Y chromosome
signal.ResultsOn average, men with TGCT had slightly lower mean T/R
ratios compared with control men lacking TGCT (1.02 vs. 1.03).
Multivariate logistic regression models adjusted for study batch effects
detected no significant relationship between mean Y chromosome T/R ratio
and TGCT risk (OR = 0.34, 95% CI = 0.10-1.17, P = 0.09). A similar null
relationship was observed when using a threshold of 1.5 standard
deviations below the mean T/R ratio to dichotomize between mosaic Y loss
and no mosaic Y loss (OR = 0.59, 95% CI = 0.21-1.63, P =
0.31).ConclusionOur study suggests that mosaic chromosome Y loss, as
measured by 15 probes spanning the Y chromosome, is not associated with
either sporadic or familial TGCT risk. Further studies aimed at
investigating the AZFc region of the Y chromosome are needed to better
assess whether this locus is directly associated with TGCT risk or is
indirectly associated by means of a shared relationship with impaired
fertility.

