Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of STAT3 in primary trastuzumab-resistant HER2-positive
cells leads to decrease cell viability


Breast Cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related death in
women. Approximately, 20%-30% of breast cancer patients overexpress Human
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2). HER2 Is a Tyrosine Kinase
receptor involved in proliferation and survival and its overexpression
makes it a good target for patients with HER2 positive breast cancer.
Trastuzumab (TRA) is a recombinant monoclonal antibody that binds HER2
receptor and inhibits its signaling. Unfortunately, clinical studies have
demonstrated that 30% of patients that overexpress HER2 do not respond to
Trastuzumab treatment. Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying Trastuzumab resistance is essential to develop new therapies
to treat these breast cancer patients. Previous studies in our lab
demonstrated that a decrease in cell growth of HER2 overexpressing cells
occurred when IGF2 and HER2 were inhibited. Nevertheless, these cells
overcame the growth inhibition and the resulting proliferative growth
coincided with an increase in STAT3 activation. STAT3 is a transcription
factor that promotes cell proliferation and can regulate apoptosis in
cancer cells. These findings lead us to hypothesize that blocking STAT3
together with IGF2 and HER2 will inhibit proliferation and cell viability
of Trastuzumab resistant breast cancer cells. We treated
Trastuzumab-resistant HER2 positive JIMT1 cells with HER2, IGF2, and/or
STAT3 inhibitors. After 24 hours of treatment, there was a marked
difference in cell morphology observed between the treatment groups. Cell
viability was measured using WST-1, a reagent that measures mitochondrial
activity. A significant decrease in cell viability was observed when
cells were treated for 24 hours with a commercially available STAT3
inhibitor (Sttatic). There was no difference between the treatment groups
when STAT3 was inhibited by Stattic or when STAT3 was inhibited in
combination with IGF2 and/or HER2 inhibitors. These findings suggest that
in Trastuzumab-resistant HER2 positive JIMT1 cells, STAT3 activation
overcomes the inhibition of the HER2 and IGF2 proliferation pathways
resulting in cell death prevention. Our study demonstrate that
Trastuzumab-resistant HER2 positive JIMT1 cells can activate STAT3 as an
alternative pathway to evade apoptosis and promote chemoresistance. Our
data also illustrate the challenge of treating cancer based on single
therapies since tumors have many alternative pathways to promote growth.

