Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and pathway analyses provide insights into the mechanisms
underlying malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors


Background: Dysfunction of the NF1 gene, which occurs in patients with
neurofibromatosis type 1, is associated with an increased risk of
developing Malignant Peripheral Neural Sheath Tumor (MPNST). The
neurofibromin protein is a negative regulator of RAS function and 1 in 10
neurofibromatosis type 1 patients develop MPNST in their young adult
years. Effective chemotherapy treatments for MPNST are not available and
the prognosis for unresectable or metastatic tumors is poor. Genome-wide
sequencing of human MPNSTs has identified several key genes in MPNST
including NF1, CDKN2A, TP53, SUZ12, and EED. Interestingly,
high-throughput drug screening of FDA-approved chemotherapy agents
demonstrated differential drug sensitivities amongst a panel of MPNST
cell lines. Further elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying
therapeutic responses in MPNST will allow the development of treatments
catered to tumor genetics and may improve understanding of other
RAS-associated diseases.Methods: We used a combination of genomics,
high-throughput drug screening, and pathway analysis to better understand
how the oncogenic pathways important for MPNST development may dictate
treatment outcomes. We performed whole exome sequencing of tumors from 5
MPNST patients as well as 4 established MPNST cell lines (SNF02.2,
SNF10.1, SNF94.3, SNF96.2). In the cell lines, we additionally performed
RNA sequencing and high-density SNP arrays. With the cell line models, we
used our high-throughput screening platform to assess the efficacy of 54
agents of interest alone or in combination at clinically relevant doses,
guided by published pharmacokinetics. The cell lines were further
subjected to pathway analysis when subject to specific blockades
downstream of RAS at the protein level with the use of immunoblotting and
antibody arrays.Results: Our sequencing results indicate alterations in
NF1, CDKN2A, TP53, SUZ12, and EED are present in the tumors and cell
lines studied. Using cell line models, the predicted genetic alterations
resulted in striking and consistent effects on expression at both the RNA
and protein level. Within our panel of four cell lines, there was a broad
spectrum of NF1 activity, ranging from complete loss to normal expression
of full-length transcript. Interestingly, we found that NF1 exhibited a
spectrum of loss from unexpressed, to partial expression, and normal
expression of the full-length transcript. We found that drug sensitivity
to targets downstream of RAS is correlated with the degree of NF1
expression. These findings suggest promising opportunities for developing
combination clinical trials that take into account a patients genetics in
order to improve treatment outcomes.

