Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the role of tumor-conditioned macrophage metabolism on
extravasation of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells


A persistently low survival rate and more than 80% of patients
experiencing relapse after surgery combine to make pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) the 4th leading cause of death from cancer. Recent
studies showed that the presence of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
may support cancer cells in each step of the metastatic cascade: growth
at the primary site followed by epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
intravasation into lymph and blood vessels, circulation to a distant
site, stoppage due to adhesion or size restriction, extravasation into
tissue, and colonization in this secondary organ. However, the role of
TAMs and their metabolic profile in tumor progression need further
investigation. The objective of our studies was to examine the potential
for macrophages to switch from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic
glycolysis (the Warburg effect), similar to what is observed in cancer
cells, and how this metabolic conversion may influence their
pro-metastatic activity. To address this question we differentiated human
peripheral blood monocytes with non tumor- and tumor-conditioned media to
obtain macrophages and TAMs, respectively. First, we showed in a live
glycolytic stress test that TAMs had a greater glycolytic capacity
compared to non tumor-conditioned macrophages. Next, a 3D in-vitro
microfluidic extravasation assay consisting of an endothelial monolayer
was used to assess the effect of macrophages on PDAC cell extravasation
across the endothelial wall into an extracellular matrix-like hydrogel.
We observed that the extravasation propensity of PDAC cells was increased
by the presence of TAMs but was not significantly affected by non
tumor-conditioned macrophages. This suggests that the tumor-conditioned
media fostered monocyte differentiation toward pro-metastatic
macrophages. To assess if the macrophage metabolic switch toward
glycolysis was the key factor promoting the increment in cancer cell
extravasation, we treated the TAMs with 2-Deoxyglucose (2-DG), a
competitive inhibitor of glycolysis at the level of hexokinase. Indeed,
we observed a significant reduction in the rate of PDAC cell
extravasation when TAMs were treated with 2-DG compared to untreated
TAMs. Our results confirmed that the glycolytic metabolism was involved
in modulating pro-tumoural macrophage function. Taken together, our data
suggest that the macrophage metabolic pathway is a potential therapeutic
target for controlling immune cell contributions to tumor progression and
that patient responses to current treatments might be improved by
inhibition of macrophage glycolysis.

