Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying lifestyle and genetic factors to prevent recurrence of
non-muscle invasive bladder cancer in a prospective cohort study at
Kaiser Permanente (The Be-Well Study)


Background: Bladder cancer is one of the top 10 incident cancers. Most
cases (75%) are diagnosed as non-muscle invasive disease (NMID), yet NMID
typically recurs (70%) and a subset (25%) progresses to muscle-invasive
disease. The Be-Well Study is an NCI-funded collaborative, multi-center
prospective cohort study, with NMID bladder cancer patients enrolled at
Kaiser Permanente Northern (KPNC) and Southern California (KPSC) and
bioassays performed at Roswell Park Cancer Institute (RPCI). The goal is
to examine diet and lifestyle factors and prognosis, with an emphasis on
cruciferous vegetable (CV) intake and their unique isothiocyanate (ITC)
content, the modifying effect of polymorphisms of ITC-metabolizing genes,
and interactions with treatment. Our prior work suggests that dietary
ITCs may prevent disease recurrence and progression in NMID
patients.Methods: Newly-diagnosed patients with NMID (Ta, Tis, T1), who
are English-speaking, KP members, and 21 years of age, are ascertained
rapidly from electronic pathology reports and enrolled on average 2.6
months post-diagnosis. Baseline participation consists of a telephone
interview including a food frequency questionnaire focused on CV intake,
and providing blood and urine samples. Patients will be contacted for
follow-up interviews and urine samples at 12 and 24 months. Smoking,
medication use, occupational exposures, physical activity, quality of
life, and urinary function are also queried. Biospecimens are processed
and assayed at RPCI. Strong support for Be-Well by KP urologists will
promote dissemination of study results in patient care and
recommendations.Results: Recruitment began in February 2015. To date, 222
patients have completed the baseline interview, representing 78% male and
22% female, and 81% White, 7% Black, 5% Hispanic, 3% Asian, and 4% Other.
Urine specimens have been collected from 82% of consented patients. Blood
specimens have been collected from 85% of KPNC patients, and collection
at KPSC began in November 2015. The 12-month follow-up interview and
outcome ascertainment for disease recurrence and progression are
scheduled to begin in February 2016.Conclusions: The Be-Well Study is
poised to be the largest and most comprehensive study to answer critical
questions related to prognosis, quality of life, and care in patients
diagnosed with early-stage bladder cancer.

