Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral delivery of drug-loaded microspheres for cancer


The oral route remains the preferred method of administering drugs;
however, this delivery mode faces many challenges, including low
bioavailability of the administered drug, generalized toxicity and drug
decomposition. Microsphere drug delivery systems have evolved to improve
patient compliance, reduce toxicity, and increase efficacy. Additionally,
the use of microspheres to deliver drugs has many other advantages, such
as control-release of the active drug, increase bioavailability and
target delivery of the drug to the desired tissue/cell. Our research
explored the utility of encapsulating vorinostat in biodegradable
microsphere delivery system, to be delivered orally via a capsule, to
attain effective therapeutic effect. The strategy is to develop an oral,
biodegradable albumin-based microsphere delivery system containing
vorinostat that would elicit targeted inhibitory effect on cancer to
enhance therapeutic efficacy. Vorinostat-loaded microspheres were
prepared by a microencapsulation method through spray drying. The
parameters for spray drying were optimized to find the best formulation
for enhanced uptake and efficacy in vitro in cultured HEPG2 cells.
Microspheres were loaded into capsules. Microspheres and capsule
formulations were assessed for particle size, particle size distribution,
surface morphology and properties and Zeta potential measurements. Drug
release characteristics were quantified using dissolution studies.
Chemical and thermal stability of the encapsulated drug and microsphere
formulations were evaluated using FTIR and DSC, respectively. The uptake
and cellular internalization of the microspheres were evaluated using
co-cultures of Caco-2 cells and Raji cells. In vitro cytotoxicity was
evaluated using MTT and clonogenic assays. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activity levels in cells from treatment of free vorinostat and
microparticle formulation were compared. Global histone modifications in
HEPG2 cancer cells due to vorinostat-loaded microsphere treatment were
also analyzed. Our data indicated that vorinostat microspheres were 1-2
microns in size and possessed spherical morphology. Zeta potential
measurements show values of -30 mV, which indicated colloidal stability
of the microsphere dispersion. Uptake studies indicated that more than
50% of the microspheres were internalized inside the cells within 12
hours. Additionally, dissolution studies showed that within 24 hours, 80%
of the drug is sustained-release from the microsphere formulations. HDAC
activity levels were shown to be decreased in cultured cells when
vorinostat microspheres were used. Our in vitro studies showed that
drug-loaded microsphere formulations exert cytotoxic effects on cultured
cells. In summary, microspheres were shown to be a potential effective
oral delivery system to administer anticancer drugs, with enhanced
efficacy due to their controlled-release manner.

