Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The amphiphatic (2,2)-amino acid derivative, LTX-401 induces
complete regression of experimental hepatocellular carcinomas


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most common cancer in the
world and third cause of cancer-related deaths. Because HCC is a
relatively chemotherapy-resistant cancer, and many patients are
restricted to surgical resection or liver transplantation, there is an
urgent need to develop new and improved therapeutic regiments. In the
present study, we have investigated the therapeutic effect of a novel
oncolytic compound, LTX-401, designed for the local treatment of solid
malignancies. In vitro analysis revealed that LTX-401 displayed potent
anticancer activity against a broad variety of cancer cell lines. In our
model cell line (JM1 HCC), LTX-401 was found to induce necrotic (lytic)
cell death followed by the release of potent immune stimulants in the
form of Danger-Associated Molecular Pattern molecules (DAMPs) such as
HMGB1 and ATP. Ultrastructural analysis by transmission electron
microscopy also revealed that a substantial portion of LTX-401-treated
JM1 cells contained significantly affected mitochondria. Additionally,
cytochrome c was detected in cell supernatants after treatment. The
anticancer effect of LTX-401 was investigated in a rat hepatocellular
carcinoma model by inoculating JM1 cells into the liver (intrahepatic) of
syngeneic Fischer 344 rats. LTX-401 induced a complete regression of HCC
tumors by intratumoral injection. Tumor-specific protective immune
responses were obtained in previously cured animals, as re-challenge with
live and equivalent tumor cells did not lead to tumor growth.
Furthermore, intratumoral treatment with LTX-401 was able to eradicate
diffuse distant untreated metastasis in the liver. Immuno-histological
analysis showed T-cell infiltration into treated tumors. Taken together,
intrahepatic treatment with LTX-401 can induce complete regression and
long lasting protective tumor-specific immune responses.

