Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel epigenetic biomarkers in premalignant/malignant
oral cavity lesions by methylation arrays


Purpose: The incidence of the oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is
around 50% of all head and neck cancer (HNC), the sixth most common type
of cancer in the world. Aberrant hyper/hypo-methylation in the promoter
region of some known or putative tumor suppressor/protoonco-genes occurs
frequently during the development of various cancers including OSCC. Both
of genetic and environmental factors play roles in the carcinogenesis of
malignant lesions. Etiological factors predisposing to OSCC are smoking,
alcohol and tobacco consumption, snuffuse, viral factors, chronic
irritation, iron and various vitamin deficiencies, poor oral hygiene and
diseases such as syphilis. Despite the advances in cancer diagnosis and
treatment, the 5-year survival rate of OSCC patients is poor and because
of advanced stage of disease, it has high mortality and morbidity.
Another the most important ethiological factor of OSCC is oral
premalignant lesions (OPML), since OPML is related with malignant
transformation. In our study, we included three different OPML associated
with different risks of leading to malignancy: Oral leukoplakia has a
high risk of conversion into malignancy, whereas oral lichen planus and
oral lichenoid dysplasia are associated with lower risk. We aimed to
investigate the epigenetic characterization of OSCC and OPML relative to
the epigenetic changes in these groups.Experimental Design: Tumor and
corresponding healthy tissues from 12 and 10 Turkish patients with OPML
and OSCC, respectively were collected. The samples were analyzed
histopatologically and after DNA extraction and bisulfite modification,
methylation patterns of the samples were investigated by using the
Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 (450K) BeadChip array.Results:
According to our preliminary results obtained from the methylation array
experiments, CpG regions in the UOX, ABCC12, FCRLB, ABL2, LGR6 and
SLC22A18 genes were found unmethylated while CpGs located in YPEL-3 were
highly methylated (pPurpose: The incidence of the oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) is around 50% of all head and neck cancer (HNC), the
sixth most common type of cancer in the world. Aberrant
hyper/hypo-methylation in the promoter region of some known or putative
tumor suppressor/protoonco-genes occurs frequently during the development
of various cancers including OSCC. Both of genetic and environmental
factors play roles in the carcinogenesis of malignant lesions.
Etiological factors predisposing to OSCC are smoking, alcohol and tobacco
consumption, snuffuse, viral factors, chronic irritation, iron and
various vitamin deficiencies, poor oral hygiene and diseases such as
syphilis. Despite the advances in cancer diagnosis and treatment, the
5-year survival rate of OSCC patients is poor and because of advanced
stage of disease, it has high mortality and morbidity. Another the most
important ethiological factor of OSCC is oral premalignant lesions
(OPML), since OPML is related with malignant transformation. In our
study, we included three different OPML associated with different risks
of leading to malignancy: Oral leukoplakia has a high risk of conversion
into malignancy, whereas oral lichen planus and oral lichenoid dysplasia
are associated with lower risk. We aimed to investigate the epigenetic
characterization of OSCC and OPML relative to the epigenetic changes in
these groups.Experimental Design: Tumor and corresponding healthy tissues
from 12 and 10 Turkish patients with OPML and OSCC, respectively were
collected. The samples were analyzed histopatologically and after DNA
extraction and bisulfite modification, methylation patterns of the
samples were investigated by using the Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation450 (450K) BeadChip array.Results: According to our
preliminary results obtained from the methylation array experiments, CpG
regions in the UOX, ABCC12, FCRLB, ABL2, LGR6 and SLC22A18 genes were
found unmethylated while CpGs located in YPEL-3 were highly methylated
(p<0.005).Conclusion: We concluded the UOX, ABCC12, FCRLB, ABL2, LGR6,
SLC22A18 and YPEL-3 may be potential biomarker candidate genes playing
role in the transformation mechanism of OPML/OSCC. In the further
studies, we will compare the methylation patterns between OPML subgroups
to discriminate the potential candidates.*This study was supported by the
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey
(TUBITAK-SBAG-114S497).

