Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting liver-tumor initiating cells via hampering the
lipogenesis pathways through stearoyl - CoA desaturase


Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the most lethal cancers in the world.
Most of the patients are diagnosed at advanced stage, and they receive
sorafenib as their treatment modality. However, sorafenib can only extend
patients survival to a median of 3-4 months. Hence, there is an urgent
need to identify a new therapeutic target for treatment of this disease.
Increasing evidence showed that tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs) are
intrinsically resistant to conventional treatments. Identification of the
signalling pathways that maintain the functions of T-ICs provides
potential targets for treatment of HCC. For this purpose, we cultured
serial passages of hepatospheres combined with chemotherapeutic regimens
as a strategy to enrich liver T-IC population. Using cDNA microarray, we
found upregulation of several key enzymes in lipogenesis in enriched T-IC
population, among which Stearoyl CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1), the enzyme
involved in the conversion of saturated into monounsaturated fatty acids,
was the most significant. In HCC clinical samples, 62% (36/58) was found
to be overexpressed (> 2-fold) when compared with non-tumor counterparts
and patients with SCD1 overexpression had shorter disease free survival.
Using overexpression and knockdown approaches, SCD1 was found to regulate
the traits of T-ICs, including tumorigenicity, self-renewal, drug
resistance and expression of liver T-IC markers. SCD1 was found critical
in survival of T-ICs, as enriched T-IC population are more sensitive to
the inhibition of SCD1 compared to adherent lineages. Interestingly, SCD1
was found to be upregulated in sorafenib-resistant HCC cells.
Pharmacological inhibition of SCD1 by A939572 not only suppressed
self-renewal ability but also consistently enhanced the sensitivity
towards sorafenib. Using a patient-derived xenograft model, we found that
a new inhibitor against SCD1 demonstrated significant growth suppressive
effect. By comparing the genetic profiles between SCD1 knockdown cells
and control cells by RNA sequencing analysis, we found that upregulation
of ER stress signature genes may be the potential downstream targets of
SCD1 to maintain the properties of T-ICs. In conclusion, we demonstrated
the crucial role of SCD1 in maintenance of liver T-ICs, and targeting
SCD1 in combination with sorafenib might be a novel therapeutic regimen
against HCC.

