Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pterostilbene (PTER) suppresses breast cancer brain metastasis by
targeting a c-Met mediated inflammation network


At the late stage of breast cancer, most patients develop metastatic
lesions and the brain is one of the major metastatic sites. Brain
metastasis profoundly affects the cognitive and sensory function as well
as morbidity of patients, and the one year survival rate among these
patients remains less than 20%. The result of our newly developed gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA)-based pathway screening indicates that
c-Met pathway is highly activated among the patients who developed early
brain metastasis. To identify a novel target of c-Met pathway in brain
metastasis, we performed the microarray analysis in two brain metastatic
cell lines with the expression of doxycycline-inducible sh-cMet. Our
results indicate that a group of inflammatory cytokines including IL1b,
IL8 and CXCL1 were significantly induced by c-Met activation.
Furthermore, we found that IL1b was able to induce the secretion of HGF
(hepatocyte growth factor) from tumor associated astrocytes (TAA) which
in turn activates c-Met pathway in cancer cells. Our results of
endothelial cell tube formation assays also strongly suggest that
cMet-induced IL8 and the activation of its receptor, CXCL1, promote tumor
angiogenesis which is essential for the metastatic growth of cancer
cells. Natural compounds (NC) have been extensively studied for their
anti-tumor effects. However, much less studies have been done on NC for
the treatment/prevention of brain tumors mainly due to the obstacle of
Blood-brain-barrier (BBB) permeability. To identify the NCs that can be
used for treating brain metastasis, we performed pathway analysis which
only focused on BBB-permeable NC. The results of GSEA indicate that
Resveratrol-targeting genes were significantly enriched among those
patients who developed brain metastasis compared to metastasis-free
patients. Furthermore, we found that the one of derivatives of
Resveratrol, Pterostilbene (PTER), showed significantly more potent
activity than Resveratrol and suppressed brain metastasis in vitro and in
vivo by targeting the c-Met oncogene. These findings suggest that
TAA-mediated c-Met activation plays a key role in brain metastasis and
that PTER is a potential therapeutic agent to treat brain metastasis by
suppressing the c-Met expression.

