Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative high-throughput screening as a tool to identify novel
therapies in bladder cancer: lessons from flavopiridol


Introduction and Objectives: Bladder cancer (CaB) is the 4th most common
cancer among men and 12th most common among women in United States. It is
one of the most expensive malignancies to treat from diagnosis to death.
No new pharmacological agents have been approved for the treatment of
bladder cancer in the last two decades. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for development of new treatment therapies. Quantitative high
throughput screening (qHTS) of representative cancer cell lines with
oncology drugs may identify new treatments and pathways. We utilized this
technique to identify new targets and therapies in two primary bladder
lines (T24 and UMUC3) and their metastatic derivatives (T24T, SLT3 and
FL3 of T24 and LUL-2 for UMUC3).Methods: We screened 7 bladder cancer
cell lines (T24T, SLT3, FL3, LUL-2, RT4, T24, and UMUC3) against 1,912
oncology drugs using a 48 hour cell proliferation assay with an ATPbased
readout (CellTiterGlo) to determine activity and potency of compounds in
a dose response manner. One of the candidate drugs inhibitory in all cell
lines tested is flavopiridol, a pan-CDK inhibitor. We further
characterized the mechanism of action of flavopiridol using various cell
based assays such as cell proliferation, cell cycle analysis, apoptosis
assays, and modified colony forming assays. Finally, mouse xenograft
studies were carried out to elucidate the in vivo effects of
flavopiridol.Results: The initial screen identified 95 compounds active
in 7 cell lines. The top 50 compounds were further analyzed for molecular
size of >200 g/mol and TPSAIntroduction and Objectives: Bladder cancer
(CaB) is the 4th most common cancer among men and 12th most common among
women in United States. It is one of the most expensive malignancies to
treat from diagnosis to death. No new pharmacological agents have been
approved for the treatment of bladder cancer in the last two decades.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for development of new treatment
therapies. Quantitative high throughput screening (qHTS) of
representative cancer cell lines with oncology drugs may identify new
treatments and pathways. We utilized this technique to identify new
targets and therapies in two primary bladder lines (T24 and UMUC3) and
their metastatic derivatives (T24T, SLT3 and FL3 of T24 and LUL-2 for
UMUC3).Methods: We screened 7 bladder cancer cell lines (T24T, SLT3, FL3,
LUL-2, RT4, T24, and UMUC3) against 1,912 oncology drugs using a 48 hour
cell proliferation assay with an ATPbased readout (CellTiterGlo) to
determine activity and potency of compounds in a dose response manner.
One of the candidate drugs inhibitory in all cell lines tested is
flavopiridol, a pan-CDK inhibitor. We further characterized the mechanism
of action of flavopiridol using various cell based assays such as cell
proliferation, cell cycle analysis, apoptosis assays, and modified colony
forming assays. Finally, mouse xenograft studies were carried out to
elucidate the in vivo effects of flavopiridol.Results: The initial screen
identified 95 compounds active in 7 cell lines. The top 50 compounds were
further analyzed for molecular size of >200 g/mol and TPSA<90. These
parameters are consistent with lipophilicity and may help identify
compounds that can be used as intravesical agents. The selection
parameters identified mitomycin C and 8 novel compounds. Cell
proliferation assays of these 8 novel compounds in cell lines not part of
the initial screen revealed that flavopiridol most consistently achieved
IC50s of 100-150 nM, consistent with the qHTS data. Flavopiridol induces
G2/M arrest; however, it induces little apoptosis as per the Annexin V
FITC-PI assay. Growth in Low Attachment (GILA) assay showed inhibition of
colony formation in the presence of flavopiridol. Xenograft studies using
the UMUC-3 cell line implanted subcutaneously demonstrated cytostatic
inhibition of tumor growth in the presence of systemically delivered
flavopiridol. However, intravesical administration has not yet been
evaluated.Conclusions: qHTS can identify novel compounds. Flavopiridol is
an effective inhibitor both in vitro and in vivo. Although it merely
caused cytostatic inhibition in a xenograft model when delivered
systemically, its physical properties are most suited for intravesical
use which may lead to it being more effective as higher doses can be
administered into the bladder with minimal/no systemic toxicities.
Studies are now underway to evaluate the use of flavopiridol as an
intravesical agent.

