Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia selectively confers resistance to the survivin-targeting
compound YM155 in acute myeloid leukemia and Ewings sarcoma cell lines


BackgroundHypoxia is characteristic of almost all types of solid tumors
and is an important component of the bone marrow microenvironment. It is
an adverse prognostic indicator in cancer as it is associated with tumor
progression and chemoresistance. Cells may adapt to hypoxia in different
ways; including growth arrest, stimulation of angiogenic factors,
inhibition of apoptosis, induction of the ER stress program, or
modification of the cellular energy metabolism. YM155 inhibits survivin
gene expression by suppressing promoter activity and subsequent gene
expression. The role of hypoxia and its clinical implications in
childhood cancer remain largely unknown. Therefore, studying the drug
response of cancer cells within a hypoxic environment is critical for the
accurate prediction of patients response to therapy.The aims of the
present study were (1) to perform screening of the effects of 5
molecularly targeted compounds on a large panel of pediatric cancer cell
lines including acute myeloid leukemia (AML), Ewings sarcoma (ES),
osteosarcoma (OS), and neuroblastoma (NB), under normoxia and hypoxia,
and (2) to determine the potential mechanisms of drug resistance under
hypoxia.Methods and ResultsIn the present study the IC50 values were
determined for the following targeting agents: linsitinib,
picropodophylin (insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor), YM155
(survivin), AZD 8055 (mTOR), dovitinib (FLT3, c-kit, FGF4), and
Palbociclib (CDK4/CDK6) in a panel of 15 AML, 4 ES, 2 OS and 2 NB cell
lines using Cell Titer Glo assay. The effect of hypoxia was differential.
It depended on the cell line and the compound used. However, hypoxia
induced universal resistance to YM155 in all cell lines tested. YM155 had
significant cytotoxicity in AML cell lines (IC50 between 2.5-1775 nM) in
normoxia, however, the IC50 values in hypoxia were in the micromolar
range, with an increase of > 100 fold. The effect of hypoxia on YM155
response in ES cell lines was less pronounced with (IC50s between 1-10
nM) in normoxia compared to (IC50 between 6 and 350 nM) in hypoxia. We
studied the effect of hypoxia on the cell cycle using propidium iodide
and flow cytometry in MV4-11 AML cells. Treatment with YM155 for 24 h in
normoxia induced a pronounced decrease in the percentage of cells in S
phase and G2/M phase and an increase in the sub-G1 phase. However, no
change in cell cycle phases was detected under hypoxia. Ongoing studies
are focusing on determining the mechanisms of hypoxia-induced YM155
resistance through studying the expression of proteins regulating
hypoxia, cell cycle, and apoptosis using western blot.ConclusionThese
data demonstrate that hypoxia induced different effects in a panel of
pediatric cancer cell lines. However, it conferred pronounced resistance
to YM155 in AML and ES cell lines. Hypoxia is likely a key factor in
programming treatment resistance and, thus, relapse and poor outcomes.

