Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the role of BHLHE40/DEC1/SHARP2/STRA13 in prostate
cancer


Background: Basic-helix-loop-helix proteins (BHLH) are transcription
factors that play important roles in critical developmental processes in
many organisms by repressing the transcription of various target genes.
Previous studies showed that overexpression of the BHLHE40 (also known as
DEC1, STRA13 or SHARP2) transcriptional repressor results in growth
suppression, cell cycle arrest, and cellular senescence indicating that
BHLHE40 may have important tumor suppressor functions. Studies showed
that the expression of BHLHE40 is indeed downregulated in some tumors,
intriguingly however, it is also overexpressed in many such as lung
cancer, breast cancer. Our overall goal is to elucidate the function of
BHLHE40 in prostate cancer (CaP) and gain an understanding of how it is
regulated.Methods: Initial studies were based on qPCR analysis to compare
the expression levels of BHLHE40 in different cell lines ranging from
androgen-dependent LNCaP cells to the castration resistant C4, C4-2,
C4-2b, R1, Rv1, PC3 and PC3 cells that stably express the androgen
receptor (AR) (PC3-AR). Further analysis were done by treating LNCaP and
C4-2 cells with 1 nM dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in media containing fetal
bovine serum (FBS), or charcoal stripped serum (CSS). Western blot
analysis was done to check the level of BHLHE40 protein in these cell
lines. Knock-down of AR, or the use of AR inhibitors Enzalutamide and/or
Bicalutamide were used to further assess the regulation of BHLHE40 by the
AR.Results: qPCR comparison of BHLHE40 transcript levels in LNCaP versus
C4, C4-2, R1, Rv1, PC3 cells showed that while LNCaP cells have high
transcript levels of BHLHE40, the CRPC cells all had very low transcript
levels of this transcription factor. When comparing LNCaP to PC3 and
PC3-AR cells, it was interesting to note that PC3-AR cells showed
significantly higher transcript levels of BHLHE40 than PC3 implying that
BHLHE40 may be regulated by the AR pathway. Treatment with 1 nM DHT on
these cells showed that BHLHE40 increases over time following DHT
treatment. In contrast, inhibition of AR by Enzalutamide (2 M) showed
reduced BHLHE40 levels, although Bicalutamide (10 M) did not
significantly altered the expression level of BHLHE40 in LNCaP
cells.Conclusions: Our results indicate that BHLHE40 is regulated by the
AR pathway, although whether this is direct or indirect is yet to be
determined. This observation is significant, since it indicates that the
AR may be utilizing this transcription factor to suppress the
transcription of other genes.Future studies will attempt to determine if
BHLHE40 may have an androgen-responsive-element (ARE) in its promoter and
via ChIP assay to identify possible binding sites for AR in conjunction
with luciferase assay to assess androgen-receptor mediated regulation.

