Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL12/CXCR4 and integrin signal activation by cancer-associated
fibroblasts enhances the chemoresistance in gastric cancer


Purpose: Gastric cancer (GC) is an aggressive cancer metastasizing with a
high propensity for peritoneal dissemination and liver metastasis. Some
studies have been shown that not only cancer cells but also their
surrounding stroma, especially cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) play
an important role in tumor development. Previously, we reported that
CXCL12-CXCR4 and integrin 1 signal activation by CAFs co-operates for
promoting FAK phosphorylation and enhances the invasiveness of GC cells
in extracellular matrix (ECM).On the other hand, a previous study
presented that CXCR4 and integrin signaling co-operates in mediating
adhesion and chemoresistance in small cell lung cancer cells. Therefore,
we hypothesized that CXCL12-CXCR4 and integrin signal activation by CAFs
enhances the chemoresistance in GC as well. The aim of current study is
to elucidate the significance of CAFs mediating signal activation for
chemoresistance in GCs.Experimental Design: We first performed
chemo-sensitive assays using GC cells cultured with fresh medium or with
CAF-conditioned-medium (CM), and these experiments were conducted on
non-coated and Matrigel-coated plates. Next, we examined the CXCL12-CXCR4
and integrin related signaling by western blotting analysis. Furthermore,
we investigated the critical molecule for chemoresistance using silencing
CXCR4 or integrin 1 in GC cells.Results: Chemo-sensitive assays revealed
that GC cells cultured with CAF-CM showed more resistant to cisplatin and
reactive oxygen spices (ROS) than those cultured with fresh medium.
Moreover, GC cells with CAF-CM on Matrigel-coated plates exhibited
remarkable resistance in these assays. On the other hand, western
blotting analysis showed that Akt activity in GC cells cultured with
CAF-CM was up-regulated in concurrence with FAK phosphorylation. Finally,
the chemoresitance induced by CAFs was significantly suppressed by CXCR4
or integrin 1 silencing.Conclusions: These results suggest that
CXCL12/CXCR4 and integrin1 signal activation by CAFs promoted the
chemoresistance through enhancing their interaction with ECM in GC. This
mechanism underlying the chemoresistance may provide a novel therapeutic
target in advanced GCs.

