Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin remodeling as a potential new strategy for fusion
positive rhabdomyosarcoma therapy


Fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma (FP-RMS) is a pediatric tumor driven by
an oncogenic fusion protein, PAX3-FOXO1, which acts as a transcription
factor. Conventional chemotherapy is effective for low risk patients who
have a 5-year overall survival greater than 65%, while high risk
patients, including those with metastatic disease, have less than 40%
survival. Consequently, we hypothesize that targeting the fusion protein
or its collaborators in transcription regulation will provide novel
therapies for this aggressive subtype of RMS. To identify new druggable
PAX3-FOXO1 interactors, we performed a combined proteomic and genetic
screen which led to the discovery of the NuRD complex (Nucleosome
Remodelling and Deacetylase) as a major PAX3-FOXO1 co-regulator. The NuRD
complex is unique among the chromatin remodelling complexes due to its
dual enzymatic activity. It can act by histone deacetylation through
HDAC1/2 (histone deacetylases) or influence nucleosome positioning
through CHD4 (chromodomain-DNA-binding protein 4). Intriguingly, it has
been associated with both activating and repressive activities in gene
expression and its role in cancer development is not fully understood
yet. We found that in FP-RMS, silencing of CHD4 affected the expression
of approximately 50% of PAX3-FOXO1 regulated target genes. These were
mainly genes which are usually upregulated, suggesting an activating role
for NuRD. Consistent with CHD4 activation activity, ChIP-seq experiments
demonstrated that CHD4 and HDAC2 co-localize with the fusion protein in
cis-regulatory sites of a subset of its target genes. Interestingly, gene
expression analysis showed that both CHD4 and HDAC2 are highly expressed
in tumor tissue and myoblasts when compared to normal skeletal muscle,
inferring a potential role of the NuRD complex in maintaining the
undifferentiated phenotype observed in FP-RMS. Importantly, CHD4
silencing had no effect on myoblasts proliferation whereas a profound
growth reduction was seen in FP-RMS cell lines, suggesting a unique
tumour dependency on this chromatin remodeler. In addition, depletion of
CHD4 caused a complete regression of xenograft tumours in mice.In
summary, we have identified the NuRD complex as an essential positive
co-regulator of PAX3-FOXO1 transcriptional activity. Our data propose a
critival role of one of the NuRD core component CHD4 in FP-RMS cell
viability, making CHD4 an attractive new target for therapy. To our
knowledge, CHD4 is the first chromatin remodeler identified to associate
with PAX3-FOXO1 transcriptional activity, thus highlighting the relevance
of epigenetic regulation in FP-RMS tumour development. Collectively, our
findings suggest CHD4 as a potential novel therapeutic target in this
childhood malignancy.Ongoing work is currently underway to identify
first-in-class small molecules to inhibit CHD4 protein.

