Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis and evaluation of fluorinated antifolates for
improved selectivity and potency against tumor cells


Folates are important single carbon transferring cofactors required for
the biosynthesis of purine and pyrimidine nitrogen bases and DNA.
Antifolates inhibit synthesis of these nitrogenous bases and function as
antineopastic agents. The use of currently marketed antifolates such as
methotrexate (MTX and pemetrexed (PMX) is limited by dose-limiting
toxicity due to non-selective transport by the ubiquitously expressed
reduced folate carrier (RFC). We previously reported a series of
6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine classical antifolates that are
selectively transported by folate receptors (FR) and/or by the
proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT) over RFC and inhibit FR/PCFT
expressing tumor cells (KB and IGROV1) at sub-nanomolar IC50 values.
These antifolates are comparatively more potent and circumvent the
important limitation of currently marketed clinical antifolates that lack
selective uptake into tumors. As an extension of the SAR, we now report
on the role of fluorine atom(s) in improving selectivity as well potency.
Fluorine was incorporated into our 6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine
antifolates to improve pharmacodynamics by improving binding affinity to
target proteins via a number of well documented electrostatic and
hydrophobic interactions of fluorine. In addition, fluorines were
strategically placed on the side chain of our targeted antifolates for
improved potency and selectivity through induced conformational
restriction due to a plausible intramolecular fluorine-hydrogen bonding
interaction. The fluorinated analogs had IC50s in the subnanomolar range
(IC50 = 0.33 to 0.29 nM) for KB tumor cells and nanomolar (IC50 = 2.77 to
3.47 nM) for IGROV-1 cells. In addition, these analogs showed 600- to
1000-fold selectivity for FR expressing cells over RFC. Protection
studies suggest that glycinamide ribonucleotide formyl transferase
(GARFTase) is the intracellular targets. In vivo activity was established
toward the SKOV3 tumor xenograft model. These preclinical studies suggest
that these fluorinated analogs are candidates for possible clinical trial
as antitumor agents.

