Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel rosmarinic acid/blue light combination treatment inhibits
cell proliferation and migration in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Our labs have observed decreased proliferation of several cultured head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines when treated with
rosmarinic acid or blue light. The purpose of this study was to test the
hypothesis that the combination therapy would be more effective than
either treatment alone, and to further characterize the cellular
mechanisms responsible for these effects.UM-SCC-6 oral squamous carcinoma
cells were cultured in 24- or 96-well plates, and cells were exposed to
blue light delivered from a Quartz-tungsten-halogen dental curing lamp
(500 mW/cm2) for 90 or 120 sec, followed 1 h later by the addition of 80
g/ml rosmarinic acid. Cell number was assessed at 24h using a WST-1 cell
proliferation assay and cell migration was measured with an Oris
Universal Migration Assay Kit. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) was
quantified with each single treatment and combination using the
CM-H2DCFH-DA assay. Western blot analysis was used to monitor changes in
levels of cell signaling proteins known to be affected by each single
treatment including phosphoAKT (pAKT) and AKT, NF-E2-related factor 2
(NRF2), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), and GAPDH (as a loading control).As
hypothesized, the combination of rosmarinic acid and blue light was more
effective in reducing cell proliferation and migration than either single
treatment alone. Both treatments also produced an early increase in ROS.
Treatment with blue light significantly increased pAKT while rosmarinic
acid decreased AKT activation. However, both treatments increased levels
of Nrf2 and its downstream target, HO-1.In order for the transcription
factor NRF2 to translocate to the nucleus it needs to be stabilized and
activated. AKT is an upstream kinase that is a known activator of NRF2 in
response to an increase in ROS. Nuclear NRF2 binds to the antioxidant
response element (ARE) within the promoters for phase II
detoxifying/antioxidant genes, including that of HO-1. This signaling
cascade has been shown to lead to anti-proliferative functions. Our
results suggest that blue light induces this pathway by transiently
increasing ROS that then significantly activates AKT. Subsequent NRF2
activation leads to increased levels of HO-1. Rosmarinic acid appears to
use a different mechanism to upregulate NRF2 due to its downregulation of
AKT. Importantly, both treatments activate NRF2, resulting in induction
of antioxidant protein expression and ultimately decreasing ROS needed to
promote tumor cell growth. This combination therapy may prove to be a
useful, non-invasive treatment for HNSCC.

