Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accumulation of tumor cells with retained heterozygous BRCA1
status during platinum therapy: A probable mechanism of attenuation of
tumor response in BRCA1-driven ovarian cancer


Approximately 15-25% ovarian cancer (OC) patients carry germ-line
mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. BRCA deficiency underlies the
pronounced sensitivity of tumor cells to platinum-containing cytotoxic
therapy. However, significant variations in platinum sensitivity are
observed even within BRCA1/2 mutation-driven carcinomas. It has been
shown, that chemoresistant tumor tissues could be characterized by the
restoration of the BRCA1 function via additional somatic genetic events.
This investigation aimed to analyze the role of BRCA status within the
group of patients receiving preoperative platinum-based therapy. We
addressed the question, whether intratumoral LOH status of BRCA1 gene may
be altered during neoadjuvant therapy.At first, we tested for Slavic
founder BRCA mutations 225 ovarian cancer patients, who started their
treatment with a few cycles of platinum-based therapy, and underwent
debulking surgery afterwards. 34 BRCA1 and 1 BRCA2 mutation carriers were
identified. Complete clinical response was documented in 12/35 (34%)
mutation carriers and 8/190 (4%) non-carriers (P = 0.000002).
Histopathologic response was observed in 16/35 (46%) women with the
germ-line mutation versus 42/169 (25%) patients with the wild-type
genotype (P = 0.02). Surprisingly, somatic loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
for the remaining wild-type BRCA1 allele was detected only in 7/24 (29%)
post-neoadjuvant therapy residual tumor tissues as compared to 9/11 (82%)
BRCA1-associated OC, which were not exposed to systemic treatment before
the surgery (P = 0.009). We hypothesize that the low frequency of LOH is
related to the selection of tumor clones with somatically preserved BRCA1
gene during the therapy. We obtained for the LOH-analysis paired
biological specimens from 8 patients; the pairs included cytological
slides prepared at diagnosis and corresponding surgical material removed
after neoadjuvant therapy. The restoration of BRCA1 heterozygosity was
revealed in 4 out of 6 post-treatment tumor samples presenting with LOH
at diagnosis. Another two ovarian carcinomas did not demonstrate somatic
LOH before the treatment, and their status did not change during the
neoadjuvant therapy. Thus, even though chemonaive OC specimens
demonstrate somatic loss of the wild-type BRCA1 allele, the intratumoral
BRCA1 heterozygosity could be restored in the platinum-exposed tissue,
probably via expansion of LOH-negative clones.Conclusion: The obtained
data confirm high sensitivity of BRCA-driven ovarian cancer to
platinating agents and provide evidence for a rapid selection of tumor
cell clones without LOH during the platinum-based therapy.

