Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pseudoexons may underlie unbalanced expression of APC alleles in
familial adenomatous polyposis


Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in
the APC gene. Clinically, the disease can be subdivided into classical
FAP with hundreds or thousands of polyps throughout the colon and rectum
and Attenuated Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (AFAP) with a milder
polyposis. Conventional screening protocols fail to detect any APC
mutation in a considerable fraction of adenomatous polyposis families,
especially those representing AFAP. We investigated 56 FAP and AFAP
families from Finland that had remained APC mutation-negative after
protein truncation test, exon-specific Sanger sequencing, and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification. Of particular interest were four
families with constitutionally unbalanced mRNA expression of APC alleles
by Single Nucleotide Primer Extension. These families were interrogated
by next generation sequencing of the whole genomes (WGS) and RNA
(RNA-seq); additionally, APC promoter methylation was addressed by
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification.
RNA-seq raised the suspicion of a pseudoexon (erroneous inclusion of
intronic sequence in the mature mRNA) in three families. A pseudoexon
between exons 5 and 6 of the APC gene was present in one family and a
pseudoexon between exons 10 and 11 in two families. By WGS, the exon 5-6
pseudoexon consisted of c.646-1806 T>G, which generated a cryptic splice
site leading to a 127-bp intronic insertion in the APC mRNA. This
pseudoexon was associated with classical FAP. Two alternative genetic
changes underlay the exon 10-11 pseudoexon: c.1408+729 A>G was present in
one family (AFAP) and c.1408+731 C>T in another family (FAP); both
created a new splice donor site leading to an identical 83-bp insertion
in APC mRNA. The exon 10-11 pseudoexon resulting from c.1408+731 C>T has
previously been described in two unrelated German patients with FAP; the
remaining two pseudoexon-associated mutations are novel. All three
pseudoexons were predicted to cause premature stop codons leading to APC
protein truncation. Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the mutations
and to test their presence in the entire series of 56 families; no
additional mutation-positive cases were detected. Taken together, deep
intronic mutations of the APC gene may explain a proportion of FAP and
AFAP families that screen mutation-negative by traditional methods.
Specifically, such mutations accounted for three out of four families
with the unbalanced expression phenotype of APC in our study. We further
conclude that RNA-seq is an effective method to reveal deep intronic
mutations and is worth considering in apparent mutation-negative families.

