Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IONP-LPrA2 and PEG-LPrA2 therapies for triple negative breast
cancer


Background: Breast cancer (BC) is an epidemic in the US. It is estimated
that there will be over 230,000 new BC diagnoses in 2016. Triple Negative
Breast Cancer (TNBC) comprises 15% of BC cases and lacks targeted
therapeutic options. Obesity and high leptin levels are associated with
higher TNBC incidence and poorer patient outcomes. Overexpression of
leptin and its receptor, Ob-R, induce BC cell growth and angiogenesis;
therefore leptin/Ob-R may serve as a TNBC therapeutic target. We have
developed a Leptin Peptide Receptor Antagonist, LPrA2, which effectively
inhibits leptin signaling. To increase its efficacy LPrA2was coupled to
iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) and polyethylene glycol (PEG), and
subsequently tested in vitro and in vivo in obese mice hosting syngeneic
TNBC-like mammary tumors.Methods: The conjugation of LPrA2 to IONPs and
PEG was confirmed by immunoblotting analysis. E0771, mouse BC cells,
which are progesterone receptor and HER2 negative were made insensitive
to estrogen stimuli by long-term treatment with Tamoxifen (TAM). Cell
cycle and MTT assays were performed to determine the effectiveness of
leptin signaling inhibition by conjugated LPrA2 in vitro. C57BL/6 female
mice were fed a 60% fat dietto induce obesity. The obese mice were
injected with E0771-TAM cells in the mammary fat pad and treated with
IONP-LPrA2 and PEG-LPrA2 after tumor development. Obese mice treated with
IONP-LPrA2 Scramble (Sc) and PEG-LPrA2 Sc served as negative
controls.Results and Conclusion: IONP-LPrA2 and PEG-LPrA2 attenuated
leptin signaling in vitro and decreased tumor growth and progression in
vivo in comparison to the controls. These findings indicate that
conjugated LPrA2may serve as a targeted therapy for TNBC. IONP-LPrA2 may
be especially useful in treating this more aggressive form of BC due to
its ability to capture multiple LPrA2 peptides as well as its small and
uniform particle size.

