Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER-positive breast cancer prevention with the use of hormone
replacement therapy


Menopause occurs in women between the ages of 45 and 55 and often results
in undesirable vasomotor symptoms. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
alleviates these symptoms, including hot flashes, difficulty sleeping,
fatigue, and vaginal atrophy. HRT also prevents osteoporosis. PremPro, a
currently available HRT formulation that combines conjugated equine
estrogens (CE) with medroxyprogesterone acetate, increases the risk of
breast cancer. Due to the perceived risk based largely on the results of
the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) trial, the number of women taking HRT
has decreased dramatically. Duavee, a new form of HRT that combines CE
and bazedoxifene (BZA), a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM)
and degrader (SERD), has recently been approved by the FDA for treatment
of moderate to severe hot flashes and to reduce the risk of osteoporosis.
Importantly, this CE/BZA mixture not only relieves symptoms associated
with menopause, but it also does not stimulate the breast or uterus.
Although several preclinical studies suggest that CE/BZA might be
protective in the breast, the mechanism of action of this new combination
therapy is not known. Our goal, therefore, is to elucidate the underlying
molecular mechanisms by which CE/BZA differentially affects estrogen
receptor alpha (ER) action in the mammary gland, using transcriptome and
whole genome occupancy analysis in breast cancer cell lines. We are also
studying the effects of CE/BZA on early mammary cancer progression in the
polyoma middle T antigen (PyMT) transgenic mouse model, which has been
shown to be sensitive to estrogens. In addition, we are studying the
effects in an ER-positive patient-derived xenograft mouse model. We have
determined that CE modulates gene expression in MCF7 cells similar to
17-estradiol (E2), and that BZA is able to inhibit these effects. We have
also observed that CE increases ER occupancy versus E2 at response
elements associated with some estrogen target genes, whereas CE/BZA
decreases this occupancy. In the PyMT mouse model, we have determined
that CE/BZA significantly delays the onset of mammary tumors in
ovariectomized mice and prolongs their survival when compared to E2 and
CE treatment alone. An improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms
of CE/BZA action in hormone sensitive breast cancer cell and animal
models should have important implications for women considering HRT.

