Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and activity of novel GLUT1 inhibitors in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an endemic disease globally, with a
5-year survival rate of 15%. Current treatment of late-stage HCC involves
the use of chemotherapy and sorafenib, a multi-kinase inhibitor.
Metabolic studies have indicated HCC has a high glycolysis rate, and is
surrounded by a hypoglycemic microenvironment. Given the need for
therapeutic options for HCC and its glycolytic nature, this study
explored the activity of novel GLUT1 inhibitors in varied glucose
concentrations. To assess target inhibition, [3H] deoxy-D-glucose (2DG)
uptake assays were performed in HEK293 cells stably over-expressing
GLUT1-4 individually. Six HCC cell lines were cultured in media with
standard high glucose (HG:25mM) and low glucose/lactic acidosis (LGLA:
5mM glucose/20mM lactic acid) to mimic the hypoglycemic microenvironment.
IC50s were assessed using the SRB assay, and other phenotypes using
standard methods. Four novel GLUT1 inhibitors (IOM1-4) from the same
chemical series were identified from diversity screening. The compounds
exhibited differential potencies to GLUT proteins at the sub-M level. The
inhibitors reduced the uptake of 2DG, the extrusion of lactate, and
increased apoptosis. In HCC cells, IC50s were lowest with IOM1 and 2 and
highest with IOM4 (Table 1). HEP3B cells displayed exceptional
sensitivity to the inhibitors. The ranking of potency according to the
IC50s correlated with the 2DG uptake studies. There was no correlation
between GLUT protein levels and IC50s. Significant differences in
sensitivity to inhibitors were observed in cells cultured in HG and LGLA
conditions. Cells cultured in LGLA had consistently lower glucose uptake
compared those in HG conditions. In LGLA conditions, cells with low
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were more sensitive to GLUT1
inhibitors compared to cells with high ROS levels. In conclusion, GLUT1
inhibition can be influenced by microenvironment glucose levels and could
be a strategy for HCC treatment.
IC50 values (uM) for respective inhibitors in respective HCC cell lines

