Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial mesenchymal transition generates cancer stem cells in
CD44- colorectal cancer cells


Background: EpCAMhigh CD44+colorectal cancer (CRC) cells are thought to
be cancer stem cells. Recently CD44- CRC cells are also suggested to
acquire a property of cancer stem cells. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is a possible process of acquisition of cancer stem cell
(CSC)-like properties. However, it is unclear whether EMT can be induced
in primary human CRC cells.Patients and Methods: We obtained surgical
specimens from 51 CRC patients, and cultured isolated cancer cells on
matrigel-coated dish with medium containing growth factors. For induction
of EMT, TGF-beta was added into the culture medium. Otherwise, TWIST1
expression was enforced in the cells by using lentiviral transduction.
Immunocytochemical analysis, flow cytometric analysis and single cell PCR
analysis using 24-genes set containing embryonic stem cell (ES)-related
and EMT-related genes were performed. PCR analysis was carried out by C1
single cell auto prep system. CD44- CRC cells with or without enforced
expression of TWIST1 were injected into immunodeficient mice.Results:
Fifteen out of 51 samples of cancer cells formed sphere (>50 m in
diameter) after one week culture. The sphere-forming ability was related
with clinical stage (Stage 1 and 2;16.7%, Stage 3 and 4;41.3%). Sorted
single CD44+ cell had higher sphere-forming ability, compared to CD44-
cell. The higher expression of ES- and EMT-related genes was observed in
short term culture than in long-term culture, suggesting that
differentiation occurred in sphere cells after long-term culture. Single
cell PCR analysis revealed that sphere-forming cells were classified into
2 different populations on the basis of primary component analysis.
Correlation analysis showed expression of TWIST1 and ES-related genes
were correlated. In addition, flow cytometric analysis revealed that
sphere forming CD44+ cells gave rise to CD44- cells. These results
suggest that CD44+ cells have an ability to reconstruct the heterogeneous
population, and EMT is involved in acquisition of CSC-like properties.
TGF-beta increased the number of CD44+ cells in CD44- cells, and enhanced
sphere-forming ability of CD44- cells. TGF-beta also induced expression
of ES-related genes and TWIST1. Enforced expression of TWIST1 induced
sphere-forming ability and tumorigenicity in CD44- cells.Conclusions: We
established the culture system to observe the differentiation of CSCs and
revealed that EMT might be involved in maintenance of CSCs. We firstly
demonstrated that primary CD44- CRC cells undergo EMT and become CD44+
cells by TGF-beta treatment or enforced expression of TWIST1.

