Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nintedanib induces antitumor effects in triple-negative breast
cancer cells by targeting SHP-1/p-STAT3-mediated signaling pathway


Background:Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous and
aggressive subtype that currently lack of specific targeted therapy.
Previous studies have suggested that disturbing the oncogenic STAT3
signaling by activating a protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 as a
possible anti-cancer strategy. Our previous study also found that
nintedanib (BIBF1120), a multi-kinase inhibitor that blocks mainly
anti-angiogenic pathways and has been approved for idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis and for non-small cell lung cancer (in Europe), inhibits
hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth independent of its anti-angiokinase
activity (J Hepatology 2015). In this study, we tested nintedanib in TNBC
cells and examined the underlying molecular mechanism by which nintedanib
shows anti-TNBC effects.Methods:TNBC cell lines (MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231,
HCC-1395) were used for in vitro studies. Cell viability was examined by
MTT assay. Apoptosis was examined by flow cytometry and western blot.
Signal transduction pathways in cells were assessed by western blot.
Purified SHP-1 proteins or cells expressing deletion N-SH2 domain or D61A
point mutants (SHP-1 mutants with constant open form conformations) were
used to investigate the potential effects of nintedanib on SHP-1. In vivo
efficacy of nintedanib was tested in nude mice bearing orthotopic breast
cancer cells xenografts.Results:MTT assays revealed nintedanib induced
anti-proliferation in the 3 TNBC cell lines. Sub-G1 flow cytometric and
western blot analysis showed that nintedanib induced apoptosis in
association with downregulation of p-STAT3 and its downstream proteins
such as cyclin D1 in both dose and time-dependent manners. Overexpression
of STAT3 suppressed nintedanib-mediated apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Nintedanib further increased SHP-1 activity in purified SHP-1 proteins,
suggesting that nintedanib may directly affects SHP-1 activity for
p-STAT3 inhibition. Moreover, either specific SHP-1 activity inhibitor or
SHP-1 siRNA reduced the apoptotic effects of nintedanib on MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-468 cells, validating the role of SHP-1 activation in
nintedanib-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, nintedanib-induced apoptosis
was attenuated in TNBC cells expressing SHP-1 mutants with constant open
form conformations, including deletion mutants of N-SH2 domain or D61A
mutants, suggesting that the auto-inhibition structure of SHP-1 mediated
the effect of nintedanib. Importantly, intraperitoneal injection of
nintedanib showed antitumor activity, increased SHP-1 activity and
p-STAT3 downregulation in MDA-MB-231 xenograft tumors.ConclusionsOur
results suggest that nintedanib induced anti-tumor effect by SHP-1
dependent STAT3 inhibition in human TNBC cells. These findings may
provide new signaling pathway insight into the inhibition of TNBC growth
by nintedanib.

