Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of oncogene affected networks in tumorigenesis of lung
cancer


Genetic abnormality is one of major causes of tumorigenesis by driving
the progressive transformation of normal human cells into highly
malignant derivatives. Tracing the downstream pathways through which and
how the effects of the oncogenic-activating mutations are transmitted is
an important and challenging problem in studying disease mechanisms,
diagnoses and treatments. In this study, we designed a network-based
computational method, called MAXMAP, to not only predict mutation
downstream affected pathways, but also quantitatively measure the
dynamics of the pathway genes.We first constructed a heterogeneous
network by integrating protein-protein interaction networks and signaling
and regulatory networks from available up-to-date curated databases, as
well as RNASeq expression data. The RNAseq dataset of these mutated cell
lines has 18,096 genes whereas the Protein Protein Interaction and
Signalling, regulation dataset has 14,864 genes. We then used the maximal
information flow method to globally optimize the effects from the
mutations to target downstream genes. The method was applied to analyze
the biological network dynamics that is caused by single (TP53), double
(TP53+KRAS) and triple (TP53+KRAS+STK11) mutations of HBEC30KT, an
immortalized lung cell line, and revealed the core dynamical subnetworks
of these mutations. Only the triple mutant is known to have tumor-like
properties and as shown in earlier studies these sequential mutation
accumulations lead to tumorigenesis in mouse xenograft models. The
experimental validation of a small subnetwork was performed using
transient knock down of the pathway genes and expression was verified
using qPCR.We showed the dynamical subnetworks through which a gene,
SLC7A5 was affected by sequential single, double or triple mutations. We
have experimentally validated the predicted small subnetwork for SLC7A5
which is an important transporter of neutral amino acids. It is
associated with bladder and bile duct adeno carcinomas and overexpressed
in lung cancers. We selected the subnetwork affected due to the single
mutation (TP53) for validation, including THBS1, TNFRSF11B and MAPK1 and
SLC7A5.Hence, using the MAXMAP method we have successfully identified a
dynamical subnetwork affected by changes in the known network of genes.
These results suggest that this computational method may allow us to
predict drug targets or biomarkers or to study interesting alternative
paths and predict the most likely path leading to certain phenotypic
outcomes.

