Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HTLV-1 viral oncogene Hbz induces leukemia with osteolytic bone
involvement in mice


Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) develops in a subset of patients
infected with the HTLV-1 virus. Most ATL patients become refractory to
chemotherapy and have a median survival time of 6 months. Although
uncommon in hematologic malignancies, 80% of ATL patients develop
osteolytic lesions and hypercalcemia of malignancy. Bone resident and
metastatic tumors release paracrine factors that modulate the bone
microenvironment to facilitate disease progression and decrease survival.
HTLV-1 encodes 2 viral oncogenes, Tax and Hbz. Tax is critical to ATL
development and regulates tumor growth and proliferation in part through
trans-activation of NFB and CREB. We have previously shown Tax expression
driven by the Granzymbe B promoter is sufficient for the development of
leukemia/lymphoma with osteolytic lesions and hypercalcemia. We and
others have shown that Tax alters the expression of paracrine factors
that modulate the bone microenvironment through effects on bone forming
osteoblasts (OB) and bone resorping osteoclasts (OC). Tax is expressed in
early lymphocyte transformation with low expression in advanced ATL. HBZ
is expressed early in lymphocyte transformation and throughout ATL
progression. We hypothesize that in ATL cells, HTLV-1 viral oncogenes Tax
and Hbz cooperate to modulate bone metabolism in a paracrine manner to
enhance ATL tumor growth and progression. Mice with Granzyme B driven Hbz
expression (T and NK cells) develop leukemia/lymphoproliferative disease
in lymph nodes correlating with increased spleen weight. We found that
lymphoproliferative disease is also present in the bone marrow. Hbz mice
have decreased trabecular bone at 18 months by microCT and radiographic
analysis. These data suggest Hbz can alter bone metabolism. Future
studies will define the effects of Hbz on bone formation, OB and OC
specific effects and tumor progression. Understanding HTLV-1 oncogene
modulation of the bone microenvironment will uncover critical pathways in
tumor/bone cross talk enabling the development of novel targeted
therapies for ATL patients.

