Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of SIAH E3 ubiquitin ligase as a biomarker in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma


The dismal prognosis of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer points
to our limited arsenal of effective anticancer therapies. Oncogenic K-RAS
pathway activation is commonly detected in pancreatic cancer. These
activations confer drug resistance, drive aggressive tumor growth and
metastasis, and ultimately contribute to poor clinical outcome.
Currently, there is no curative treatments for pancreatic cancers. Thus,
early detection, biomarker discovery, and identifying novel means of
countervailing hyperactive K-RAS signals are urgently
needed.Seven-In-Absentia Homolog (SIAH), E3 ubiquitin ligase, is an
essential downstream component of the RAS signal transduction pathway.
SIAH is a member of a highly evolutionarily conserved family of RING
finger E3 ubiquitin ligases.Our previous immunohistochemistry (IHC)
studies have shown SIAH is a tumor-specific biomarker and SIAH expression
is progressively increased as pancreatic tumor progresses from pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) to pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDCA) at
late stages. In this study, we expand our observations by comparing the
expression patterns of SIAH and several newly identified SIAH-interacting
proteins using Mayo clinic pancreatic cancer SPORE tissue microarrays
(TMA) in a hope of identifying new vulnerability and novel prognostic
biomarkers in pancreatic cancer. We hypothesized that SIAH and
SIAH-interacting proteins may serve as useful biomarkers and will help to
assess effectiveness of anticancer treatment, disease progress, predict
clinical outcome and patient survival in the clinical settings. Moreover,
we are evaluating SIAH's role in the regulation of the SIAH-interacting
proteins and validating the potential mechanisms of these dynamic
interactions identified in vitro using pancreatic cancer patients TMA.
Ultimately, we aim to explore the new cancer vulnerability, develop new
therapeutic strategies, and validate novel prognostic biomarkers for
pancreatic cancer patients.This study is performed in a double blind
control settings and we are currently awaiting the disclosure of the
clinical information from the pathologist.

