Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a tubulin, detyrosinated tubulin and vimentin
expression in CTCs; identification of the interaction between CTCs and
blood cells through cytoskeletal elements


Background: Circulating tumor cells are the major player in metastatic
procedure (CTCs). A potential mechanism of cell migration and invasion is
the formation of microtentacles in tumor cells. These structures are
supported by alpha-Tubulin, detyrosinated, alpha Tubulin (GLU) and
Vimentin.The goal of the current study is to identify the expression of
the above cytoskeletal proteins on CTCs.Methods: We used three different
representative breast cancer cell lines MCF7, SKBR3 and MDA-MB 231 spiked
in of normal donor's blood as controls. Furthermore 15 metastatic breast
cancer patients were enrolled in this study. Tumor cell were isolated
using the ISET platform. Spots were then stained with two different
combinations of antibodies; pancytokeratin/Vimentin/a-Tubulin and
pancytokeratin/Vimentin (VIM)/GLU. Cells were then analyzed with both
confocal laser scanning microscopy and the ARIOL system.Results: We
observed that Vimentin was highly expressed in MDA-MB231 cells whereas
lower expression was observed in SKBR3 and MCF7 cells. Fluorescence
intensity quantification, using the ARIOL system, revealed that the ratio
CK/VIM was 41.11, 29.03 and 4.58 in MCF7, SKBR3 and MDA-MB 231
respectively. CK/Tubulin ratio was also higher in MCF7 compared to other
cell lines 6.24, 2.29 and 4.18 respectively. In accordance with this,
CK/GLU was 20.13 in MCF7 cells, 11.87 in SKBR3 and 11.68 in MDA-MB 231.
Interestingly, in SKBR3 and MDA-MB 231 cell lines, alpha-tubulin and
vimentin filaments were observed to mediate tumor to blood cell
interaction through filamentous bridges between cells.Consequently, we
analyzed 15 breast cancer patients. Eight (53%) of them harvested CTCs in
their blood. One of these patients had clusters of CTCs in her blood. In
this patient as well as in other CK(+) patients, CTC-to-CTC communication
through cystoskeletal bridges could be revealed. These cell connections
show localization of alpha-tubulin, Vimentin and GLU; moreover, the same
proteins form cytoskeletal structures which allow connections between
CTCs and blood cells.In all breast cancer patients the CK/Vimentin and
CK/Tubulin ratio was lower than that observed in MCF7 cells. Conversely,
there was a heterogeneity of the CK/GLU ratio since in four patients was
lower than that of MCF7 cells and in three others higher.Conclusions: The
importance of understanding the mechanisms that underlie CTC aggregation
have been highlighted by recent reports showing that clusters of CTCs
have up to 50-fold higher metastatic potential. Our study shows that CTCs
can aggregate with each other and with blood cells through cytoskeletal
structures supported by. Vimentin, a-Tubulin and Glu-tubulin.
Quantification of these cytoskeletal elements revealed that CTCs present
a phenotype similar to the most aggressive cell lines.

