Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of EIF1AX mutations in thyroid cancer
predicts for gain of function by increasing translational rate with
concomitant derepression of upstream inputs from mTOR


EIF1AX (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 1A) is a component of
the translation pre-initiation complex (PIC). Recurrent EIF1AX mutations,
first reported in uveal melanomas, are found in 1% of papillary thyroid
cancers in a mutually exclusive manner with other oncogenic driver events
(BRAF, RAS, and oncogenic fusions). By contrast, they are enriched in
advanced thyroid cancers (9% of anaplastic and 11% poorly-differentiated
thyroid cancers), and are strongly associated with RAS mutations (pEIF1AX
(eukaryotic translation initiation factor 1A) is a component of the
translation pre-initiation complex (PIC). Recurrent EIF1AX mutations,
first reported in uveal melanomas, are found in 1% of papillary thyroid
cancers in a mutually exclusive manner with other oncogenic driver events
(BRAF, RAS, and oncogenic fusions). By contrast, they are enriched in
advanced thyroid cancers (9% of anaplastic and 11% poorly-differentiated
thyroid cancers), and are strongly associated with RAS mutations
(p<0.0001). EIF1AX mutations cluster in the N-terminal (NTT) or
C-terminal tails (CTT). EIF1AX NTT missense mutations in thyroid cancer
occur within the first 15 amino acids, whereas the CTT mutation disrupts
a splice acceptor site at exon 6 (A113splice). A113splice is the most
prevalent defect and is private to this disease, and results in two
differentially spliced mRNAs: (1) Cryptic splice variant: by use of a
cryptic acceptor site in exon 6 that leads to a 132 AA protein that
excludes 12 AA; (2) Truncated splice variant: by retaining intron 5,
leading to a 115 AA truncated protein. EIF1AX mutants retain the ability
to recruit the ternary complex, as shown by co-IP with EIF2 after ectopic
expression of NTT or A113splice EIF1AX mutants in HEK293T cells, or after
CRISPR-mediated knock-in of A113splice into Cal62 RAS-mutant thyroid
cancer cells. The EIF1AX mutants had greater affinity to EIF5 compared to
WT, consistent with a more stable PIC. As translation initiation is a
rate-limiting step, the altered affinity of EIF1AX mutants to PIC
components could impact the rate of protein synthesis. We tested this by
L-azidohomoalanine labeling, which showed contrasting roles of the two
A113-generated splice variants expressed at endogenous levels: i.e. the
cryptic splice variant increased protein synthetic rate, whereas the
truncated splice variant strongly inhibited protein translation. Despite
inhibiting translation, the truncated splice variant showed a paradoxical
increase in 4EBP1 phosphorylation. Upon A113splice knock-in, where both
variants are expressed, translation is increased, which we hypothesize
results from the combined effects of 4EBP1 phosphorylation, caused by
relief of negative feedback events upstream in the pathway, with
increased PIC assembly caused by the cryptic splice variant. We are
currently determining whether the altered rate of protein synthesis is
global or selective. Of note, cells expressing the cryptic, but not the
truncated splice form, showed a transforming phenotype as assessed by
soft agar colony formation. As EIF1AX mutations co-occur with RAS
mutations in advanced thyroid cancers, it is likely that RAS-induced
PI3K-AKT/mTOR signaling may provide a further cooperative benefit and
play a key role in disease progression, and in generating specific tumor
cell dependencies.

