Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and analysis of pure intact tumor cell populations from
FFPE: Implications for more precise HER2 FISH testing in breast cancer


Body: Guidelines worldwide focus on the importance of precise,
reproducible, and quality assurance of Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization
(FISH) methods for testing companion diagnostic markers, including Human
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) gene amplification in breast
cancer. Despite these guidelines, variations in test results due to
pre-analytical sampling and tissue processing are observed. In this
study, we demonstrate a unique approach to isolating pure and intact
tumor cells from breast cancer Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE)
samples for precise subsequent FISH analysis.Methods: Fifty-micron thick
FFPE curls from both HER2 non-amplified breast cancer tumors (n = 4; each
with a reported HER2/CEP17 ratio 1.8) and positive control SKBr3 breast
cancer cells were tested. Isolation of 250 pure and intact
cytokeratin-positive/vimentin-negative/DAPI positive tumor cells from
each sample was achieved using the DEPArray platform, an automated system
enabling image-based cell sorting with single-cell resolution for pure
cell population isolation and collection. Recovered cells were then
cyto-spun onto poly-L coated glass slides prior to standard dual-color
HER2/CEP17 FISH (Path Vysion Abbott/Vysis) analysis.Results: Positive
HER2 amplification levels for the FFPE derived control SKBr3 cells were
observed (HER2/CEP17 ratio >4.4) and consistent with levels reported in
the literature. Among the patient samples, 75% of the DEPArray isolated
tumor cells were recovered onto slides prior to FISH. Through routine
FISH scoring, an expected non-amplified result was observed for each
patient sample, with observed HER2/CEP17 ratios only ranging from 1.1 to
1.4.Conclusion: We demonstrate feasibility in performing FISH for
HER2/CEP17 on pure and intact tumor cells isolated from breast cancer
derived FFPE using the DEPArray platform. Using a 50-micron section
permitted recovery of whole, intact, tumor cells based on immunostaining
for cytokeratin, vimentin, and DAPI. Efficient recovery of the DEPArray
sorted cells onto slides further permitted routine FISH analysis of only
tumor cells. These preliminary results imply the possibility of more
precise FISH analysis when standard FISH results are inconclusive or when
insufficient tumor content prohibits downstream analysis. Evaluation of
larger numbers of patient samples is underway.

