Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defensin-alpha 6 (DEFA6) as a protumorigenic function in vitro and
prognostic marker in colorectal cancer


ObjectiveDEFA6 also known as human alpha defensing 6 (HD6) is a member of
the alpha defensins family that defends the host against bacteria and
viruses. Expression of DEFA6 is enhanced in colorectal cancer tissue and
cells. The mechanism and function of DEFA6 have not been reported to play
an important role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the protumorigenic functions of DEFA6 in the
colorectal cancer cell line and to evaluate the clinical significance of
DEFA6 expression in colorectal cancer patients.MethodsDEFA6 was highly
expressed in colorectal cancer cell lines. Colorectal cancer cell,
HCT116, expressing high level of DEFA6 was used for the biological roles
of DEFA6 by siRNA transfection. The protumorigenic functions of DEFA6 was
evaluated by MTT assay, migration and invasion transwell assay and plate
colony forming assay. DEFA6 expression was investigated by
immunohistochemistry in 60 cases of colorectal cancer tissue and the
association of DEFA6 expression was correlated with patient's
survival.ResultsImmunohistochemistry analysis showed that the DEFA6
protein was expressed higher in death group (survival 5 years), (p =
0.02). The HCT116 of knockdowned DEFA6 by siRNA showed significant
decrease in proliferation by MTT assay (p5 years), (p = 0.02). The HCT116
of knockdowned DEFA6 by siRNA showed significant decrease in
proliferation by MTT assay (p<0.05) and plate colony forming assay (p =
0.00). Also, the ability of migration and invasion was significantly
reduced in DEFA6 knockdowned HCT116 compared to control HCT116 cell
(both, p5 years), (p = 0.02). The HCT116 of knockdowned DEFA6 by siRNA
showed significant decrease in proliferation by MTT assay (p<0.05) and
plate colony forming assay (p = 0.00). Also, the ability of migration and
invasion was significantly reduced in DEFA6 knockdowned HCT116 compared
to control HCT116 cell (both, p<0.05).ConclusionDEFA6 plays important
roles in invasion and migration of colorectal cancer cell according to
the functional study. As patient's survival mostly depends on the
migration and invasion of the tumor cells, the high expression of DEFA6
in colorectal cancer is associated with patient's survival and could be a
good prognostic marker.

