Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-genome RNAi screen identified BCAS1 as a novel modifier of
non-small cell lung carcinoma radioresistance


Introduction: Despite optimal chemotherapy, radiotherapy and/or surgery,
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) remains the leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States. Therefore, there is a need for
agents, such as radiosensitizers, that can improve the efficacy of
current therapies. Using a whole-genome shRNA screen, we sought to
identify and characterize novel gene products that may be involved in
NSCLC radioresistance. We hypothesize that these proteins may represent
novel targets for NSCLC radiosensitization.Materials and Methods: A
whole-genome pooled retroviral shRNA screen was performed using the
Hannon-Elledge library of 74,705 distinct shRNAs directed against over
18,000 genes, to identify gene knockdowns that showed cytotoxicity only
in cells treated with fractionated radiation given daily Monday-Friday.
To confirm targets identified in the whole-genome screen, we treated A549
and NCI-H460 NSCLC cells with siRNAs targeted against the genes of
interest and assessed cell viability following irradiation using the
CellTiter-Glo assay and clonogenic survival assays.Results: We identified
six novel genes (BCAS1, c7orf24, CDC45L, KIAA0101, TCN1 and TNC) whose
knockdown sensitized NSCLC cells to radiation. Of the six genes, siRNA
knockdown of BCAS1 showed the most consistent increases in sensitivity to
ionizing radiation. Analysis of cell viability following radiation
revealed that BCAS1 knockdown resulted in a 50% additional decrease in
cell viability in A549 and NCI-H460 cells following 8 and 4 Gy of
ionizing radiation, respectively. We confirmed these results by
clonogenic survival assays. To assess for tumor-specific expression in
NSCLC, we compared expression data between matched normal tissue and
NSCLC biopsy samples and found that BCAS1 is substantially more highly
expressed in tumor tissues. Examination of affinity capture-mass
spectroscopy data suggested that BCAS1 interacts with RUVBL2, a RuvB-like
AAA ATPase, which has known functions in DNA damage and
repair.Conclusions: BCAS1 emerged from a whole-genome RNAi screen as a
potential target for improving the efficacy of radiotherapy in NSCLC. We
demonstrated that BCAS1 is overexpressed in tumor tissues compared to
normal lung, and that its knockdown consistently sensitizes NSCLC cell
lines to radiation, validating the screen hit. Ongoing work suggests that
BCAS1 may modulate DNA damage repair. Further studies to understand the
mechanism by which BCAS1 is involved in radioresistance are necessary.

