Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Charactering the interactomes of the Myc family of oncogenes


The Myc family of transcription factors, c-Myc, N-Myc and L-Myc, are
known to be deregulated in a large variety of cancers. Mechanisms
responsible for the deregulation of the activity of Myc family members in
cancer are not well understood. A number of protein-protein interactions
and post-translational modifications have been suggested to promote the
oncogenic activity of Myc. Traditional biochemical approaches have not
been successful at mapping the interactors of Myc family members due to
their tight association with chromatin and the labile nature of Myc
proteins. Mapping the protein-protein interactions that support the
aberrant activity of Myc family of oncoproteins in cancer cells is of
high interest, particularly in a more natural context in xenograft models
in vivo.A new mass spectrometry-based technique, BioID-MS, which relies
on proximity-based biotin labeling, has recently emerged as a key advance
for the characterization of hard-to-detect protein-protein interactions
in living cells. Herein, we are reporting a new application of the
BioID-MS technique for the characterization of c-Myc interactors in human
cell line in vivo, in mouse tumor xenografts. Using the in vivo BioID
assay, we were able to identify more than 30 known and validated c-Myc
interactors, some of which include the components of the STAGA complex
and SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex. We were further able to
identify more than 100 novel high-confidence c-Myc interactors, which
include components of the DNA repair and replication machinery, general
transcription and elongation factors, and the co-regulator of
transcription-like DNA helicase protein chromodomain 8 (CHD8). Using
ENCODE ChIP-seq datasets we were able to map some of the high-confidence
interactors to coincident binding sites with c-Myc throughout the genome.
This provided further credibility that the newly identified putative
interactors could co-occupy sites on chromatin with c-Myc and could be
functionally important for activity. Furthermore, we validated the
Myc-CHD8 interaction using a number of approaches, including yeast two
hybrid and proximity-based ligation assays.These findings suggest that
the BioID-MS technique can be used to extend the mapping of the Myc
interactome and contribute to a greater understanding of Myc regulation
by protein-protein interactions. Furthermore, we are currently in the
process of employing this technique to map the interactomes of two other
Myc family members, N-Myc and L-Myc. We are interested in identifying
common interactors of the Myc family members that contribute to their
oncogenic activity, validate them, and explore whether these interactors
could be potential therapeutic targets in cancers with deregulated Myc
activity.

