Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing doxorubicin derivatives delivery using temperature
sensitive biopolymers in multidrug resistant breast cancer cells


The anticancer agent doxorubicin is an anthracycline compound that shows
high potency in treating cancer, and it is one of the most widely used
chemotherapeutics. However, efficiency of doxorubicin treatment is
limited by low blood plasma solubility, poor blood pharmacokinetics, and
non-selective cell killing that results in serious toxicity to healthy
tissues. Additionally, cancer cells often develop drug resistance, which
is a significant limiting factor to the drug's effectiveness. Motivated
by these problems, we have designed a drug delivery system that can
specifically deliver drug to the tumor site while overcoming doxorubicin
resistance in breast cancer cell lines. This drug delivery system
consists of: ELP - Elastin like polypeptide, CPP - Cell penetrating
peptide, a cleavable linker to enable doxorubicin release in the targeted
low pH environment, and a derivative of the anticancer agent Doxorubicin
(modified by a 6-maleimidocaproyl moiety for conjugation to a terminal
cysteine residue on ELP). ELP is thermally responsive and improves the
complex's pharmacokinetics by prolonging its clearance rate while the CPP
mediates cellular uptake of large macromolecules. The linker is an acid
sensitive amino acid sequence (Gly-Phe-Leu-Gly) that serves as a
substrate for lysosomal enzymes. In this study, we compared cytotoxicity
of a cleavable (cDox) and non-cleavable (ncDox) doxorubicin derivative
delivered by ELP biopolymer in the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and
MCF7/ADR (doxorubicin resistant cell line). We showed that cDox had two
fold higher cytotoxicity than ncDox in both cell lines. When ncDox,
however, was conjugated to the ELP biopolymer containing a lysosomally
degradable GFLG spacer, the drug delivery construct was equally cytotoxic
to both sensitive and resistant cell lines, indicating that the construct
delivers doxorubicin into cells by a mechanism that bypasses doxorubicin
resistance. Confocal fluorescence microscopy showed that after two hours
of exposure to the doxorubicin derivatives, cDox was predominantly
localized in the nucleus in both cell lines. However, ncDox was localized
in the plasma membrane and cytosol. Intracellular doxorubicin
accumulation examined by flow cytometry indicated 3 fold higher uptake of
ELP-cDox in sensitive MCF 7 cells compared to resistant MCF7 ADR cells.
Cellular uptake of ELP-cDox was further enhanced two fold when conjugated
with CPP. In conclusion, our current results indicate that
ELP-doxorubicin conjugates may successfully overcome drug resistance in
breast cancer cells, providing a promising approach for the use of
chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin in patients with drug
resistant breast cancers.

