Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of hTERT and increased proliferative potential in
conditionally reprogrammed normal bronchial epithelial cells


Background. Based on increasing evidence from this laboratory and genome
wide association studies (GWAS), single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
responsible for inter-individual variation in normal bronchial epithelial
cell (NBEC) cis-regulation of antioxidant, DNA repair, and cell cycle
control genes are key determinants of lung cancer risk. Thus, there is a
need for NBEC culture methods that enable extended population doublings
without genetic alteration to enable experimental investigation of
putative cis-regulatory SNPs in NBEC. Toward this goal, we assessed the
effect of previously reported conditional reprogrammed culture (CRC)
conditions on regulation of human telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT) transcript abundance and proliferative potential in NBEC.
Methods. NBEC were obtained by bronchoscopic brush from eight individuals
after obtaining informed consent to an IRB-approved protocol. NBEC were
incubated in three different culture conditions: bronchial epithelial
cell growth media (BEGM) only, co-cultured with irradiated mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (IRR-MEF) + Rho kinase inhibitor (ROCKi) in BEGM,
and conditioned BEGM + ROCKi. Media were changed every three days and
cells were passaged and sub-cultured after ten days. Human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT) was measured in three individuals after
each passage in triplicate via qPCR. The proliferative capacity of all
eight individuals was assessed using cell count and morphology at passage
>3. Results. Co-culturing NBEC with IRR-MEF in BEGM supplemented with
ROCKi produced a highly proliferative cell population while maintaining
lineage commitment evident after removal of CRC conditions. Transcript
abundance of hTERT was elevated 6.5-fold in NBEC in co-cultured
conditions and 4.3-fold in NBEC in conditioned media compared to BEGM
alone. Cell count in CRC conditions were up to 22-fold higher compared to
BEGM alone. Cells were passaged and sub-cultured up to passage 4,
followed by being frozen down in cell culture freezing media for further
assessment. Conclusion. NBEC hTERT transcript abundance was up-regulated
and cell population proliferative potential was extended in CRC
conditions. It is likely that hTERT functions to protect the ends of
linear chromosomes in dividing cells, enabling increased cell divisions
while maintaining normal genome. These cell populations will be used in
future studies to assess the effect of putative cis-regulatory single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on gene expression in NBEC.

