Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UDP-N-acetylglucosamine as a regulator of cancer cell signaling
and microenvironment


A common feature to most cancers is their disturbed glucose metabolism:
increased glucose and glutamine uptake combined with preference to
utilize aerobic glycolysis, a phenomenon called Warburg effect. In
addition to providing fast, yet inefficient way to produce energy,
Warburg effect increases the availability of glycolysis intermediates
that function as starting points of metabolic pathways facilitating the
fast cell proliferation. One of the pathways involved is the hexosamine
biosynthesis producing UDP-N-acetylglycosamine (UDP-GlcNAc). UDP-GlcNAc
is a nucleotide sugar with pivotal functions as a key substrate for the
synthesis of glycoconjugates like hyaluronan, and as a metabolic sensor
that controls cell functions through O-GlcNAcylation of intracellular
proteins. UDP-GlcNAc is linked to cancer through its dependence on
glycolysis intermediate availability and by the fact that both hyaluronan
and O-GlcNAcylation are closely involved in the development and
progression of various cancers. Our hypothesis is that the disturbed
sugar metabolism increases the levels of UDP-GlcNAc, which implements its
tumorigenic effects through hyaluronan and O-GlcNAcylation, and that
these changes manifest themselves also in clinical data.In order to test
our hypothesis we collected 33 biopsy samples from breast cancer
patients, and 13 healthy control samples. Clinical data and
immunohistochemical samples are available from the operated patients.
From these samples we have analyzed UDP-sugar content with HPLC,
hyaluronan levels with ELISA-like method and by immunohistochemistry, and
measured mRNA expression of key enzymes with quantitative RT-PCR.Our
results show for the first time that UDP-sugars levels are indeed
elevated in breast cancer patients. The level of UDP-GlcNAc shows a
12-times increase, while other UDP-sugars were 4 to 6 times higher. To
investigate the cause of differential increment of UDP-GlcNAc and other
UDP-sugars, we measured the mRNA levels of genes regulating the synthesis
of UDP-GlcNAc. Cancer patients had increased expression of GFAT2 while
others (GFAT1, GNPDA1 and 2) remained unchanged. In accordance to our
hypothesis, the increased levels of UDP-GlcNAc correlated with changes in
the mRNA expression of enzymes involved in both hyaluronan synthesis and
O-GlcNAcylation of proteins.Our results show that the increased glucose
uptake associated to aerobic glycolysis dramatically increases UDP-sugars
in breast cancer, promoting malignant growth by increased hyaluronan
synthesis and O-GlcNAc signaling.

