Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heparan sulfate proteoglycans mediate SW13 oncogenic potential and
response to granulin


The SW13 adrenal adenocarcinoma cell line exists as two epigenetically
and phenotypically distinct subtypes. One is a highly proliferative
epithelial subtype lacking the expression of key tumor suppressor
proteins, Brm and Brg1, the intermediate filament protein vimentin, and
the cell cycle check point protein CD44 (SW13-), while the other is a
slow growing, mesenchymal-like subtype which expresses all of these
proteins (SW13+). Evidence strongly suggests that subtype determination
is epigenetic in nature, as HDAC inhibitors can induce an SW13- to SW13+
subtype switch, but the cellular and environmental factors that regulate
cellular phenotype have yet to be characterized. We performed a
comprehensive microarray analysis and identified heparan sulfate
proteoglycan (HSPG) binding as a primary pathway affected between these
two subtypes. HSPGs are glycoproteins present in the extracellular matrix
that can have tumor-promoting or tumor-suppressing activities depending
on the number and sulfation status of attached sugar chains known as
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Quantitative RT-PCR was then used to confirm
the increased expression of the HSPGs, serglycin and glypican-3, as well
as the HSPG-binding growth factors granulin and fibroblast growth
factors-1 and -2 in SW13+ cells. Furthermore, HDAC inhibition was also
shown to increase the expression of these genes in a time-dependent
manner. As granulin over-production is associated with cancer progression
in a number of human cancers, we were interested in examining the role of
this HSPG binding growth factor further. A pro-granulin ELISA showed that
SW13+ cells secrete significantly more granulin than SW13- cells.
Intriguingly however, treatment with exogenous granulin increases growth
rates in the already highly proliferative SW13- subtype, but had no
effect on SW13+ growth. We hypothesized that the pleiotropic response of
SW13 cells to growth factor treatment may be the result of HSPG
post-translational modifications, so we assessed total GAG sulfation was
by dimethylmethylene blue assay, and indeed the SW13+ cells were found to
have significantly higher levels of total GAG sulfation than SW13- cells.
Thus, transcriptional and post-translational modifications of HSPGs may
contribute to SW13 phenotype control, and ultimately may affect
tumorigenesis.

