Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of DNA methyltransferases and histone
methyltransferases by plant flavones


Methylation of DNA and histone protein is an epigenetic modification
mediated by DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and histone methyltransferases
(HMTs) critically involved in methylation and regulation of affinity
binding between the histones and DNA backbone. HMTs catalyze the transfer
of one, two, or three methyl groups to lysine and arginine residues of
histone proteins. The HMTs-mediated increase in histone affinity to DNA
causes chromatin condensation, preventing transcription; whereas DNMTs
methylate cytosine residues within gene promoters resulting in
transcriptional repression. DNMT and HMT activities are reported to be
associated with signal transduction, cell growth and death, as well as
with the pathogenesis of various human diseases including cancer. Dietary
plant flavones can affect epigenetic modifications accumulated over time
and have shown health-beneficial effects. However, the epigenetic
response on DNMT and HMT elicited by plant flavones has not been
elucidated. Through in silico protein-ligand docking studies and
molecular studies with plant flavones viz. chrysin, apigenin and luteolin
and their effect on DNA and histone methylation was assessed. The ligands
were individually docked into the pocket of DNMT and EZH2 using Glide in
XP (extra precision) mode (Schrodinger, LLC). Binding of ligands with
proteins were evaluated using GlideScore, which is an empirically derived
scoring function. Virtual screening approach using the model of the
catalytic site of DNMT and EZH2 demonstrated that plant flavones tethered
at both ends inside the catalytic pocket of DNMT and EZH2 by means of
hydrogen bonding. Flavones exhibited a high docking rank (Glide score) in
the order of chrysin (-5.8), apigenin (-6.4), luteolin (-7.4) compared
with the pharmacological inhibitor, 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine (-4.2).
Notably, all three flavones inhibited EZH2, having a high docking rank
compared to the known pharmacological inhibitor, 3-Deazaneplanocin A
(DZNep). The docking rank for chrysin was -10.07, apigenin -9.73 and
luteolin -11.23, compared to -7.62 for DZNep. Epigenetic studies
performed with plant flavones demonstrated reversal of hypermethylation
of cytosine bases in the DNA and prevented methylation of cytosine in the
GC-rich promoter sequence incubated with MSsI enzyme. Furthermore,
decrease protein expression of EZH2 and trimethylation of H3K27 was noted
in prostate cancer cells treated with these plant flavones. Taken
together, our results suggest that plant flavone can alter DNMT and HMT
activities and methylation of DNA and histone proteins that regulate
epigenetic modifications providing significant health-effects and prevent
various pathological processes involved in the development of cancer.

