Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutralization of CD47 in cancer cells with bispecific antibodies
harnesses the phagocytic potential of tumor-infiltrating macrophages


The inhibitory don't eat me signal of phagocytosis, CD47, is commonly
overexpressed in cancer cells, a feature generally associated with poor
prognosis. CD47 overexpression in cancer is believed to promote immune
evasion by allowing tumor cells to hide from innate immune phagocytes
like macrophages or dendritic cells. CD47 is therefore a new type of
immune checkpoint and an attractive target for cancer immunotherapy.
However, as CD47 is also universally expressed on healthy cells, clinical
development of anti-CD47 monoclonal antibodies is inevitably limited by
toxicity and/or pharmacokinetic issues. To overcome these liabilities, we
engineered dual-targeting bispecific antibodies (biAbs) for selective
blockade of CD47 in malignant cells. By tethering the biAbs strongly to
cells expressing a tumor-associated antigen (TAA), such as CD19 or
mesothelin, CD47 is blocked selectively on the target cell. In contrast,
as these biAbs will lose the avidity effect with TAA-negative cells, they
will bind with very low affinity to healthy cells which express CD47. In
this manner, dual-targeting should help to sidestep safety and
pharmacokinetic sink problems resulting from ubiquitous CD47 expression.
Studies in non-human primates performed with the CD47/CD19 therapeutic
candidate NI-1701 confirmed this prediction, demonstrating normal IgG1
pharmacokinetics and absence of toxicity, even at high antibody doses
(100 mg/kg per week).Hence, the mechanism of action of CD47/TAA
dual-targeting antibodies is heavily contingent upon target
co-engagement. In vitro, CD19-positive or mesothelin-positive cancer
cells are efficiently killed through antibody dependent cellular
phagocytosis (ADCP) and/or antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC) in the presence of effector cells, such as macrophages or natural
killer cells, and the corresponding dual-targeting CD47/TAA antibodies.
Their enhanced ability to induce tumor cell phagocytosis was also
demonstrated in vivo, in xenograft models: Mice implanted with
subcutaneous human B cell lymphoma xenografts controlled tumor growth
following therapy with NI-1701, contrary to mice treated with an
anti-CD19 mAb. Importantly, tumor microenvironment (TME) studies revealed
that mouse macrophages infiltrating human tumors engulfed tumor cells
more frequentlyand at a significantly higher ratein animals treated with
NI-1701 as compared to controls. Moreover, the observed superior
phagocytic activity of tumor-infiltrating macrophages was associated with
a reduction of granulocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cell infiltrates,
suggesting that NI-1701 may favor the establishment of a tumor-hostile,
immunostimulatory TME. We conclude that dual-targeting CD47/TAA
bispecific antibodies may open the way to the safe and efficacious
therapeutic neutralization of CD47, the universal don't eat me signal
hijacked by cancer cells.

