Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large variations in clinical and ethical aspects of genomic
sequencing initiatives: A Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH)
survey


Although next generation sequencing (NGS) has expanded our understanding
of disease prognostication and cancer treatment, there is heterogeneity
regarding its implementation. GA4GH is a not-for-profit organization that
promotes and harmonizes responsible and effective data sharing, as
unconnected data silos unacceptably stall the advancement of precision
medicine. The GA4GH Cancer Task Team conducted a survey of international
cancer sequencing activities to evaluate variability in these initiatives
and report our findings on clinical/ethical aspects.A total of 108
sequencing initiatives were approached via a web-based survey, of which
59 responded (55%) (Characteristics: Table 1). Most initiatives (61%)
were North American or European based. Genomic-based drug matching
occurred in 39 initiatives (66%): unplanned opportunistic matching to
existent trials e.g. phase I (n = 29), specifically designed genomics
driven trials (n = 10). In matching initiatives, outcome data was
collected via RECIST in 24 (62%), time on treatment in 23 (59%), and
clinical assessment in 10 (26%). Toxicity data was collected in all
clinical trials but in few genomic sequencing programs.Specific or
implied informed consent was identified in 34 (58%) and 7 (14%)
initiatives respectively and 36 (61%) allowed re-contacting of patients.
However, only 31 (53%) had a protocol for communicating genetic results
and 23 (39%) had a policy to handle incidental germline mutations. In
total, 63% of initiatives are currently sharing data with an additional
10% partially sharing or planning to share.In conclusion, there is
currently no uniform approach for collecting data for precision medicine
application. GA4GH is actively leading harmonization efforts (e.g.
standardized outcome data, toxicity data collection, policies for
returning genetic results and strategies for data sharing) to maximize
the value of the increasingly complex datasets generated from NGS.


