Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of new original blocking antibodies
targeting the CD73 immune checkpoint for cancer immunotherapy


CD73 (NT5E) is a cell membrane ectoenzyme of the NTPDase family that
plays a major role in the conversion of AMP into Adenosine (Ado). Within
the tumor microenvironment, accumulation of Ado causes immune suppression
and dysregulation of immune cell infiltrates resulting in tumor
spreading. CD73 expression in the tumor environment has been associated
with poor disease outcome and/or with a pro-metastatic phenotype. Thus,
targeting CD73 may promote anti-tumor immunity by reducing Ado
accumulation and may block tumor cell metastasis by inhibiting CD73 on
tumor cells. Here, we describe the generation and characterization of
novel anti-human CD73 antibodies, intended for the treatment of a wide
range of cancers. The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Community's Seventh Framework Program
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n602200. Antibodies were discovered
that inhibited CD73 function by different mechanisms, including the
direct blocking of CD73 enzymatic activity or the down-modulation of
membrane CD73 expression. Epitope mapping revealed that antibodies acting
by these different modes of action bound to distinct sites on CD73. All
selected antibodies cross-react with cynomolgus CD73 protein and have
strong avidity and affinity for membrane or recombinant CD73, by flow
cytometry and Surface Plasmon Resonance, respectively. Antibodies that
inhibit CD73 enzymatic activity strongly reduce AMP catabolism by both
recombinant and cellular CD73 with IC50 in the nanomolar range. They also
efficiently reverse ATP- and AMP-mediated T cell suppression in in vitro
assays in presence of both CD39+ and CD73+ cells. The antibodies that
induce down-modulation of cellular CD73 expression do not block
recombinant CD73 enzyme activity and partially inhibit cellular CD73
activity; they reverse ATP- but not AMP-dependent T cell suppression. The
antibodies displaying the most interesting features were humanized.
Evaluation of their activity in animal models is ongoing.

