Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correspondence between clinical patient outcome and in vivo
carboplatine response of high grade ovarian cancer PDX


Survival rate for high grade ovarian cancer (HGOC) remains low and has
not significantly evolved for several years. This poor outcome is due to
several mechanisms of resistance (initial or acquired) in different
context (Homologous recombination deficience, CCNE1 amplification). We
developed a collection of High-grade ovarian cancer Patient Derived
Xenografts (PDX) with extensive characterization (CGH, transcriptome and
exome sequencing, Colombo et al, Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):28327-40).
Our objective is to create a panel of HGOC PDX which encompasses main
types of platinium sensitivity/resistance in HGOC. We selected 10 PDX
models (9 serous histiotypes and one carcinosarcomas) among our
collection of 39 HGOC PDXs from two patient extreme platinium response
categories (resistant with a progression-free inferior to 6 months and
sensible with a progression-free higher than 18 months, some of the
sensitives with BRCA1 mutations). These PDXs included PDXs were grafted
sub-cutaneously on nude mice and submitted to carboplatin treatment
(50mg/kg twice a week, for 4 weeks) and impact on tumor growth was
evaluated as well as histological characterization. For the
carcinosarcomas, no selection of the epithelial or sarcomatous component
upon treatment was observed. Outgrowth of the tumors after end of
treatment is currently under assessment.Remarkably, tumor PDXs response
was in accordance with clinical status with complete and partial response
for the sensitive PDXs; slowed growth under treatment or stabilization
for resistant PDXs. Outgrowth of the tumor after the end of treatment is
currently under assessment.For each PDXs model, the large majority of the
7-9 treated tumor reacted in identical fashion if classified according to
RECIST criteria with occasionally divergent responses reflecting tumor
heterogeneity. Genetic and histological characterization of these
outliers is ongoing.This collection is a valuable resource to model
carboplatine resistance in a well-defined context and will be the
cornerstone of our future studies to conduct preclinical drugs tests, in
particular for combination selected in vitro and to evaluate clonal
evolution under treatment.

