Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of HER3 and PIK3CA has potent anti-tumor effects in
pre-clinical models of HNSCC


Background: The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is a frequently
mutated oncogenic pathway in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). This pathway is often further activated by dysregulation of
receptor tyrosine kinases, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor
family. HER3 has a direct phosphorylation site with the regulatory
subunit of PIK3CA, and is being investigated as a potential co-target to
increase anti-tumor effects of PI3K inhibition. In this study, we use the
human monoclonal antibody KTN3379, which blocks HER3 in the autoinhibited
configuration and thus inhibits ligand-independent and ligand, neuregulin
-1,-dependent HER3 activation, and an inhibitor of PIK3CA (BYL719) to
determine if HER3 and PIK3CA can be inhibited in a synergistic fashion.
KTN3379 and BYL719 are clinical stage compounds and are being evaluated
in HNSCC clinical trials.Methods and Results: Treatment with neuregulin
-1 significantly increased phosphorylation of HER3, AKT, and S6 across
HNSCC cell lines, regardless of baseline level of HER3 expression. HER3
inhibition (KTN3379) consistently abrogated these effects and decreased
baseline phosphorylation of HER3. Combined blockade of HER3 (KTN3379) and
PI3K (BYL719) inhibited the growth of HNSCC cell lines in a synergistic
fashion (CI range 0.1-0.5), in both cell proliferation and colony
formation assays. This synergy appeared to be less pronounced in
HPV-associated cancer cell lines. Combined treatment decreased tumor
growth in xenograft models of HNSCC. Furthermore, treatment of some HNSCC
cell lines with BYL719 led to upregulation of the HER3 protein in HNSCC
cell lines by Western blotting analysis, suggesting a possible role of
HER3 in PI3K pathway inhibitor resistance.Conclusion: HER3 interacts with
PI3KCA, and the PI3K pathway in multiple HNSCC cell lines, and combined
blockade has synergistic effects in pre-clinical HNSCC models. These
findings suggest that HER3 and PI3K dual inhibition may be more effective
in tumors that are resistant to mono-therapy with either HER3 or PI3K
inhibition alone.

