Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of new AML and MDS patient subsets sensitive to the
highly selective RAR agonist SY-1425 (tamibarotene) through
super-enhancer analysis


Super-enhancers (SEs) are large, highly active chromatin regions that
regulate key cell identity genes including oncogenes in malignant cells.
Using our gene control platform, we identified SEs genome-wide in 60
primary AML patient samples to enable the discovery of novel tumor
vulnerabilities. One of the SEs that showed a highly asymmetric
distribution amongst patient samples was associated with the gene
encoding the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR). We have discovered that
the presence of a RARA SE is predictive for response of non- APL AML cell
lines to the highly selective RAR agonist SY-1425. SY-1425 is a clinical
stage RAR agonist with improved PK, potency, and selectivity over
existing pan-retinoic acid agonists.SY-1425 has sub-nanomolar potency on
RAR, with 200-2000 fold selectivity over other RAR family members.
SY-1425 treatment of AML cell lines containing a RARA SE results in 0.2-2
nanomolar EC50 anti-proliferative effects, whereas proliferation of cell
lines without SEs are not affected. The RARA enhancer level (as measured
by H3K27ac ChIP-seq) is well correlated with mRNA levels for RAR. Two
patient derived xenograft models with high RAR mRNA show prolonged
survival and tumor cell differentiation response to SY-1425, whereas two
models with low RAR mRNA do not show a treatment effect. In contrast,
treatment with the non-selective agonist ATRA fails to show a survival
benefit in a RAR mRNA high model, presumably due to its lower agonist
activity and its inferior PK.RAR is a nuclear hormone receptor that acts
as a transcriptional repressor when unliganded and as a transcriptional
activator when bound by an agonist. SY-1425 treatment of SE containing
AML cells shows a transcriptional response very similar to retinoid
treatment of APL cells. Analysis of ex vivo treated primary AML cells as
well as analysis of bone marrow and blood samples from SY-1425 treated
patient derived xenograft models support an anti-proliferative and
differentiation induction effect in cells containing the RARA SE but not
in cells lacking the RARA SE. In addition to AML, a sub-population of MDS
patient samples also contain elevated RAR mRNA levels, suggesting the
potential utility of SY-1425 in this closely related indication.In
summary, using our gene control platform, we have identified subsets of
non-APL AML and MDS who may respond to the selective RARa agonist,
SY-1425. A phase 2 clinical study with SY-1425 is being planned in
patients identified with a novel biomarker based on these findings.

