Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A transposon-based forward genetic screen for steatosis-associated
liver cancer drivers


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), or liver cancer, is the second leading
cause of death from cancer worldwide (Ferlay et al, Lyon, France:
International Agency for Research on Cancer, 2013). HCC is linked with
hepatic steatosis, or fatty liver disease, the most common chronic liver
disease in the US. Both hepatic steatosis and HCC are increasing in
prevalence in the US. However, the molecular mechanisms that cause HCC in
a steatotic liver are not entirely understood. To uncover mutations
promoting cancer in fatty livers and elucidate the role of steatosis in
HCC, we performed a forward genetic screen using the conditional Sleeping
Beauty (SB) transposon insertional mutagenesis system in mice treated
with ethanol and a choline deficient diet to induce steatosis. Mice
developed hepatic steatosis and liver cancer without sex bias, modeling
the pattern seen in humans in whom HCC's with steatosis as a preceding
condition are represented by a nearly equal number of males and females.
We found that hepatic steatosis caused a downregulation of liver Foxa1
expression and increased Foxa2 inactivating phosphorylation, thus
providing a molecular explanation for the loss of gender bias in our
mouse model. Transposon insertion sites were mapped from the mouse HCC
tumors, and genes near or in which more insertions were observed than
expected by chance were identified as common insertion sites (CIS), which
we consider putative steatosis-associated liver cancer genes.
Wnt/b-catenin signaling, which defines a subclass of HCC and can induce
tumors in mice without sex bias, was one of the top CIS associated
pathways identified. Interestingly, alpha-adrenergic and dopamine
signaling were also among the top steatosis-specific CIS associated
pathways, suggesting a role for the sympathetic nervous system and cAMP
signaling in fatty liver-associated cancer. Further studies are underway
to test the roles of the pathways and individual genes identified in this
study in driving HCC. Our studies implicate Wnt/beta-catenin and
sympathetic nervous system signaling in steatosis-associated HCC and
suggest methods for treatment or prevention in such cases.

