Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 expression as a predictive factor for recurrence pattern and
prognosis in curatively resected gastric cancer


Interaction of programmed death-1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1
(PD-L1) induces functional impairment of antigen-specific T cells, which
leads to immune evasion of tumors. Immune checkpoint therapy including
PD-1/PD-L1 blockade is an emerging treatment strategy which brings great
improvement in patient's prognosis. Many reports have mentioned that
PD-L1 expression on tumors correlates with poor prognosis in various
types of cancers. While there is a few report about correlation between
PD-L1 expression and prognosis in gastric cancer, one of the most common
cancers in the world especially in Asia, it still remains controversial.
In addition, almost no report has referred to the correlation of PD-L1
expression with metastatic or recurrence pattern of cancers. Thus, we
investigated the correlation of PD-L1 expression with prognosis and
recurrence pattern in gastric cancer patients. In this study, 255 gastric
cancer cases which had curative surgical resection at Okayama University
Hospital between 2002 and 2009 were analyzed retrospectively in terms of
correlation of PD-L1 expression on tumors with patient's prognosis and
recurrence pattern in addition to clinicophathological features. When
PD-L1 expression was classified into 4 groups according to PD-L1 positive
rate on tumors on immunohistochemical staining (0: Interaction of
programmed death-1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) induces
functional impairment of antigen-specific T cells, which leads to immune
evasion of tumors. Immune checkpoint therapy including PD-1/PD-L1
blockade is an emerging treatment strategy which brings great improvement
in patient's prognosis. Many reports have mentioned that PD-L1 expression
on tumors correlates with poor prognosis in various types of cancers.
While there is a few report about correlation between PD-L1 expression
and prognosis in gastric cancer, one of the most common cancers in the
world especially in Asia, it still remains controversial. In addition,
almost no report has referred to the correlation of PD-L1 expression with
metastatic or recurrence pattern of cancers. Thus, we investigated the
correlation of PD-L1 expression with prognosis and recurrence pattern in
gastric cancer patients. In this study, 255 gastric cancer cases which
had curative surgical resection at Okayama University Hospital between
2002 and 2009 were analyzed retrospectively in terms of correlation of
PD-L1 expression on tumors with patient's prognosis and recurrence
pattern in addition to clinicophathological features. When PD-L1
expression was classified into 4 groups according to PD-L1 positive rate
on tumors on immunohistochemical staining (0: < 1%, 1+: 1-5%, 2+: 5-10%,
3+: 10%) and 2+ and 3+ were defined as PD-L1 positive, PD-L1 positive
rate was 15% (37/255). PD-L1 positive cases had significant correlation
with advanced stage (p = 0.0424), lymphatic invasion (p = 0.0028) and
venous invasion (p = 0.0254), and tendency to be more observed in
intestinal type than diffuse type (p = 0.0599) in terms of histological
types of cancer. Overall survival (p = 0.0109) and disease-free survival
(p = 0.0052) were significantly poor in PD-L1 positive group. Moreover,
PD-L1 expression had significant negative correlation with peritoneal
dissemination (p = 0.0081) and had tendency to cause hematogenous
recurrence (p = 0.1002) in terms of recurrence pattern after curative
surgical resection, which might be reflected by the correlation of PD-L1
expression and histological types of cancer. Multivariate analysis
revealed that PD-L1 expression was an independent risk factor for
recurrence (p = 0.0160, odds ratio: 3.19), along with diffuse type and
advanced stage. In conclusion, PD-L1 expression on tumors strongly
correlated with poor prognosis and negatively correlated with peritoneal
dissemination in recurrence pattern in gastric cancer patients who had
curative surgical resection.

