Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treponema denticola, a periodontal pathogen, promotes stemness and
migration in oral squamous cell carcinoma


Periodontitis is a chronic infectious disease characterized by
inflammation and destruction of periodontal tissues including the
periodontal ligament fibers and alveolar bone. Recent epidemiological
studies have revealed a significant association between periodontitis and
oral cancer. While the precise mechanisms that mediate these associations
are not well understood, periodontal pathogens, including Treponema
denticola (T. denticola), which are believed to initiate the destructive
inflammatory responses and dysbiosis or dysregulation of tissue
homeostasis that characterize periodontal disease may contribute to oral
cancer. However, knowledge about T. denticola's contribution to oral
cancer is limited. Previously, we showed that nisin ZP, a bacteriocin and
commonly used food preservative, reduced tumorigenesis in vivo and long
term treatment with nisin ZP extended survival. In a separate study, we
further showed that nisin ZP exhibits antimicrobial and antibiofilm
effects, limiting T. denticola viability. The antimicrobial doses of
nisin ZP are two orders of magnitude lower than the antitumor doses. The
present study investigated the impact of T. denticola on the stemness,
migration, and tumorigenesis of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), and
nisin's potential modulatory effects on these processes. To investigate
the role of T. denticola on OSCC tumorigenesis, OSCC cells were treated
with T. denticola and with or without nisin ZP then assayed for stemness
(orasphere) and migration. Treatment with T. denticola enhanced OSCC
orasphere formation and migration without affecting cell viability or
inducing apoptosis. Addition of nisin ZP inhibited these T.
denticola-mediated processes. These data indicate that the periodontal
pathogen T. denticola promotes stemness and migration of OSCC cells, and
thereby may contribute to oral cancer tumorigenesis.

