Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESR1 coregulator binding inhibitor (ECBI): a novel agent for
treating hormone therapy-resistant breast cancer


Background: Estrogen contribute to the progression of breast cancer via
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and current therapies involve either
antiestrogens (AE) or aromatase inhibitors (AI). However, most patients
develop resistance to these drugs. In resistant tumors, activation of
ESR1 in the absence of ligand or mutations in ESR1 allow interaction
between the ESR1 and coregulators leading to sustained ESR1 signaling and
proliferation. Here we, developed a novel ESR1 coregulator binding
inhibitor (ECBI) that targets persistent ESR1 signaling that commonly
occur in therapy resistant breast tumors.Methods: Using rational design,
we synthesized and evaluated a small organic molecule (ECBI) that mimics
the ESR1 coregulator nuclear receptor box motif. Mechanistic studies were
conducted using reporter gene assays, RT-qPCR., ChIP, and RNA-Seq
analysis. Xenografts and patient derived tumors were used for preclinical
evaluation and toxicity.Results: In estrogen induced proliferation assays
using several ESR1+ve model cells, ECBI significantly inhibited growth
and promoted apoptosis. Importantly, ECBI showed little or no activity on
ESR1 negative cells. Further, ECBI also reduced the proliferation of
several ESR1 positive hormonal therapy resistant cells. Mechanistic
studies showed that ECBI interacts with ESR1, efficiently blocks ESR1
interactions with coregulators and reduces the ESR1 driven ERE reporter
gene activity. Further, ECBI directly interacted with mutant-ESR1 with
high affinity and significantly inhibited mutant-ESR1 driven oncogenic
activity. RNA sequencing analysis revealed that ECBI blocks multiple ESR1
driven pathways, likely representing the ability of a single ECBI
compound to block multiple ESR1-coregulator interactions. Treatment of
ESR1-positive and therapy resistant as well as syngeneic xenograft tumors
with ECBI (10 mg/kg/day/oral) significantly reduced the tumor volume
compared to control. Using human primary breast tissue ex vivo cultures,
we have provided evidence that ECBI has potential to dramatically reduce
proliferation of human breast tumors.Conclusions: The ECBI is a novel
agent that targets ESR1 with a unique mechanism of action. ECBI has
distinct pharmacologic advantages of oral bioavailability, in vivo
stability, and is associated with minimal systemic side effects.
Remarkably, ECBI block both native and mutant forms of ESR1 and have
activity against therapy resistant breast cancer cell proliferation both
in vitro and in vivo and against primary human tumor tissues ex vivo.
This first-in-class agent with its novel mechanism of action overcomes
the limitations of current therapies.

