Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the cytotoxic profile of Metformin and Y15 in
platinum resistant ovarian cancer cells


Platinum resistance remains a major challenge in the chemotherapeutic
management of ovarian cancer. The anti-diabetic drug metformin has been
previously shown to induce cytotoxicity in platinum resistant ovarian
cancer cells and overexpression and increased phosphorylation of a
tyrosine kinase called Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) has been implicated in
the development of this platinum resistance. Therefore, in the present
study we evaluated the combined cytotoxic efficacy of Metformin and the
focal adhesion kinase inhibitor 1,2,4,5-Benzenetetraamine
tetrahydrochloride (Y15) in platinum resistant OVCAR3 ovarian cancer
cells. Cells were initially treated with concentrations of Y15 ranging
from 10-100 M, and metformin from 10-100mM to determine 1C50 values.
Subsequently, cells were treated with Y15 (80 M) and metformin (26mM)
alone and in combination. All treatments were triplicated with duration
of 24hrs and control cells exposed to media only. The cytotoxic profile
of each treatment was assessed using the automated trypan blue assay. DNA
fragmentation and poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage assays were
performed to evaluate the mechanism of cell death and we further
evaluated the expression of phosphorylated FAK, p53 and p21 in response
to treatments using western blot.Y15 alone produced 48% cell death. In
combination, Y15 significantly increased the cytotoxic efficacy of
metformin by 22%, when compared to the metformin only treatment. Cell
death by apoptosis was confirmed by PARP cleavage and the presence of DNA
fragments in Y15, metformin, and metformin +Y15 treatment groups. The
Metformin +Y15 combination significantly downregulated the expression of
phosphorylated FAK when compared to the individual treatments and control
and this confirmed reduced FAK activity. Reduced FAK auto phosphorylation
also correlated with increased expression of p53 AND p21 in metformin and
Y15 treatment groups.Our findings show that Y15 significantly enhances
the cytotoxic profile of metformin in platinum resistant OVCAR-3 cells.
Furthermore, a FAK dependent apoptotic mechanism appears to underlie the
cytotoxic effect of metformin as well as Y15 as both drugs significantly
reduced the phosphorylation of FAK alone, and in combination. Reduced FAK
activity also correlated with increased p53 and p21 expression. This
study is the first to report a FAK dependent cytotoxic mechanism of
metformin in ovarian cancer and in further work we will evaluate the
mechanisms why which metformin cooperates with Y15 to inhibit FAK
activity in platinum resistant ovarian cancer.

