Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DLD microfluidic purification and characterization of intact and
viable circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood


We have developed a microfluidic chip-to-chip approach to purify
circulating tumor cells (CTCs). The first, a DLD (deterministic lateral
displacement) microchip contains an array of microposts arranged in
sub-arrays of different gap sizes. The product outlet of the DLD chip is
connected with a second magnetic-separation chip. In the DLD chip, cells
and particles are deflected or bumped based on their size, whereas the
second chip is designed to remove any cell or component tagged with a
magnetic particle (MNP). Air pressure is applied to maintain a constant
flow of sample and buffer throughout the system in a vertical fashion.
First, whole blood is mixed with biotinylated antibodies to CD45 and
strepavidin-MNP's for 20min, diluted in buffer and passed through the DLD
chip where the blood interacts with the posts and cells are bumped based
on a deterministic lateral displacement principle, thus separating blood
components. The product fraction from the DLD chip containing white blood
cells and other larger cells is directed to the magnetic chip and the
waste fraction containing red blood cells, platelets, debris and soluble
blood components is discarded. The second chip has an array of magnets,
capturing the sav-MNP/CD45+-tagged cells thereby allowing the gentle free
flow of rare cells towards the final product fraction. With the
chip-to-chip configuration we are able to process up to 8ml of blood,
removing >99.8% of red blood cells and >98% of white blood cells, with
the remaining purified cell populations suitable for further analysis and
characterization. Validation of the chip-to-chip approach using
tumor-derived cancer cells, including MDA-MB-231, PC-3 and SKBR-3 cells,
confirms a linear recovery of >80% of the spiked-cells with a viability
of 90%. The minimum cell size captured by our approach is approximately
6m ensuring the isolation of small-sized CTCs. Multi-color flow cytometry
and imaging analysis of the chip-to-chip isolated cells from blood of
breast cancer patients confirms the purification and identification of
unique populations of HER2+/CD45-/EpCAM+ and CD146+/CD44+ cells
characteristic of breast carcinomas-among other rare cell populations.
Our chip-to-chip approach allows a gentle purification of intact and
viable rare cells from cancer patients blood, suitable for functional
analysis, drug sensitivity tests and genetic characterization. Thus, we
have developed a hands-free liquid biopsy capable of isolating and
purifying rare circulating tumor cells.

