Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impaired taxane binding to MT pore sites mediates intrinsic drug
resistance in diffuse gastric cancer


Successful clinical application of taxanes (microtubule-stabilizers) is
limited due to intrinsic or acquired drug resistance. Thus, it is
critical to unveil the molecular mechanisms of taxane resistance to
significantly improve clinical outcomes. Retrospective analysis of the
TAX-325 gastric cancer (GC) trial revealed that the addition of docetaxel
(DTX) to cisplatin/fluorouracil increased progression-free plus overall
survival, in intestinal (INT) but not in diffuse (DIF) GC subtypes. Our
preclinical data confirmed that DIF GC cell lines are intrinsically
resistant to taxanes. The incidence of DTX resistance in DIF GC cell
lines was 2.5 times higher than INT GC cell lines. Drug efflux, tubulin
posttranslational modification and differential -tubulin isotype
expression were ruled out as potential mechanisms of intrinsic taxane
resistance. Thus, a new molecular mechanism must underlie the intrinsic
taxane resistance in DIF GC. To quantify the kinetics of taxol binding to
cellular MTs, we treated both DIF and INT groups of GC lines with the
fluorescein-conjugated paclitaxel analog, Flutax-2. The Flutax-2 staining
intensity of cellular MTs was assessed by live-cell confocal microscopy
at different time points. Following a 3h incubation, there was less than
20% decrease in Flutax-2 intensity in the sensitive cell lines, compared
to 5989% decrease in the resistant cell lines. These data suggested
different binding kinetics between sensitive and resistant cells. We
added 1M Flutax-2 to sensitive/resistant cells native cytoskeletons for
060 seconds to determine the association rate (kon) of Flutax-2 binding
to MTs. The kon of Flutax-2 in the sensitive cell lines was significantly
higher in sensitive (5.8104M1s1) versus resistant cells (0.32.6104M1s1).
Next, we measured the dissociation rates (koff) by competing the
pre-bound Flutax-2 with DTX (0600 seconds). Although 2040% faster koff
was observed in resistant cells, it appeared that the association rate of
Flutax-2 was the dominant factor of differential taxane binding to MTs in
GC cells. The binding mode of taxanes to MTs involves 1) binding to MT
pores and 2) internalization to the high-affinity binding site at the MT
lumen. To differentiate between the two, we used hexaflutax, which binds
exclusively to the MT pores. We observed hexaflutax decorating radial MT
arrays in sensitive but not in the resistant cells. As tubulin mutations
around the high-affinity taxane binding site or tubulin posttranslational
modifications/differential expression of -tubulin isotype is not the case
in DIF GC cell lines, our data suggest that modifications of the MT pore
conformation or occlusion of the pore site is responsible for the
intrinsic taxane resistance in DIF GC. Determining the origin of the
defect at the pores will help design better MT-stabilizing drugs to
overcome chemo-resistance, the major obstacle hindering overall survival
of patients.

