Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of G-protein estrogen receptor (GPER) in primary
breast cancer in Caucasian and Black women by tumor immunophenotype and
menopausal status


Background: Assignment of breast cancer therapies is largely defined by
immunohistochemical analyses that evaluate steroid hormone and growth
factor receptor status in primary tumor biopsies. Patients whose tumors
are devoid of these receptors have fewer treatment options, and poor
survival. This outcome is more commonly measured among Black versus
Caucasian patients, and in patients with intact ovarian function. The
G-protein coupled estrogen receptor, GPER, holds significance for breast
cancer biology and treatment as 17-estradiol and ER antagonists trigger
the release of epidermal growth factor (EGF)-ligands and GPER associates
directly with clinicopathological factors that predict advanced
disease.Experimental design: GPER was measured by immunohistochemical
analysis and a semi-quantitative scoring method in 521 primary breast
tumors obtained from the NCI Cooperative Breast Cancer Tissue Resource
and the Nashville Breast Health Study, including tumor specimens derived
from 389 Caucasian and 108 Black patients. GPER was correlated with
disease progression variables and evaluated by race, menopausal status
and tumor immunophenotype.Results: GPER is expressed in more than
two-thirds of invasive breast carcinomas in this study with no difference
observed between Caucasian and Black women (p = 0.69). Coexpression of
GPER and ER was measured in less than half of all tumors (48%).
Additionally, GPER is commonly expressed in ER-negative tumors (107/171;
62%) and in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) (42/56; 75%) and did not
differ by race for this newly defined measure of estrogen responsiveness
(p = 0.42). Moreover, while ER-negative tumors are more common in pre-
(79/153; 52%) versus postmenopausal women (92/336; 27%), GPER expression
is not influenced by menopausal status. GPER is positively associated
with tumor size (particularly in premenopausal women) in both studies,
and with frank metastases at first diagnosis in the NCI population. No
significant association was seen with nodal invasion. Survival data in
NBHS patients found that women who died of breast cancer are more likely
to have GPER-positive tumors than survivors.Conclusion: GPER is expressed
in the majority of invasive breast tumors (> 60%) at diagnosis and is
commonly retained in patients with ER-negative or triple-negative disease
regardless of race or menopause. Unlike ER, which varies inversely with
variables that predict advanced disease, GPER is positively associated
with these same prognostic parameters. These data support GPER as an
independent marker of estrogen responsiveness and breast cancer
progression. Most importantly, our results suggest that GPER represents a
promising therapeutic target since its expression is constant across
multiple types of invasive breast cancer, including patients with TNBC
and in tumors from pre- and postmenopausal women.

