Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prospective Dutch colorectal cancer cohort: A prospective
nation-wide observational cohort study


The increasingly complex subclassification of tumors based on clinical
and molecular characteristics, as well as the large sample sizes needed
for clinical trials, pose new challenges to the recruitment of patients
for studies. Currently, less than 10% of all cancer patients are enrolled
in clinical trials, limiting their external validity, but also leaving
room for improvement in the recruitment of patients. Clinical trials are
often complicated by low inclusion rates, inadequate data collection,
high non-completion rates and costs, and often provide insufficient data
for post-hoc subgroup analyses. We believe that a prospective
observational cohort study can provide standardized and validated
collection of clinical data, tissue and blood samples and
patient-reported outcome measures, and can improve patient recruitment
for clinical trials. The Prospective Dutch ColoRectal Cancer cohort is a
prospective multidisciplinary nation-wide observational cohort study in
the Netherlands, a country with a yearly colorectal cancer incidence of
15,000 patients. The goal of the study is to facilitate future basic,
translational and clinical research in the field of colorectal cancer for
both national and international research groups with short or absent
inclusion periods, even for studies with stringent inclusion criteria.All
patients > 18 years with histologically proven colorectal cancer are
asked to participate. Four essential features characterize the study: 1)
a patient-centered informed-consent approach; 2) a framework to
systematically collect long-term clinical follow-up and patient-reported
outcomes; 3) an infrastructure for the standardized collection and
storage of tissue and blood samples and 4) efficient recruitment for
clinical trials which is facilitated by the innovative cohort multiple
randomized controlled trial (cmRCT) design. The cmRCT design allows
patients to participate in multiple non-conflicting clinical trials. We
believe that the key to the development of a sustainable cohort study is
the collaboration with existing organizations using their expertise, and
preventing duplicate data entry and unnecessary costs. To these ends,
close collaborations with other national initiatives, like the national
cancer registry (hosted by IKNL), the national pathology registry PALGA,
and the national biobanking infrastructure BBMRI-NL have been
established. An effective governance structure to secure the privacy of
patients and hospitals, and to facilitate research is needed.This study
will provide long-term clinical data, tissue and blood samples, and
patient-reported outcome measures collected under a broad informed
consent, of a large cohort of patients with colorectal cancer. The
available data and tissue will facilitate basic, translational and
clinical research. Furthermore, the design of this cohort study can be
used as an example for other tumor types.

