Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAS-115, a novel and highly potent VEGFR/MET inhibitor, shows
prominent antitumor efficacy by restoring HGF-mediated hypoxia-resistant
phenotype in clear cell sarcoma


Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) / HGF receptor (MET) signaling is
considered to be involved in chemoresistance to cancer treatment.
Notably, many reports have described reduced sensitivity to vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-targeted inhibitors in
patients with high serum HGF levels compared to those with low serum
levels. This study investigated whether HGF directly influenced
sensitivity to VEGFR-targeted inhibitors in human clear cell sarcoma
(CCS) xenograft models using human HGF knock-in (hHGF KI) mice, and
evaluated the potency of TAS-115.MET signaling pathway in SU-CCS-1, a
human CCS cell line, were analyzed using Western blotting analysis. To
study the effects of hypoxia in SU-CCS-1 cells, culture plates were
placed in airtight jars under anaerobic conditions and cell viability was
assessed by ATP-based assay. In the in vivo study, SU-CCS-1 cells were
subcutaneously implanted into hHGF KI mice, and compounds were orally
administered once daily for 14 consecutive days. Tumor vessel density
(TVD) was determined by immunohistochemistry using anti-CD31
antibody.SU-CCS-1 cells expressed MET, and exogenous HGF phosphorylated
MET and its downstream factors in SU-CCS-1 cells. Exogenous HGF also
significantly enhanced SU-CCS-1 cell proliferation. TAS-115 inhibited
HGF-induced MET phosphorylation and SU-CCS-1 cell proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner at concentrations higher than 10 nM. In contrast,
pazopanib, a VEGFR-targeted multi-kinase inhibitor, could not block
HGF-induced phenotypes in SU-CCS-1 cells, even at 1 M. To evaluate the
effects of HGF on the antitumor activities of TAS-115 and pazopanib
against SU-CCS-1 cells, these agents were administered in hHGF KI and
wild-type (WT) mice bearing subcutaneous SU-CCS-1 tumors. TAS-115
completely suppressed tumor growth and reduced TVD in SU-CCS-1 tumor
tissue in both models at a dose of 200 mg/kg/d. In contrast, pazopanib
suppressed tumor growth at a dose of 100 mg/kg/d in WT mice but not in
hHGF KI mice. However, pazopanib significantly reduced TVD in SU-CCS-1
tumor tissue in both models. HGF is therefore suggested to impact
SU-CCS-1 cells rather than mouse endothelial cells. We considered that
HGF modulated cell proliferation or survival in SU-CCS-1 cells under
hypoxia. Actually, hypoxic conditions induced apoptosis in SU-CCS-1
cells, and endogenous HGF dose-dependently attenuated hypoxia-related
apoptosis. TAS-115 clearly restored HGF-mediated cytoprotection under
hypoxia but pazopanib did not.These results suggest that effects of
VEGFR-targeted inhibitors are attenuated by HGF-mediated hypoxia
resistance, and simultaneous inhibitors of the MET and VEGFR axes, such
as TAS-115, are more effective in sarcoma patients with high serum HGF
than inhibition of the VEGFR axis alone.

