Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target specificity of epigenetic therapy in cancer


A major question facing the use of epigenetic therapies in cancer is
specificity in modulating gene expression. In addition, combined
targeting of DNA and histone methylation remains largely unexplored
despite the promising synergistic effects observed from combining DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors with HDAC inhibitors. To address these
questions, we performed RNA-seq, DNA methylation analysis and ChIP-seq
(H3K4me2, H3K9me2, and H3K27me3) to study the effects of inhibitors of
DNA methyltransferases (DAC), histone deacetylases (Depsi), histone
demethylases (KDM1A inhibitor S2101), and histone methylases (EHMT2
inhibitor UNC0638 and EZH2 inhibitor GSK343) in three different cancer
models (colon cancer, breast cancer, and leukemia). In colon cancer cells
(YB5), DAC affected 3% of the transcriptome and 93% of the effect was
gene upregulation. DAC had a greater effect on genes expressed in normal
tissues and silenced in cancer (443 genes) compared to genes that do not
change in cancer (194 genes). 90% of DAC targets genes showed no promoter
DNA methylation in normal colon but gained methylation in cancer. Depsi
changed the expression of 35% of the transcriptome and showed little
specificity for gene upregulation or silenced genes. S2101, UNC0638, and
GSK343 had limited effects on their own (A major question facing the use
of epigenetic therapies in cancer is specificity in modulating gene
expression. In addition, combined targeting of DNA and histone
methylation remains largely unexplored despite the promising synergistic
effects observed from combining DNA methyltransferase inhibitors with
HDAC inhibitors. To address these questions, we performed RNA-seq, DNA
methylation analysis and ChIP-seq (H3K4me2, H3K9me2, and H3K27me3) to
study the effects of inhibitors of DNA methyltransferases (DAC), histone
deacetylases (Depsi), histone demethylases (KDM1A inhibitor S2101), and
histone methylases (EHMT2 inhibitor UNC0638 and EZH2 inhibitor GSK343) in
three different cancer models (colon cancer, breast cancer, and
leukemia). In colon cancer cells (YB5), DAC affected 3% of the
transcriptome and 93% of the effect was gene upregulation. DAC had a
greater effect on genes expressed in normal tissues and silenced in
cancer (443 genes) compared to genes that do not change in cancer (194
genes). 90% of DAC targets genes showed no promoter DNA methylation in
normal colon but gained methylation in cancer. Depsi changed the
expression of 35% of the transcriptome and showed little specificity for
gene upregulation or silenced genes. S2101, UNC0638, and GSK343 had
limited effects on their own (<1.5% of the transcriptome), but UNC0638
and GSK343 preferentially targeted genes with H3K9me2 or H3K27me3,
respectively. DAC combined with histone methylation inhibitors led to
synergistic gene upregulation while still maintaining specificity for DNA
methylated and silenced genes. These synergistic genes had limited
overlap, indicating the possibility to target distinct sets of genes
based on different epigenetic therapy combinations. IPA analysis
demonstrated that these genes are enriched in cancer pathways, and
consistent with this analysis, the combination therapies were able to
decrease cancer cell proliferation more effectively than monotherapy.
Broadly similar results were seen with genome wide studies in both breast
cancer (MCF7) and leukemia (HL-60) cells. These results demonstrate that
DNA methyltransferase inhibitors preferentially target cancer relevant
genes, and can be combined with inhibitors targeting histone methylation
for synergistic effects while still maintaining specificity.

