Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analyzing the impact of MDM2 overexpression on cell cycle
pathway-related genes using polymerase chain reaction array


The human homologue of the mouse double minute 2 (MDM2) oncogene has been
well characterized as a negative regulator of the tumor suppressor p53.
It has been established that p53 regulates genes that are involved in
cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, DNA repair and senescence. MDM2 interacts
primarily with p53 in an autoregulatory negative feedback loop and
targets it for ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation there by
attenuating p53 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis functions. Studies have
shown that MDM2 also exerts its effects via p53 independent pathways.
These p53-independent functions of MDM2 may have a role in cancer
etiology and progression, yet the exact function and significance of
these interactions are not fully understood. MDM2 is overexpressed in
more than 40 different types of malignancies, including wide varieties of
carcinomas and sarcomas, which is believed to be associated with worse
clinical prognosis and increased likelihood of distant metastases. Hence,
MDM2 is proving to be a key player in human cancer and thus an important
target for therapeutic intervention. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the effects of MDM2 overexpression on cell cycle pathways by
using LNCaP prostate cancer cells and MDM2 transfected LNCaP-MST. The
LNCaP-MST cells expressed at least 10-folds higher levels of MDM2 mRNA
due to transfection. We used the Human Cell Cycle PCR array to compare
the gene expression profiles of LNCaP and LNCaP-MST cells. Our
experimental results clearly indicated that MDM2 modulates the expression
of cell cycle related genes. The following genes were found to be
significantly down-regulated in LNCaP-MST cells compared to LNCaP: CCND2,
GADD45A, RB1, RBBP8, CDKN1A and TP53. Genes such as BIRC5, CDK1 were
found to be significantly up-regulated. Heat map and scatter plot
analysis further confirmed the alterations in the expression levels of
these genes following the MDM2 overexpression. In addition, cluster
analysis further denoted that the gene expression patterns positively
correlated with cell proliferation and tumor growth. Our experimental
results offer conclusive evidence that MDM2 can impact the cancer growth
and metastatic potential by altering the gene expressions in the cell
cycle pathway. (The financial support from the Royal Dames of Cancer
Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale is gratefully acknowledged).

