Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repurposing disulfiram for use as an anticancer drug: a story
about metabolism and metal binding


Disulfiram (DSF) is an FDA approved agent for the treatment of alcoholism
with over 60 years of clinical use. It was identified in several
high-throughput screen to be effective against glioma tumor initiating
cells; this activity is amplified more than 100-fold in the presence of
copper (Cu2+). DSF is metabolized to diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC), an
established copper chelating agent. One mechanism attributed to the
copper DDC (Cu(DDC)2) complex is proteosome inhibition. Cu(DDC)2 is very
poorly soluble in aqueous solution; making it difficult to purse
development for any cancer indication. A novel liposomal formulation of
Cu(DDC)2 is described here; which represents the first iv injectable
Cu(DDC)2. 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) and
cholesterol (CHOL) (55:45 molar ratio) liposomes were prepared by
extrusion methods in the presence of 300 mM unbuffered CuSO4 to 100 nm in
size. DDC was added to these pre-formed liposomes at room temperature,
unentrapped drug was removed using column chromatography. The therapeutic
activity of this formulation was determined in vitro against a variety of
cancer cell lines. The toxicity and pharmacokinetic (PK) behaviour of
this formulation was determined in CD-1 mice. DDC was tested in the
presence and absence of Cu2+ in vitro with U251, U87, MDA231-BR and A549
cell lines giving IC50 values greater than >10 M in the absence and from
300- 900 nM in the presence of Cu2+. The liposomal Cu(DDC)2 formulation
was as active as unencapsulated Cu(DDC)2 when tested in vitro. The
maximum tolerated dose of liposomal Cu(DDC)2 was determined to be 8mg/kg
given iv using a Q2D schedule for two weeks. The PK studies suggested
that Cu(DDC)2 was rapidly released from circulating liposomes. Initial
efficacy studies were completed using convection enhanced delivery of
liposomal Cu(DDC)2 in the F98 rat glioma model. Treatment resulted in a
statistically significant delay in tumour growth upon injection of 10 L
of 0.5 mg Cu(DDC)2 /mL solution. Further anti-tumor efficacy studies are
being conducted in a subcutaneous leukemia xenograft model (MV-4-11).
This work describes a novel formulation of Cu(DDC)2, the active agent
generated when administering DSF and Cu to treat cancer.

