Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TIMELESS is a KSR1-like effector of Ras-driven colon tumorigenesis


Multiple studies have revealed that Ras-driven tumors acquire unique
vulnerabilities by adapting cellular mechanisms that promote uncontrolled
proliferation and suppress apoptosis. Targeting these vulnerabilities
provide opportunities to develop novel, efficacious cancer therapeutics
that lack the harmful side effects accompanying current therapies. RNA
interference (RNAi) of the molecular scaffold Kinase Suppressor of Ras 1
(KSR1), which modulates ERK activation downstream of oncogenic Ras,
selectively kills malignant, Ras-driven cancer cells, but does not kill
immortalized, non-transformed human colon epithelial cells (HCECs). With
the exception of a minor hair follicle defect, KSR1-/- mice are fertile
and phenotypically normal, suggesting that KSR1 is not required for
normal cell survival and that Ras-driven and KSR1-dependent pathways may
yield valuable new targets for therapeutic development.To identify
targets, like KSR1, that are required for cancer cell survival but not
normal cell survival, we used a gene expression-based signature screening
approach termed Functional Signature Ontology (FUSION, Potts et al. Sci.
Signaling 2013) to screen 15,172 genes in the K-RasD13-bearing human
colorectal cancer cell line HCT116. We quantified the functional
similarity between KSR1 and each individual gene screened using Euclidean
Distance and Pearson Correlation similarity metrics. Additional metrics
were added to identify the best targets for biological validation
including off-target analysis (siRNA seed sequences), cell viability
evaluation, expression analysis, and enrichment analysis. Initial
biological validation is completed by assessing cell viability following
transient depletion of a screen hit in anchorage-independent and normal
culture conditions in HCECs and HCT116s.Due to the similarity between the
gene expression signatures, Timeless Circadian Clock (TIMELESS) was
identified as being KSR1-like and a potential target. We found that
transient TIMELESS depletion decreases cell viability in HCT116 cells
under anchorage-independent conditions (47% decrease, p 0.05; HCT116 49%
decrease, p 0.05; HCT116 49% decrease, p < 0.0001, N = 6). TIMELESS is
upregulated at the RNA level in colon tumors compared to normal colon
tissue (2.2 fold, p 0.05; HCT116 49% decrease, p < 0.0001, N = 6).
TIMELESS is upregulated at the RNA level in colon tumors compared to
normal colon tissue (2.2 fold, p < 0.0001) (TCGA) and is upregulated at
the protein level in three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, SW480,
SW620) bearing activated Ras compared to HCECs (4-7 fold).Our data
indicate that the FUSION screen provides a platform for identifying novel
therapeutic targets and demonstrates the potential to identify
oncogene-specific vulnerabilities in an unbiased manner. TIMELESS
overexpression represents a vulnerability in Ras-driven tumors that will
reveal novel and selective targets found in Ras-driven cancers that can
be used in the development of selective therapeutics.

