Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Consequence of the tumor-associated deletion of CHD1 on
transcriptional output and tumor progression


CHD1 is a member of the super-family of chromatin modifier proteins, and
is characterized by the presence of several chromo-domains as well as an
ATP dependent helicase domain. A multitude of studies across several
model systems have demonstrated that CHD1 functions as a transcriptional
co-activator, responsible for efficient RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II)
ejection from the transcriptional start site as well as maintenance of
RNA pol II processivity across the gene body. This is accomplished
largely though nucleosome remodeling ahead of RNA pol II, which
efficiently reorganizes nucleosome position to allow for optimal RNA pol
II function. Consequently, as CHD1 plays a critical role in
transcriptional competency, tumor associated deletions and/or mutations
of the CHD1 gene that compromise its function are rare. Interestingly,
prostate cancer proves to be the exception, where the CHD1 locus is
deleted with high frequency in primary disease. Tumors harboring
homozygous deletion of CHD1 belong to a subclass of prostate cancer that
are enriched for either SPOP or FOXA1 mutations, suggesting a
prostate-specific, tumor suppressive role for CHD1 in this genomic
context. Importantly, while the oncogenic functions of both FOXA1 and
SPOP mutations have been largely defined, little is known as to how CHD1
loss contributes to tumor initiation or progression. Here, using 3D
organoid cultures derived from GEM models of inducible CHD1 loss,
prostate specific cells were found to have dramatically altered
transcriptionally competency upon CHD1 depletion. These events were
correlated with an aberrant, tumor-associated transcriptome, resulting in
changes in morphology and growth. Furthermore, while genome wide
assessment of CHD1 occupancy in human prostate cancer models uncovered an
enrichment of CHD1 at sites of active transcription, loss of CHD1 did not
dramatically affect expression of genes associated with tumor
progression. Inversely, genomic loss of CHD1 was associated with changes
in lineage dependent markers, suggesting that a major function of CHD1 is
to regulate the differentiation state of prostate cells. Collectively,
these data help to define the tumor suppressive role for CHD1 in prostate
cancer tumorigenesis, and suggest that loss of CHD1 could alter the
function of key transcriptional regulators associated with prostate
cancer initiation and progression.

