Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of metastasis promoting genes using the PiggyBac
insertional mutagenesis system


The Myc oncogene is overexpressed in approximately 30% of human breast
cancers. Mice carrying the mammary tumor virus LTR/c-myc (MMTV-c-Myc)
develop mammary tumors, but display a relatively low rate of metastases
to the lung. However, not all cells that express the transgene develop
neoplasms indicating that Myc-induced tumorigenesis requires additional
cooperating events for full transformation. To identify genes that
cooperate with Myc-induced tumorigenesis leading to the acceleration of
tumor progression or an increase in metastases in MMTV-Myc transgenic
mice, we have employed the PiggyBac (PB) transposon system.The PiggyBac
system used in our studies was (developed by Rad et al, Science, 2010) is
composed of two elements, the ATP-1 PiggyBac transposon and transposase.
ATP-1 transposons are mobile DNA elements that can randomly integrate
throughout the genome in the presence of transposase resulting in the
activation or loss of gene function. The insertion sites can be
identified through sequencing. It has been used successfully for genomic
modification of cells in vivo leading to cancer gene discovery. In order
to better adapt the PB system for studing mammary gland biology, we have
designed a system to express a hyperactive transposase and luciferase
specifically in the mammary gland using the MMTV LTR (MMTV-hyTPase-luc).
The efficiency of MMTV-hyTPase-luc expression was first examined in vitro
by transfection with an ATP-1 containing plasmid using the HC11 mouse
mammary epithelial cell line. Selection for integration of ATP1 in the
cells using puromycin selection and crystal violet staining, RT-QPCR and
luciferase assays confirmed that MMTV-hyTPase-luc led to efficient
integration of ATP-1 into the HC11 cells. HC11 cell proliferation further
increased in the presence of dexamethasone, a hormone that stimulates
MMTV promotor function. The MMTV-HyPB-Luc construct was subsequently used
to generate transgenic mice and multiple founder lines are being analyzed
for mammary specific transposase expression. The best expressing line
will be crossed with MMTV-cMyc mice and mice carrying multiple copies of
the ATP1 transposon. Transposon integration sites will be determined from
tumors or metastases in mice with accelerated tumor development and/or
increased metastases compared to controls. Further molecular
characterization and validation of candidate genes will identify novel
genes that cooperate with Myc to augment tumorigenesis and metastases.

