Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AS-10: a new small molecule with promising activity against
pancreatic cancer


Patients with pancreatic cancer (PC) have a median survival of only 6
months and a five-year survival of less than 5%, hence making PC one of
the deadliest cancer. Severity of PC is due to its identification at late
stages, rapid local invasion, early metastases, and meager response to
current chemotherapeutic agents. Current therapies result in minimal
survival advantage and are linked with multiple adverse events and drug
resistance. Hence, there is an urgent need for novel agents which are
less toxic and offer greater benefits over conventional therapy. There is
ample evidences in literature demonstrating that inflammation plays a
critical role in PC growth and promotion. Nuclear factor B (NF-B)
pathway, one of the major inflammatory pathway, is well known for its
inflammatory response, cell proliferation, and resistance to apoptosis.
It has been demonstrated that activation of NF-B in PC is also
responsible for resistance towards first line chemotherapeutic agent,
gemcitabine, in PC. Through extensive structure-activity relationship
studies, we have recently identified a novel small molecule, AS-10, which
was lethal to PC cells. We sought to evaluate the mechanism of action of
AS-10 responsible for inhibiting the growth of PC cells. In vitro, AS-10
reduced PC cell growth with an EC50, in the range of 2.5 to 5 M. Growth
arrest was confirmed by cell cycle studies, which showed that AS-10
induced G1 and G2 cell cycle arrest. The cell cycle arrest was associated
with an increase of cell cycle inhibitory markers like p21 and p27.
Effect of AS-10 on cell cycle was translated into activation of
apoptosis, confirmed by caspase 3/7 activity, PARP cleavage and Annexin V
staining. Due to its structural characteristics, we evaluated the effect
of AS-10 on inflammatory NF-B pathway. Our studies, in Panc-1 cells,
showed that AS-10 inhibited NF-B DNA binding activity as well as NF-B
translocation to the nuclei in the presence of inflammatory stimuli
(tumor necrosis factor (TNF)). Since, up regulation of NF-B activity has
been known to be responsible for gemcitabine resistance in PC, we
evaluated the activity of our NF-B inhibitor AS-10 in combination with
gemcitabine, and showed that AS-10 synergistically potentiated
gemcitabine activity in PC cells. Taken together, these results suggest
that AS-10, may represent a potentially promising therapeutic agent for
PC. Detailed investigations regarding the efficacy and mechanism of
action of these compounds will be presented.

