Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The regulation of angiogenin expression and the genes regulated by
angiogenin


Angiogenin (ANG) is first isolated and identified by its ability to
stimulate the growth of blood vessels. As a member of the
vertebrate-specific secreted ribonuclease (RNase) family, ANG is encoded
by a single exon and is usually located in the middle of its family gene
cluster. Particularly, ANG gene locus has a unique gene arrangement,
featured by shared promoters and 5-untranslated regions (5-UTR) which
direct two distinct exons enconding ANG and ribounclease 4 (RNASE4, the
4th member of RNase family) respectively. However, the gene structure and
regulation of these genetic regions are largely unknown. Here, we have
characterized the promoters, defined the transcription start site, and
identified a unique mechanism of transcription regulation. We
demonstrated that two Pol III elements within the promoter regulate ANG
and RNASE4 expression in a position- and orientation-dependent manner.
Moreover, an intragenic chromatin loop formed between the two
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-binding sites located in two introns flanking
ANG coding exon, which preferentially enhances ANG transcription. These
results suggest a multilayer transcriptional regulation of ANG and RNASE4
gene locus. The data also add more direct evidence to the notion that Pol
III elements are able to directly influence Pol II gene transcription.
Furthermore, our data indicate that a CTCF-dependent chromatin loop is
able to differentially regulate transcription of genes that share the
same promoters.On the other hand, the secreted ANG undergoes a
receptor-mediated endocytosis from the cell surface to the nucleus and
accumulates in the nucleoli. The nucleoli ANG can promote 47S pre-rRNA
transcription by binding the ABE (Angiogenin Binding Element) and UCE
(Upstream Core Element) region on the promoter of ribosomal DNA (rDNA),
where ANG increases the number of actively transcribing rDNA and promotes
the assembly of initiation complex by epigenetic activation through
promoter methylation and histone modification. We have also shown that
the surplus ANG in nucleus also related to mRNA transcription. ANG binds
the first exon region of estrogen receptor-related receptor gamma (ERR)
and inhibits the ERR expression. To screen and identify the mRNAs
regulated by ANG at a genome-wide level, we carried out chromatin
immunoprecipitation-chip assay (ChIP-on-chip) and found a total of 699
genes that may be regulated by ANG. These genes were significantly
enriched to tumorigenesis, Wnt and TGF-beta pathways by the KEGG (Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) analysis. Based on the findings that
ANG is able to remodel the histone modification through direct binding to
the histone protein, we propose that ANG might act as a chromatin
remodeling activator to regulate RNA transcription. However, there is
still a long way to go before fully disclosing the roles and mechanisms
of ANG in gene transcription.

