Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-translational regulation of the cleaved fragment of Par-4 in
ovarian and endometrial cancer cells


Prostate Apoptosis Response-4 (Par-4) is a tumor suppressor protein whose
expression level in cancer is frequently decreased; however, it is rarely
mutated nor suppressed. Par-4 is not only regulated at the expression
level, but also post-translationally. Most recently, we reported the
cisplatin-induced caspase3-dependent cleavage of Par-4 resulting in the
accumulation of a 25kd cleaved-Par-4 (cl-Par-4) fragment. In the present
study, we investigated the mechanisms regulating this fragment using
cl-Par-4-expressing stable clones derived from ovarian and endometrial
cancer cell lines.Briefly, we used cancer cell lines in which we produced
stable clones expressing the cleaved form of PAR-4 (cl.PAR-4) using
lentiviral particles. Using these models, we studied the regulation of
cl.PAR-4 at the protein level using Western blots.Intriguingly, cl-Par-4
protein was weakly expressed in all stable clones despite constitutive
transgene expression. However, upon cisplatin treatment, cl-Par-4 levels
increased up to 50-fold relative to baseline conditions. We assessed the
subcellular localization of cl-Par-4 in baseline and cisplatin-treated
conditions using cytoplasmic/nuclear fractionation. Results showed that
cl-Par-4 is localized in both the cytoplasm and nucleus compartments, but
cisplatin treatment did not alter its localization. Treatment of stable
clones with proteasome and translation inhibitors revealed that cisplatin
exposure may in fact protect cl-Par-4 from proteasome-dependent
degradation. To confirm proteasome involvement in this process, potential
ubiquitination sites were predicted using bioinformatic tools.
Interestingly, we showed that PI3K and MAPK pathways are also implicated
in this post-translational regulation, as evidenced by an increase of
cl-Par-4 in the presence of PI3K inhibitors (Wortmannin and NVP-BEZ235)
and a decrease of cl-Par-4 using MAPK inhibitors (U0126 and PD98059).
Finally using bioinformatics resources, we found diverse datasets showing
similar results to those we observed with the proteasome and cl-Par-4.
Indeed, we have showed, using data from a published study, that the use
of Bortezomib (a potent proteasome inhibitor) significantly increased
Par-4 expression in MCF7 cancer cells.These new findings add to the
complex mechanisms regulating Par-4 expression and activity, and justify
further studies addressing the biological significance of this phenomenon
in gynecological cancer cells.

