Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis of survival outliers in glioblastoma


Despite the general poor prognosis for patients with GBM, a proportion
survives well beyond the median survival of 12-14 months following
diagnosis. To elucidate molecular features associated with
disproportionately protracted survival, we conducted deep genomic
comparative analysis of a cohort of patients receiving standard therapy
(surgery plus concurrent radiation and temozolomide) wherein GBM outliers
were identified: patients who responded (long-term survivor, LTS) versus
those who failed rapidly (short-term survivor, STS). The datasets enabled
interrogation for signatures indicative of tumor vulnerability. Whole
genomic, transcriptomic and epigenetic analyses of 18 patients, including
8 LTS with an average 30 months overall survival (OS) and 10 STS with an
average of 7 months OS were performed to capture single nucleotide
variants (SNVs), indels, translocations, intra-chromosomal
rearrangements, copy number variants, along with DNA methylation and mRNA
expression. LTS and STS cases showed equal proportion of 7p11.2 (EGFR)
amplification and 9p21.3 (CDKN2A) deletion. However, LTS GBM showed
frequent chromosomal gains in 4q12 (PDGFRA and KIT) and 12q14.1 (CDK4)
and deletion in 19q13.33 (BAX, BCAT2 and CD33), whereas, STS GBM showed
frequent deletion in 9p11.2 (FOXD4L2 and AQP7P3) and 22q11.21 (HIC2). In
addition, LTS GBM showed a 2-fold increased copy number alteration
(specifically deletion) as compared to STS GBM. By gene expression
analysis, supervised clustering using the CIN70 signature (prognostic)
showed an increased expression in STS GBM. Overall, whole genome
methylation analyses showed that STS GBM tumors harbor more
hypomethylation in probes situated in -200 bp of transcription start site
(TSS) and both exon 1 and 5UTR region. A methylation signature consist of
89 probes distantly separate LTS from STS GBM tumors. We posit that
genomic instability (broadly inclusive) is associated with vulnerability
of GBM to standard therapy; conversely, genomic instability coupled with
genetic and epigenetic signatures may identify patients where up-front
entry into alternative, targeted regimens would be a preferred,
more-efficacious management.Supported by a grant from the Ben & Catherine
Ivy Foundation.

