Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorescent probe activation and hNQO1 activity in solid tumor
mimics


Fluorescence molecular imaging is an emerging field with potential to aid
in optically guided surgery for cancer treatment. To overcome the
drawbacks of always-on fluorescent probes, such as indocyanine green,
activatable fluorescent probes are being developed that allow high
signal-to-background imaging for better discrimination of cancerous cells
from normal cells. The activatable fluorescent probes designed in our
research group rely on the presence of two-electron reductase hNQO1
(human NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase isoenzyme 1), which is highly
upregulated in tumor cells.Two-dimensional monolayer cell culture systems
lack the features of real tissues, such as complex microenvironment and
cellular heterogeneity. To overcome the limitations of two-dimensional
(2-D) systems, we expanded our research to three-dimensional (3-D) cell
culture systems. Our goal is to understand the dependence of probe
activation on the availability and activity of hNQO1 in the heterogeneous
regions of solid tumors. Hence, 3-D cell cultures were incorporated in
our study using the traditional liquid overlay method for the HT-29
cancer cell line. Following the original approach for monolayer cell
imaging, probe activation is observed in the outer proliferating cell
regions of 3-D HT-29 colon cancer cell assemblies (multicellular
spheroids, MCSs). We are utilizing the in vitro cultured MCSs as mimics
of solid tumors to investigate the activity of hNQO1 in the avascular
regions of solid tumors with the help of hNQO1 activatable fluorophores,
such as previously reported QMeNN.Paraffin-embedded sectioning is used to
determine hNQO1 presence in the avascular, or necrotic regions, of these
tumor mimics. Immunofluorescence data obtained from more than 20-day-old
HT-29 MCSs exhibited a distribution of hNQO1 throughout the peripheral
cellular region and in the fragmented cells and debris of the necrotic
center of the tumor mimics. Preliminary results, from wide-field
fluorescence microscopy of MCSs that were trypsinized for periods of time
to yield released cells that were then incubated with the QMeNN probe,
showed minimal probe activation in the inner regions of MCSs, implying
diminished hNQO1 activity in the core region. These results counter
increased hNQO1 activity, based on literature and our work, that has been
observed in the later stages of the monolayer growth cycle of HT-29
cells. Currently, experiments are being performed to determine if hNQO1
expression and its activity are dependent on the age of MCSs, through the
use of immunofluorescence, and UV/vis and fluorescence spectrometry
methods, with the aid of fluorescent probes. hNQO1 is a potential tumor
target, not just for contrast agents, but for bioactivatable prodrugs as
well. Understanding the bioavailability of the hNQO1 biomarker in the
avascular regions of solid tumors and their activity may answer some
aspects of the reasons for chemoresistance.

