Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of target and cytotoxicity of novel monoclonal
antibody NEO-201 in ovarian and uterine cancer subtypes


Objectives: Given the heterogeneity of ovarian cancer, it is imperative
to identify subtype-directed treatments. The novel antibody NEO-201
targets a specific tumor-associated antigen (TAA) expressed on some
ovarian and uterine malignancies, providing a tumor-directed approach.
Here, we aimed to identify the cancer subtypes which express the NEO-201
target and demonstrate its cytotoxic effects in vitro and in mouse models
of ovarian cancer.Methods: NEO-201 is a genetically humanized novel
monoclonal antibody developed through vaccines with TAAs. This antibody
targets malignant tissues that express tumor-specific epitopes in
membrane-anchored protein CEACAM-6. We performed immunohistochemistry
(IHC) on tissue microarrays from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
subtyped ovarian and uterine cancers to estimate the incidence of cancers
expressing the NEO-201 target. Ovarian and uterine cell line pellet
arrays were stained by IHC to identify in vitro models. We examined the
cytotoxicity of NEO-201 in two high- and three low-expressing cell lines
using Calcein AM cell viability assays alone and with purified natural
killer (NK) cells with and without IL-2 stimulation. Studies of NEO-201
in ovarian cancer mouse models are ongoing.Results: IHC of NEO-201 in
tissue microarrays demonstrated 51% and 12% reactivity in uterine and
ovarian samples, respectively. Similar expression patterns were
identified in representative cell lines by IHC and Western blot. NEO-201
killed cell lines expressing its target in the range of 0.5-20g/mL. Over
3 weeks, NEO-201 treatment of tumor-bearing mice demonstrated control of
tumor growth with 3 doses of 250g NEO-201 and tumor regression with 100g
in combination with IL2-stimulated PBMC. Studies are ongoing to further
investigate NEO-201 cytotoxicity in ovarian cancer mouse models as well
as identify the mechanism of tumor cell death and the target epitope of
NEO-201.Conclusions: NEO-201, a novel monoclonal antibody, specifically
targets epithelial malignancies including ovarian and uterine cancer.
This potentially therapeutic antibody demonstrates tumor-specific
cytotoxicity in cancer cell lines expressing its target in vitro and in
xenografts with IL2-stimulated PBMC, suggesting both antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and direct cytotoxicity mechanisms are
involved in tumor inhibition and regression. These studies lay the
groundwork for future examination of TAA-directed therapy for ovarian or
uterine malignancies.

