Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of cell cycle-related gene expressions in
MDM2-transfected LNCaP-MST cells after inhibition of HSP90


MDM2 gene is a cellular proto-oncogene amplified in 25-40% of all human
cancers and regulates cell proliferation, senescence, and apoptosis
through targeting p53. It is widely speculated that MDM2 protein is not
only responsible for tumorigenesis via p53 inactivation, but also for
increasing the metastatic ability of originally non-metastatic tumor
cells. HSP90 is a molecular chaperone that regulates the maturation,
activation and stability of critical signaling proteins that drive the
development and progression of prostate cancer.
17-Allyamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) is an inhibitor of HSP90,
which causes proteasomal degradation of client proteins such as AR, HER2,
Akt etc., leading to cell cycle arrest and substantial growth inhibition.
HSP90 is also believed to be involved in the stabilization of MDM2 and
therefore, inhibition of HSP90 is expected to accelerate degradation of
MDM2 and disrupt its function. Hence, our study was designed to determine
the expression profile of the genes in the cell cycle pathway following
treatment of MDM2 overexpressing LNCaP-MST prostate cancer cells with
17-AAG (10 M at 24 hrs). In the present study, Human cell cycle PCR array
was used to examine the alterations in gene expression pattern following
exposure to the 17-AAG in MDM2 overexpressed prostate cancer cells. In
our experiments we observed that the genes impacted by MDM2
overexpression were reversed by HSP90 inhibition. The expression of genes
such as CDC25A, CDC25C, AURKB and Survivin levels were significantly
down-regulated after 17-AAG treatment, while p21 and GADD45A were
up-regulated compared to the control LNCaP-MST. A heat map and
scatterplot analysis clearly confirmed the alterations in the expression
levels of these genes following 17-AAG treatment. It is expected that
more thorough understanding of the consequences of HSP90 blockade,
particularly those that are independent of its role as a regulator of
p53, will reveal its therapeutic significance. Our results offer
convincing evidence to suggest that the inhibition of HSP90 can induce
cell cycle arrest in LNCaP-MST cells. (The financial support from the
Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida is
gratefully acknowledged).

