Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of androgen receptor in aromatase inhibitor
resistance


Clinical assessment of breast cancer tumors has shown that androgen
receptor (AR) is expressed in more than 75% of cases, independent of
molecular subtype. Specifically, clinical studies have shown that
estrogen receptor (ER) and AR discordance correlates with endocrine
resistance. Preclinical studies show that downregulation of ER results in
a lack of estrogen mediated growth which is concurrent with upregulation
of AR and its mediated gene targets. In addition, forced expression of AR
was shown to induce resistance to tamoxifen, even when estrogen receptor
was still expressed. Furthermore, ER positive breast cancer cells made
resistant to tamoxifen express higher levels of AR and show sensitivity
to abiraterone acetate. Together, these results implicate AR in endocrine
resistance and suggest AR as a potential therapeutic target in a subset
of these endocrine resistant cancers. The aim of this study was to better
understand the role of AR in aromatase inhibitor (AI) resistance through
the use of cell lines made resistant to AI through xenograft mouse
modeling. In this study, MCF7 cells, MCF7 cells transfected with the
human aromatase gene (MCF7Ca), and their aromatase inhibitor (AI)
resistant counterparts, were analyzed for changes in AR and ER expression
by qPCR and Western blot. Sensitivity of these cells to AR targeting
agents was assessed by MTT assay. MCF7Ca cells displayed decreased
expression of AR and increased expression of ER when compared to MCF7
cells. AI-resistant cell lines displayed modulation of ER and AR
expression when compared to their AI-sensitive counterparts. Upregulation
of AR was accompanied with increased AR transcriptional activity, as
demonstrated by increased expression of PSA. Treatment of AI-resistant
cells with AR targeting agents displayed increased sensitivity when
compared to AI-sensitive cells. Together, these results suggest that
upregulation of AR may contribute to AI-resistance, and that targeting AR
in AI-resistant breast cancer may have therapeutic relevance.

