Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concordance of immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay results with gene
expression profiling (GEP) methods for diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) subtype identification


Introduction: The survival of DLBCL patients who receive
immunochemotherapy is correlated with the molecular signature of their
tumors. The two most common subtypes which are defined by cell of origin
(COO) are the germinal center B cell-like (GCB) and activated B cell-like
(ABC) subtypes which have 3-year OS rates of 80% and 45%, respectively
when treated with R-CHOP. Several methods have been developed to
categorize DLBCL into these sub-types as the treatment they receive
directly affects their outcome. Microarray GEP was first used to classify
DLBCL into ABC or GCB, with a minority unclassified (UNC), however this
is difficult to implement widely and has been replaced by more recent
technologies. The most commonly used IHC-based Hans method profiles
patients into GCB and non-GCB. The primary focus of this study was to
evaluate concordance between current GEP and IHC methods to designate
DLBCL subtypes.Methods: For this study, the IHC assay used was a
standardized IHC assay based on the Hans algorithm and for the GEP-based
assay; the NanoString Technologies Lymphoma Subtyping Test (LST) was
used. Commercially available DLBCL samples (N = 138) were confirmed for
tumor content and sent to a central laboratory for evaluation by the IHC
assay. RNA was extracted from each sample and sent to NanoString for GEP
evaluations. To compare methods homogeneously, calls for each method were
converted to either GCB or non-GCB. All ABC and UNC subtype calls from
the NanoString platform was converted to non-GCB and any did not pass
(DNP) calls were converted to not available (NA). All NA values were
excluded from the tables and concordance calculations.Results: The
Positive Percent Agreement [95% CI] in calling non-GCB between IHC and
LST was 87% [78% - 96%] (47/54). Overall concordance between IHC and LST
was 80% [73% - 87%] (N = 125, 12 LST samples DNP, 1 IHC sample DNP). The
Negative Percent Agreement between IHC and LST (i.e., in calling the GCB
sub-type) was 75% [65% - 85%] using the LST result as a non-reference
standard (53/71).Conclusions: Given that the success of targeted therapy
for the treatment of DLBCL is contingent on the correct identification of
sub-type of DLBCL, it is important to adopt a method that accurately and
consistently identifies the sub-type in the majority of patients. Given
the good concordance between the GEP and IHC methods, DLBCL can be
stratified into COO sub-types using either platform. The results show
that an optimized Hans IHC assay standardized in a central laboratory
offers a robust, relatively inexpensive and accessible platform for cell
of origin sub-typing in DLBCL and, with clinical validation, may offer an
excellent tool for the selection of optimal therapy.

