Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-proliferative function of SIRT3 in a human melanoma xenograft
mouse model


Melanoma is one of the most aggressive forms of skin cancer and is often
lethal, if not treated early. Therefore, it is necessary to try to
develop novel target-based strategies to combat this neoplasm. SIRT3 is a
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) -dependent mitochondrial protein
deacetylase involved in metabolism- and aging- related disorders,
including certain cancers. Interestingly, studies have suggested both
tumor suppressor as well as tumor promoter roles of SIRT3 in cancer.
However, its role in melanoma is not well-established. Previously, we
have shown that SIRT3 was upregulated in human melanoma cells and its
lentiviral knockdown resulted in anti-proliferative effects in human
melanoma cells. We also found that SIRT3 knockdown resulted in the
G1-phase arrest of the cell cycle, induction of senescence, and decrease
in cell migration. This study was designed to determine the relevance of
our in vitro findings to the in vivo situation, in human melanoma
xenograft models. Employing immunodeficient mice (Crl:NU-Foxn1nu,
homozygous; Strain 088), we first determined the effect of
SIRT3-knockdown on melanoma tumorigenesis. The mice were subcutaneously
implanted with shNS-SK-MEL-2 (control) and shSIRT3-SK-MEL-2
(SIRT3-knockdown) melanoma cells, followed by assessing tumorigenesis of
melanoma cells. We found that compared to shNS-SK-MEL-2 cells,
shSIRT3-SK-MEL-2 cells showed a significantly decreased tumorigenic
potential in these mice, in terms of average tumor volume (measured
weekly) and average tumor weight (measured at termination of the study).
Further, the Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that SIRT3 knockdown resulted
in a significant survival advantage, in terms of reaching the cutoff
tumor size (2.0 cm in one dimension). In an additional strategy, we
determined the tumorigenicity of SIRT3 overexpressing melanoma cells
(Hs294T-SIRT3) in NU/NU mice. Our data demonstrated that compared to
control Hs294T-pcDNA cells, the SIRT3 overexpressing Hs294T-SIRT3 cells
demonstrated a significantly enhanced tumorigenic potential (average
tumor volume and tumor weight) in NU/NU mice. Overall, our study provides
evidence supporting a pro-proliferative role of SIRT3 in melanoma and
suggests that SIRT3 needs to be further evaluated as a potential
druggable therapeutic target for melanoma management. However, detailed
mechanistic and in vivo studies in relevant melanoma models are needed to
further validate our findings.

