Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel long noncoding RNA, onco-lncRNA 230, induces apoptosis and
invasion in lung squamous cell carcinoma


Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are RNAs that are longer than 200 base
pairs and do not translate into proteins but have been shown to play
roles in all aspects of biological regulation. LncRNAs have also been
shown to regulate gene expression including chromatin organization,
transcriptional regulation, and post-transcriptional control. In
addition, they are now emerging to be important players in our
understanding of cancer and have been shown to promote tumorigenesis.
However, the mechanisms driving the advancement of tumor progression to
metastasis is poorly understood. To identify lncRNAs critical to
tumorigenesis, our lab conducted a pan-cancer analysis of normal and
primary tumor tissues from The Cancer Genome Atlas to discover lncRNAs
that are commonly altered across cancer types, which we termed
onco-lncRNAs. During our analysis, we discovered a novel unannotated
onco-lncRNA, onco-lncRNA-230, that was significantly up regulated in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSC), lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), and
lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) tumors relative to matched adjacent
normal tissues, when available. We chose to focus on onco-lncRNA-230 as
it displayed more than seven fold increase in LUAD and more than thirty
seven fold change in LUSC tumors relative to adjacent normal. First, we
validated this finding by quantitative PCR which revealed greater than a
two fold enrichment of onco-lncRNA-230 expression in two out of seven
LUAD and all six LUSC cells lines compared to a normal lung cell line.
Because we observed the greatest increase in expression in HCC95 LUSC
cells, we next sought to determine if modulating the expression of
onco-lncRNA-230 promotes oncogenic phenotypes. Silencing of
onco-lncRNA-230 in HCC95 cells did not change cellular proliferation but
significantly increased apoptosis. Furthermore, silencing onco-lncRNA-230
resulted in a decrease in cellular invasion by transwell assay. Taken
together, this represents the first study reporting that onco-lncRNA-230
is dysregulated in multiple cancer types, significantly up-regulated in
lung cancer patient samples and lung cancer cell lines, and confers
oncogenic phenotypes. Moving forward, we intend to explore how
onco-lncRNA-230 mechanistically promotes lung cancer with the objective
of utilizing onco-lncRNA-230 as a novel cancer diagnostic and therapy.

