Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pooled shRNA screen in 3D cultures of primary tumor propagating
cells identifies regulators of innate chemoresistance in KRAS-driven NSCLC


Despite advances developing targeted therapies for non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), patients carrying activating KRAS mutations still have no
effective targeted therapeutics and respond poorly to chemotherapy.
Discovering drug targets that work in combination with existing
chemotherapeutics to inhibit innate chemoresistance and prevent
re-initiation of tumor growth could reduce the likelihood of relapse and
extend patient survival. Heterogeneous tumor propagating cell (TPC)
populations in NSCLC have been shown to have increased chemoresistance,
an enhanced ability to re-seed tumors in immunocompromised mice, and
express genes associated with poor prognosis. To target chemoresistance
in TPCs, we have developed a 3D culture model for functional genomic
screens using primary tumor cells from a mouse model of NSCLC driven by
activation of KRAS and p53 loss. Using pooled shRNA libraries, we have
performed a focused screen in 3D TPC cultures of over 3,000 shRNAs
targeting 600 genes associated with chemotherapeutic response in TPCs,
TPC gene expression, DNA damage response, or bulk tumor resistance. We
selected targets for validation, characterization, and in vivo studies if
knockdown of a gene selectively sensitized TPCs to platinum-based
chemotherapy or inhibited growth of TPCs. Multiple DNA damage response
pathways were implicated in chemoresistance including known regulators,
such as ATR and the translesion synthesis pathway. Many genes expressed
selectively by TPCs alone or in response to chemotherapy were required
for chemoresistance, including regulators of mitochondrial transport, RNA
export, and DNA replication. A parallel screen using the KRAS-mutant
LKR10 cell line was used as a control for shRNA representation and to
determine which targets are required for TPCs to survive in 3D but not in
2D cultures. 3D-specific vulnerabilities include genes that are expressed
highly in TPCs or in chemoresistant tumors and represent potential KRAS
vulnerabilities that exist in the TPC population. Most chemoresistance
targets and KRAS vulnerabilities are not shared by LKR10 cells grown in
2D suggesting growth in a multidimensional matrix exposes therapeutic
opportunities that are distinct from cells grown as monolayers. Although
functional genomic screens using primary tumor cells in 3D have limited
throughput, focused screens utilizing primary tumor cells have the
potential to discover therapeutic opportunities that exist in vivo that
have not been uncovered in screens utilizing cell lines in 2D.

