Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CtBP1 regulates olfactory and adhesion pathways in prostate cancer
and metabolic syndrome


Metabolic syndrome (MeS) is a cluster of pathophysiological disorders
that comprise at least three of the following factors: abdominal obesity,
elevated triglycerides, dyslipidemia, high blood pressure and impaired
glucose tolerance. Several studies associated MeS with increased risk for
several cancer types, including prostate cancer (PCa). C-terminal binding
protein 1 (CtBP1) is a potent transcriptional co-repressor of tumor
suppressor genes. This protein is activated by low NAD+/NADH ratio
produced by highly energetic environment such as high fat diet (HFD)
intake. Previously, we identified CtBP1 as a novel molecular link between
MeS and prostate tumor growth. The aim of this work was to assess the
CtBP1 related pathways in PCa and MeS. We developed a MeS in vivo model
by chronically feeding male nude mice with HFD. Control diet (CD) fed
animals were maintained at the same conditions. These mice were
inoculated with PC3 stable CtBP1 depleted or control cells. RNA obtained
from xenografts was used for Genome-wide expression profiles (Affymetrix)
and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). These analyses yielded several
important pathways regulated by CtBP1, such as Cell Adhesion (COL17A1,
PRRS2, CDH3, ITGB4, LCN2, CDH1, GJB5, TGM2 and SPARC) and Olfactory
(OR4C45, OR5P2, GUCA1C and CLCA2). CtBP1 significantly diminished the
capability of PCa cell lines to adhere to a collagen matrix, repressing
the epithelial marker CDH1 and inducing the mesenchymal marker VIM
expressions. Interestingly, CtBP1 associated to ITGB4 promoter gene,
strongly repressing its expression. CtBP1 depletion increased the plasma
membrane of the cell attached to the substrate and the number of
filopodia.From olfactory pathway, we particularly focus on Chloride
Channel Accessory 2 (CLCA2), a reported breast cancer tumor suppressor
gene that function inhibiting epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and invasion processes. We found that CtBP1 regulates the transcription
of CLCA2 in xenografts generated on HFD-fed mice. Using a panel of
luciferase reporter plasmids with variable length of the CLCA2 promoter
region, we determined that CtBP1 represses CLCA2 promoter activity in PC3
cells. Moreover, we established that CtBP1 associates to the CLCA2
proximal promoter region by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
Finally, several proteins regulate CLCA2 promoter activity independently
(p53, ET2 and BRCA1) or dependently of CtBP1 (p300 and HDAC2).
Altogether, these results demonstrated a new role for CtBP1 in the
regulation of cellular adhesion, EMT and invasion reinforcing a potential
function for this protein in cancer progression. Hence, CtBP1 pathway
might help to identify new molecular candidates for better prediction of
PCa progression in a subset of patients with MeS

