Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and characterization of circulating and disseminated
tumor cells in patients with bladder and prostate cancer


Introduction: Increasing evidence suggests that cancer cells display
dynamic molecular changes in response to systemic therapy. Circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) in the peripheral blood and disseminated tumor cells
(DTCs) in bone marrow represent a readily available source of cancer
cells with which to measure this dynamic process. To date, many
strategies to isolate and characterize these cells have been described.
These techniques, however, have been limited by the requirement for
positive or negative selection thus resulting in cell losses. Herein we
report a method to detect and characterize CTCs and DTCs in matched
peripheral blood and bone marrow samples without need for a selection
step.Methods: Following blood or bone marrow aspirate collection,
nucleated cells were extracted using a modified density-media
centrifugation technique. Nucleated cells were spread on positively
charged slides and stained with epithelial markers (Pan-cytokeratin and
EpCAM) and a leukocyte marker CD45. High throughput scanning microscopy
was performed followed by image processing and subsequent ranking for
probability of being a cancer cell. Candidate cancer cells were defined
as events which were positive for PanCK and/or EpCAM but negative for
CD45. Candidate cells were independently confirmed with high resolution
microscopy.Results: Cytokeratin-positive, EpCAM-positive DTCs and CTCs
were readily detectable in patients with clinically-localized bladder and
prostate cancer without need for positive or negative
selection.Conclusions: Future work aims to incorporate disease specific
makers to confirm that the observed cells truly represent cells of either
bladder or prostate origin. This method offers the flexibility to
preserve samples for downstream molecular assays including single cell
isolation and sequencing. All told, this assay provides a novel means to
detect and characterize CTCs and DTCs without positive or negative
selection methods.

