Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the effects of hypoxia and hydrostatic
pressure on the expression of immunotherapeutic targets on cell lines
used for translational research


INTRODUCTIONThe characterization of the tumor microenvironment includes
mechanotransduction, hypoxia, acidosis, and tissue remodeling. These
factors can influence the gene and protein expression of various cell
types that make up the tumor as well as influence the selection of cells
that can thrive in a given microenvironment; however, typical cancer cell
culture rarely uses hypoxia and pressure nor utilizes substrates similar
to the native extracellular matrix (ECM). We designed a system to study
the influence of hypoxia, pressure, and native ECM conditions on cancer
cell lines and primary cells, with the goal of creating culturing
environments relevant for translational studies involving key
immunotherapeutic targets.METHODSFirst, we studied how hypoxia with or
without pressure influences cell biology and gene expression, using
transcriptome profiling across a range of physiologically-relevant
culturing conditions to mimic various tumor microenvironments found
within the body. To do this, we utilized Xcell's primary cell culture
platform that allows for the precise control of oxygen concentration
(0.1%-20% O2) and hydrostatic pressure levels (26 to 260 mmHg / 0.5 psig
to 5 psig). Additionally, we studied the influence of biomimetic
substrates by ECM composition and organization (aligned or unaligned
collagen at concentrations from 1-2.5 mg/ml +/- fibronectin 0.1-10
microgram/ml). Cell lines studied include models for brain (U-87, A172),
pancreatic (PANC10.05), and prostate cancer (DU-145, PC-3, 22Rv1, LNCaP).
We performed high-resolution immunofluorescence imaging and western blot
protein expression analysis of key targets, including immunotherapeutic
targets CTLA-4, PD-1, and PD-L1. Finally, we applied these culturing
conditions to characterize primary tissues obtained from cancer patients
for studies focused on biomarker discovery, patient monitoring and
treatment decision-making.CONCLUSIONSWe identified both common and unique
gene expression signatures across different cells lines, with hypoxic
conditions activating HIF1 signaling, whereas hydrostatic pressure
resulted in restricted signatures of high clinical value. Cancer cell
lines and PBMCs differentially express immunotherapeutic targets, at low
oxygen and high pressure culturing conditions, resulting in reduced
expression of key drug targets. Analysis of mRNA-seq data revealed
alterations in gene expression profiles of immunotherapeutic and
drug-target pathways involving CTLA-4 and AR signaling. In contrast, we
observed increased CD47 and CD44 expression at low oxygen and high
pressure culturing conditions in cancer cell lines and immune cells.
Therefore, these results support the presence of physiologically-relevant
drug targets in tumors and immune cells characterized by low oxygen and
high interstitial fluid pressure.

