Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redox regulation of p53 stability is a function of inhibition of
PP2A-mediated dephosphorylation at threonine 55


Protein Phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a heterotrimeric serine/threonine
phosphatase that has critical roles in numerous cellular pathways. The
role of PP2A as an essential tumor suppressor in numerous death signaling
pathways is well documented. In this regard, recent work from our
laboratory has highlighted a novel mechanism of apoptosis inhibition via
post-translational redox-modification of PP2A. Increase in intracellular
superoxide, either by pharmacological inhibition or siRNA-mediated
silencing of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), results in the dissociation
of PP2A-AC catalytic core from its B regulatory subunit. Dissociation of
the PP2A heterotrimer is a result of the selective nitration [by
peroxynitrite derived from the reaction of superoxide with nitric oxide]
of a conserved tyrosine residue on B56 which we identified as Y289
(B56Y289). Importantly, we showed in lymphoma cells that PP2A-AC
catalytic core is typically targeted to Bcl-2 by its B56 regulatory
subunit. When O2- is elevated, it signals for the sustained
phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at S70 by inducing the release of PP2A-AC
catalytic core from B56-bound Bcl-2. This results in the sustained
phospho-activation of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and resistance to apoptotic
stimuli. Notably, Bcl-2 is not the only substrate of PP2A, nor is B56 the
only PP2A regulatory subunit susceptible to redox modification. Thus,
implications from redox-modification of PP2A may extend beyond the
phospho-activation of Bcl-2. In the context of carcinogenesis, another
notable substrate of PP2A is the tumor suppressor, p53. p53 stability is
negatively influenced by its phosphorylation status at threonine-55
(T55). Phosphorylation of T55, on the other hand, is countered by PP2A
harboring the B563 subunit. Here we provide evidence that the B563
sub-unit of PP2A complexes with p53 and this complex is sustained upon an
increase in intracellular superoxide. Importantly, redox-mediated
inhibition of B563-containing PP2A (PP2AB563) prevents the
dephosphorylation of p53 at T55, thereby negatively impacting the
stability of p53 in tumor cells with elevated superoxide level. This, we
hypothesize, may be a novel death inhibitory mechanism that renders tumor
cells resistant to conventional DNA-damaging therapeutic agents that rely
heavily on the activation of p53 for death induction.

