Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AGEN1884 and AGEN2041: Two functionally distinct anti-CTLA-4
antagonist antibodies


CTLA-4 is an important negative regulator of T cell function. Together
with CD28, these two co-receptors exemplify a co-inhibitory/stimulatory
system that is critical in the regulation of T cell immune responses. Key
to this regulatory system are the shared ligands, CD80 and CD86, whose
engagement determines whether T cells receive stimulatory (CD28) or
inhibitory (CTLA-4) signals. Pre-clinical and clinical studies have shown
that anti-CTLA-4 antibodies can enhance tumor-specific immunity through a
combination of mechanisms including: 1) blockade and or displacement of
CD80/CD86 binding to CTLA-4, leading to CD28 activation; 2) prevention of
the trans-endocytosis of CD80/CD86 from the surface of antigen presenting
cells by CTLA-4 expressing regulatory T cells; and 3) the selective
depletion of CTLA-4 expressing intratumoral regulatory T cells by an Fc
receptor-mediated mechanism.AGEN1884 and AGEN2041, two fully human
anti-CTLA-4 antibodies identified using the Retrocyte Display platform,
are being developed for the treatment of advanced malignancies. The
antibodies share heavy and light chain complementarity determining
regions (CDRs), but differ in their IgG Fc region (AGEN1884, an IgG1, and
AGEN2041, an IgG2). AGEN1884 and AGEN2041 selectively bind to human and
cynomolgus monkey CTLA-4 with low single digit nM affinity. Further, both
antibodies bind CTLA-4 expressed on T cells, and potently block
engagement of CD80 and CD86, leading to enhanced T cell responsiveness.
In a T cell-dependent antibody response (TDAR) study in cynomolgus
monkeys, administration of a vaccine in combination with either AGEN1884
or AGEN2041 augmented the antibody response to the vaccine antigen. This
finding demonstrates that both antibodies are functional in non-human
primates, and exemplifies their utility in promoting immunity to
co-administered antigens in patients, such as therapeutic cancer
vaccines. Consistent with this, an anti-mouse CTLA-4 antibody produced
potent tumor regressions in combination with a heat-shock protein-based
vaccine (a surrogate vaccine resembling Prophage heat shock protein-based
autologous vaccine).The distinct IgG backbones of AGEN1884 and AGEN2041
enable distinct optimal effector functions, such as the ability to
mediate antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and
antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis (ADCP). We anticipate that
these differences in effector function may be exploited in certain tumors
depending on immune cell composition. Taken together, the biochemical and
functional attributes of AGEN1884 and AGEN2041 are ideally suited for
clinical development, both as single agents and also in combination with
other immune education approaches, such as cancer vaccines and
immunomodulatory antibodies or small molecule therapies.

