Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular analyses of histopathologic morphologic features in
breast cancer


Traditional histopathologic analysis of breast cancer phenotypes has
played a central role in the diagnosis, prognosis and clinical management
of breast cancer. This study integrated molecular data with breast cancer
histopathologic annotations to elucidate the molecular basis of these
common morphologic features.We constructed a large, comprehensive
histopathologic database of 850 invasive breast cancer cases from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We integrated the consensus assessments of 11
morphologic features (nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic count, epithelial
tubule formation, inflammation, DCIS, LCIS, lymphovascular invasion,
necrosis, fibrotic focus, apocrine features and proportion of epithelium
in invasive portion by area) with TCGA's genomic, transcriptomic and
proteomic data. Using this highly annotated dataset, we identified
molecular profiles associated with morphologic features, constructed
Omics-based multivariate models to predict morphologic features and
provided insights into their molecular etiology. The association of
morphologic features signatures with survival in ER-positive and
ER-negative breast cancer was assessed using six independent datasets.
All data are publicly accessible at
http://pathology.ai/tcga_breast.Morphologic features were associated with
PAM50 subtypes, PAM50 proliferation scores, genomic alterations and gene
expression (pTraditional histopathologic analysis of breast cancer
phenotypes has played a central role in the diagnosis, prognosis and
clinical management of breast cancer. This study integrated molecular
data with breast cancer histopathologic annotations to elucidate the
molecular basis of these common morphologic features.We constructed a
large, comprehensive histopathologic database of 850 invasive breast
cancer cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We integrated the
consensus assessments of 11 morphologic features (nuclear pleomorphism,
mitotic count, epithelial tubule formation, inflammation, DCIS, LCIS,
lymphovascular invasion, necrosis, fibrotic focus, apocrine features and
proportion of epithelium in invasive portion by area) with TCGA's
genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data. Using this highly annotated
dataset, we identified molecular profiles associated with morphologic
features, constructed Omics-based multivariate models to predict
morphologic features and provided insights into their molecular etiology.
The association of morphologic features signatures with survival in
ER-positive and ER-negative breast cancer was assessed using six
independent datasets. All data are publicly accessible at
http://pathology.ai/tcga_breast.Morphologic features were associated with
PAM50 subtypes, PAM50 proliferation scores, genomic alterations and gene
expression (p<0.05). Clustering of morphologic features and genomic
alterations produced two clusters of morphologic features and their
separate were driven by TP53, CDH1 and PIK3CA mutations and chr12p13.3,
ch8q24.21 and chr3q26.3 amplifications. The clustering of morphologic
features and gene sets/pathways also produced two clusters of morphologic
features characterized by proliferation or inflammation. The
transcriptomic signatures of nuclear pleomorphism and epithelial tubule
formation were independently prognostic in ER-positive breast cancer. No
signatures were prognostic in ER-negative.Our detailed morphologic data
enrich and complement TCGA's existing molecular data, increase our
understanding of the molecular basis of breast cancer pathologic
phenotypes, can facilitate the refinement of breast cancer
classification, and enhance our understanding of breast cancer biology.

