Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lacking hepatic retinoid storage in mice suppresses NASH-related
hepatocarcinogenesis


Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), which is strongly associated
with metabolic syndrome, has become one of the most common causes of
chronic liver disease in developed countries. Some patients with NAFLD
develop a more serious form of the disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH), and NASH can develop cirrhosis or even hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Although hepatic retinoid (vitamin A) stores are progressively
lost during the development of liver diseases, how this affects
NAFLD/NASH and NASH-related hepatocarcinogenesis is unknown. In order to
investigate this, we used streptozotocin (STZ) and high-fat diet (HFD) to
induce NASH and related hepatic tumorigenesis in matched wild-type and
lecithin:retinol acyltransferase (LRAT) knockout (KO) mice, which lack
stored retinoid in the liver. LRAT is the sole enzyme responsible for
hepatic retinyl ester synthesis since LRAT KO mice completely lack lipid
droplets in hepatic stellate cells. Mice were injected with STZ within 48
hours after birth and then fed HFD from 4 to 16 weeks of age. At the
termination of the experiment, liver tumors were observed macroscopically
and microscopically in both groups. In LRAT KO mice, the development of
hepatic adenoma and HCC was significantly suppressed compared to control
group. LRAT KO mice showed decreased expression levels of cyclin D1 and
TGF-beta mRNA in the liver. The serum levels of d-ROMs and BAP were
measured and the d-ROM/BAP ratio, which indicates oxidative stress,
markedly decreased in LRAT KO mice. The fibrosis in the liver of the LRAT
KO mice was decreased. In addition, liver fibrosis in LRAT KO mice was
suppressed. These findings indicate that LRAT KO mice are less
susceptible to STZ and HFD-induced liver tumorigenesis due to regulation
of cell cycle and attenuation of oxidative stress.The amount of hepatic
retinoid may affect the progression of NASH and the development of
NASH-related HCC.

