Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Moonlighting Functions of glycolytic enzymes relate to human
prostate cancer invasion


Background: Castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is the second
leading cause of cancer deaths among US men. Currently, a large number of
small and low grade prostate cancers (PCa) are being diagnosed. Only a
few of them will metastasize and become lethal. A clinical method to
distinguish aggressive from the indolent tumors is warranted. An enhanced
glucose metabolism (Warbrg effect) and invasion of cells from their
organs of origin and metastasis to distant organs are two characteristics
that are ubiquitous in most solid tumors. In the last few years, the
non-glycolytic activities (moonlighting functions) of glycolytic enzymes
have been investigated in relation to cancer cell invasion. We propose
that oxidatively stressed PCa cells, as a countermeasure, redirect some
of the glycolytic enzymes to their moonlighting functions.Methods: We
used a novel microfluidic device that separates the invading from the
non-invading PCa cells based on their migratory characteristics in a 3D
collagen matrix. We performed ICC analysis of the separated cells for
oxidative stress generating enzyme spermidine/spermine N1 acetyl
transferase (SSAT) and glycolytic enzymes aldolase, GAPDH and F-actin
levels. We also carried out proteomic analysis of aldolase and GAPDH
levels and oxidation state and metabolomic analysis for enzymatic
activities of those two enzymes.Results: Under identical condition, LNCaP
cells show minimum invasion, whereas between 30-40% of C4-2 cells invade
more than 0.8 mm in 16 hours. ICC assay of C4-2 cells shows that most
migratory C4-2 cells have SSAT overexpression, but less than 5%
stationary cells show this effect. Proteomic analysis shows that androgen
treatment that increases overall oxidative stress in both LNCaP and C4-2
cells actually decreases oxidation status of GAPDH in LNCaP cells and
increases that in C4-2 cells. Anti-androgen enzalutamide reverses the
androgen effect in both cell lines. The glycolytic activity of GAPDH
decreases with an increase in protein oxidation. Our metabolomic data
further confirmed an increase in GAPDH activity in LNCaP and a decrease
in C4-2 cells after androgen treatment and the reversal with enzalutamide
as expected from its oxidation status.Discussion: SSAT expression and a
consequent increase in oxidative stress are related to invasion of CRPC.
Oxidation of certain glycolytic enzymes in CRPC cells may divert them to
their moonlighting function related to cellular invasion and metastasis.
These functions may be monitored in patient biopsies and/or prostatectomy
tissues for PCa prognosis. Application of the microfluidic method for the
separation of invading from the non-invading cells and proteogenomic and
metabolomic analysis of these cells isolated from patient prostatectomy
tissues are currently being standardized.

