Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting chemo-resistant colon cancer by inhibiting embryonic
resistance pathways


Colorectal cancer (CRC), with an estimated 2.1 million worldwide new
cases, and 610,000 deaths in 2014, is the second-leading cause of cancer
death in developed countries. While early detection (e.g., via
colonoscopy, occult fecal blood tests) or prevention (removal of
premalignant polyps) generally allows complete disease elimination,
metastatic and drug-resistant disease is uniformly fatal. Even so
FDA-approved, life-extending CRC chemotherapies such as
camptothecin-derived alkaloidal quinolones (e.g., irinotecin, topotecin)
have demonstrated potent inhibition of the DNA synthesis enzyme
topoisomerase-1, although the use of these drugs is limited due to
specific adverse effects and resistance mediated by ATP-dependent
membrane transporters. Consequently, to improve the efficacy (e.g.,
specificity, attenated toxicity, chemosensitivity, etc.) of these
topoisomerase inhibitors, we designed and synthesized (based on
structure-activity relationships, molecular docking, and in silico
studies) eight distinct analogues, based on a
pyrimido[1,2:1,5]-pyrazolo[3,4-b]quinoline (PPQ) (IND-2) structure. One
of these, IND-2, demonstrated robust anticancer efficacy, selectivity to
colon cancer cells, negligible toxicity to normal cells, high
water-solubility, and absent cellular efflux via multidrug transporters,
but remained vulnerable to metabolic inactivation and poor
bioavailability. Resultantly, based on our preliminary microarray and
bioinformatics analyses of over 47,000 genes, and our findings of
IND-2-facilitated transcriptional downregulation of several gene members
of the embryonic WNT/EMT signaling axis, we further bioinformatically
optimized and synthesized 14 IND-2 derivatives that we herein set forth
to characterize in in vitro and in vivo CRC models, specifically
assessing the abovementioned vulnerabilities. We hypothesize that
embryonic signal pathways (e.g., WNT- catenin, EMT, etc.) play an
important role in colorectal tumorigenesis and can be successfully
targeted for the development of safe and efficacious drugs for eventual
human CRC treatment. Presently, we are assessing these analogs in
numerous normal and cancerous CRC cell lines, to select the most
promising of these candidates (based on efficacy and selectivity) for
scaled-up synthesis and extensive in vivo testing, using the highly
aggressive mouse APC/Min/+ CRC model. We strongly believe that the
proposed work will validate embryonic signal cascades as targetable
pathways that could lead to the identification of synthetic, plant-based
pyrimido-pyrazolo-quinoline derivatived compounds with significant
efficacy (in high-risk individuals) and/or selective (minimally toxic)
for further progression into preclinical and clinical anti-CRC drug
development.

