Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial cancer tumor
grafts: a step toward genomic-guided treatment


Endometrial cancer (EC) is the fourth most frequently diagnosed
gynecological cancer among American Women. Steady increased numbers of
newly diagnosed cases and deaths necessitates an added attention. Despite
survival rates between 60-80% for localized, early stage disease, only
marginal advances have been made in the treatment of distant (16%) and
recurrent (15% of early stage) EC over the past two decades. New
treatment strategies, guided by more predictive preclinical disease
models incorporating molecular characteristics are crucial. Recent
findings from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research Network suggested
that the current histo-pathologically-guided classification of EC may not
suffice to direct treatment recommendations, and introduced the potential
adequacy of genomic profiling for reclassifying EC. However, these
findings are hampered by the lack of appropriate in vivo models, which
adequately facilitate obtaining the necessary preclinical evidence before
translating findings to genome-guided clinical trials. Objectives: To
establish patient derived orthotopic endometrial tumor grafts
recapitulating histology, metastasis, and molecular characteristics of
the original tumor specimen, and integrating TCGA genomic
characterization to facilitate the development of genomic-guided
treatment. Methods: Patient derived EC tissues were orthotopically
transplanted to murine uteri and propagated over multiple generations.
Generated tumor grafts were characterized for metastases, histopathology,
and molecular profiles to ensure grafts resemblance of the original tumor
samples. Tumor grafts were then further categorized into the four
reported TCGA clusters on the basis of mutation frequency, somatic copy
number alterations, microsatellite instability, and POLE mutation.
Results: Twenty EC tumor grafts were successfully generated. Histological
features, including tumor grade and hormone receptor status, as well as
genomic profiles were maintained for up to 7 generations. Xenografts were
capable to form metastasis closely parallel to clinical relevant sites.
Results from a survival study demonstrated that the established tumor
grafts reflected clinical stage-, and grade-based disease progression,
and recapitulate TCGA cluster-based survival findings. Conclusions: This
study reports the first successful generation of orthotopic EC
patient-derived tumor grafts, which retain crucial histo-pathological
characteristics, the capacity to form distant metastasis following known
clinical patterns, as well as recapitulating molecular features of the
original human tumor specimen. Additionally, our model can indeed be used
as a tool to investigate the need for reclassifying EC into four clusters
rather than two simplified disease subtypes and feasibility in directing
genomic-guided treatment based on TCGA recommendations.

