Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a RSPO3 CLIA-validated assay as a predictive
biomarker for response to anti-RSPO3 antibody treatment in patients with
solid tumors


R-Spondin (RSPO) proteins bind to LGR receptors and potentiate
Wnt/-catenin signaling. We have identified a therapeutic anti-RSPO3
antibody targeting the RSPO-LGR pathway. In preclinical studies, RSPO3
gene expression has shown correlation with anti-RSPO3 antibody efficacy
in multiple solid tumor types. A qPCR-based RSPO3 assay has been
developed as a predictive biomarker for response to the anti-RSPO3
antibody. In addition, RSPO gene fusions may play a role in the
activation of Wnt signaling. A gene fusion detection workflow consisting
of a RSPO3 CLIA assay, a RSPO3 RUO assay and next generation sequencing
(NGS) has also been developed.We designed 6 qPCR-based assays for the
RSPO3 CLIA assay development and 2 assays for the RUO assay. These assays
were designed to span exon-exon junctions or target microarray probe set
sequences. Amplification sensitivity and specificity were assessed for
assay selection. The analytic performance of the candidate RSPO3 CLIA
assay and quality control measures were established in a validation
study. The validation study included: 1) performance specifications of
the RSPO3 assay including analytical sensitivity, linearity, and
precision, 2) determination of a reportable range, 3) establishment of a
cut-off for the RSPO3 CLIA assay for patient selection, and 4)
establishment of quality control procedures. 104 human cancer tissues and
24 independent patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX) were used in these
studies. To evaluate the fusion detection workflow, the RUO assay was
performed on samples that tested above the CLIA assay cut-off. The delta
Ct difference between the CLIA and RUO assays was calculated to identify
potential fusions.The limit of quantification was established for the
RSPO3 CLIA assay. The 95% reference interval was estimated to be (-2.44,
16.02) with 90% confidence interval for the lower bound (-3.45, -2.12)
and upper bound (15.26, 16.57). The delta Ct cut-off for the RSPO3 CLIA
assay was set based on sensitivity, specificity and prevalence. No
statistically significant difference in the total variance across the
tested samples was observed. A549 and OV56 were identified to be cell
line controls with established acceptable delta Ct limits. Using NGS,
RSPO3 fusions were identified in 6 PDX tumors with delta Ct RUO - delta
Ct CLIA>7, including a novel fusion. This cut-off was further refined
with NGS of 9 clinical samples. Prevalence of the RSPO3 expression and
fusions will be presented.A qPCR based RSPO3 assay was developed and
CLIA-validated for use as a potential predictive biomarker for response
to anti-RSPO3 therapy. This RSPO3 CLIA assay, together with the fusion
detection workflow, will be evaluated in a Phase 1a/b dose escalation
study of anti-RSPO3 (OMP-131R10) in advanced solid tumors and in
combination with FOLFIRI in metastatic colorectal cancer (NCT02482441).

