Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomics and epigenomics analysis reveals genome-wide
effect of the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacitidine (Aza) on
regulation of transcription


DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTi) such as 5-azacytidine(Aza) are
clinically used in treating hematologic malignancies. Promising effects
were also observed in solid tumors, although the exact mechanism
underlining the efficacy was unclear. There has been accumulating
evidence suggesting an enhanced immune response to the tumor cells
following such epigenetic therapies. Cancer immunotherapies targeting
checkpoint inhibition in combination with epigenetic agents such as a
DNMTi could hold promise for those patients that do not respond to
immunotherapies alone. Aza was also found to stimulate an interferon
response in tumor cells via inducing expression of endogenous
retroviruses. In this study, we were interested to further explore the
mechanisms of AZA on transcription regulation across the whole
regulome.HCT-116 is a colon cancer cell line genetically defined by
microsatellite instability (MSI) and mutations in KRAS(G13D) and
PIK3CA(H1047R). In this study, HCT-116 cells were treated with DMSO
(control) or 1M Aza for 42 and 96 hours. RNA-seq, Mass spectrometry
proteomics, RRBS, Chip-Seq, ATAC-Seq and Hi-C data was collected. Data
was analyzed by integrative computational methods. Treatment with Aza
resulted in global demethylation at CpG islands(CGI), which was
moderately correlated with increased expression of the corresponding
genes. DNA methylation, DNA accessibility, H3K4me3 (active promoter
histone mark), H3K27me3 (repressive histone mark) and RNA expression
revealed and cross-verified different states of genomic regions. Pathway
and gene set enrichment analysis found activation of anti-viral defense
and interferon pathways, as well as increased expression of cancer-testis
antigens. IRF7 expression was increased by Aza, and IRF binding motifs
were the most enriched TF motifs at the immediate promoter regions of the
up-regulated genes. The data also suggested that Aza may remove gene
repression by disrupting the scaffolding function of DNMTs. The effects
of Aza on promoter-enhancer interactions were also examined by Hi-C. In
conclusion, we found that DNMTi such as Aza regulates gene transcription
through multiple modes of actions.

