Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inside of multiple mechanism of adaption towards the proteasome
inhibitors in multiple myeloma


Malignant plasma cells drive massive overproduction of monoclonal
immunoglobulin in multiple myeloma (MM). Hence MM cells critically rely
on a proper balance between protein biosynthesis and folding, and
degradation of unfolded/ misfolded protein orchestrated by the unfolded
protein response (UPR). Inhibitors of the proteasome, the terminal
protease along the UPR pathway, are highly effective against MM. Adaptive
resistance to current proteasome inhibitors (PI) (Bortezomib-Btz,
Carfilzomib-Cfz) is a major cause of treatment failure. Btz is a peptide
boronate-type reversible inhibitor, whereas Cfz is of epoxyketone-type
and binds irreversibly to the same proteasomal B5 active site target.
Next generation PI are likewise B5-directed and either of the peptide
boronate (ixazomib, dalanzomib), or the epoxyketone type (oprozomib). PI
resistance is currently understood via two alternative concepts, the
load/capacity concept characterized by proteasome upregulation in
conjunction with downregulation of the UPR via reduced IRE/XBP-1
signaling, and the mutation concept basing on B5 active site mutations
that prevent PI binding. Only IRE1/XBP1 downregulation have been
confirmed in patient-derived material. We generated an in vitro model
where AMO-1 myeloma cells (IC50: 3.1nM for Btz, 4.9nM Cfz) were adapted
to Btz (AMOaBtz; IC50: 298.7nM Btz, 43.2nM Cfz) or to Cfz, (AMOaCfz;
IC50: 27.9nM Btz, 411.5nM Cfz). AMOaBtz cells showed preferential
resistance against ixazomib and dalanzomib, while AMOaCfz cells were
preferentially resistant to oprozomib and other epoxyketone-type
experimental inhibitors. AMOaBtz and AMOaCfz likewise downregulated
IRE/XBP-1, but only AMOaBtz contained an acquired proteasome mutation
(A310G in PSMB5), however this had only a modest influence on Btz binding
and proteasome inhibition. Global gene expression analysis revealed 1430
differentially expressed genes in AMOaBtz/ AMOaCfz (FC>2, pMalignant
plasma cells drive massive overproduction of monoclonal immunoglobulin in
multiple myeloma (MM). Hence MM cells critically rely on a proper balance
between protein biosynthesis and folding, and degradation of unfolded/
misfolded protein orchestrated by the unfolded protein response (UPR).
Inhibitors of the proteasome, the terminal protease along the UPR
pathway, are highly effective against MM. Adaptive resistance to current
proteasome inhibitors (PI) (Bortezomib-Btz, Carfilzomib-Cfz) is a major
cause of treatment failure. Btz is a peptide boronate-type reversible
inhibitor, whereas Cfz is of epoxyketone-type and binds irreversibly to
the same proteasomal B5 active site target. Next generation PI are
likewise B5-directed and either of the peptide boronate (ixazomib,
dalanzomib), or the epoxyketone type (oprozomib). PI resistance is
currently understood via two alternative concepts, the load/capacity
concept characterized by proteasome upregulation in conjunction with
downregulation of the UPR via reduced IRE/XBP-1 signaling, and the
mutation concept basing on B5 active site mutations that prevent PI
binding. Only IRE1/XBP1 downregulation have been confirmed in
patient-derived material. We generated an in vitro model where AMO-1
myeloma cells (IC50: 3.1nM for Btz, 4.9nM Cfz) were adapted to Btz
(AMOaBtz; IC50: 298.7nM Btz, 43.2nM Cfz) or to Cfz, (AMOaCfz; IC50:
27.9nM Btz, 411.5nM Cfz). AMOaBtz cells showed preferential resistance
against ixazomib and dalanzomib, while AMOaCfz cells were preferentially
resistant to oprozomib and other epoxyketone-type experimental
inhibitors. AMOaBtz and AMOaCfz likewise downregulated IRE/XBP-1, but
only AMOaBtz contained an acquired proteasome mutation (A310G in PSMB5),
however this had only a modest influence on Btz binding and proteasome
inhibition. Global gene expression analysis revealed 1430 differentially
expressed genes in AMOaBtz/ AMOaCfz (FC>2, p<0.05). Analysis of uniquely
upregulated genes in AMOaCfz identified the multi-drug resistance gene
ABCB1 (MDR1) that was found 120-fold upregulated by qPCR. Inhibition of
ABCB1 with Verapamil or Reserpin strongly increased Cfz sensitivity,
confirming functional significance. Genes responsible for immunoglobulin
production were selectively downregulated in AMOaBtz, and paraprotein
production (IgA) was abolished as measured by ELISA. In conclusion,
AMOaCfz is the first model combining the key features found in
PI-resistant patient cells (lack of PSMB5 mutation and low IRE1/XBP1
activity). The comparison of AMOaCfz and AMOaBtz suggests the presence of
class-preferential adaptation mechanisms, which may be overcome by using
alternative type proteasome inhibitors or mMDR1 inhibitors.

