Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of FoxO1 expression is associated with decreased IGF-1R
levels and alters IGFBP-1 induction in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer
cells


Breast cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths in
the world. The majority of breast cancers express estrogen receptor alpha
(ER) and tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor modulator, is commonly
prescribed as adjuvant therapy for ER-positive breast cancer patients.
The development of chemoresistance is a common occurrence in treated
patients, however, the molecular mechanisms associated with acquired
tamoxifen resistance are not well defined. Previous work from our lab
identified a novel mechanism of tamoxifen action that involved the
accumulation of extracellular Insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-1 (IGFBP-1) and modulates IGF-1-dependent signaling transduction.
Tamoxifen-induced IGFBP-1 induction in this model was mediated by G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER)-dependent CREB activation as
shown by phosphorylation on serine 133. To determine IGFBP-1 induction is
altered during the development of chemoresistance, this mechanism of
action was studied in tamoxifen resistant MCF-7 (TamR) cells. Whereas
CREB was constitutively phosphorylated in TamR cells, IGFBP-1 levels were
not elevated when compared to parental cells and IGFBP-1 was not induced
by tamoxifen treatment in TamR cells. These data suggest that another
transcription factor(s) are also necessary for the induction of IGFBP-1
in breast cancer cells. FoxO1 is a known regulator of IGFBP-1
transcription and we tested whether FoxO1 contributes to
tamoxifen-induced IGFBP-1 transcription. Our results indicate that FoxO1
expression levels were significantly reduced in TamR cells compared with
parental cells. Furthermore, FoxO1 knockdown experiments demonstrated
this transcription factor mediates tamoxifen-induced IGFBP-1 induction in
MCF-7 cells. Consistent with previously published observations, IGF-1R
expression was reduced in TamR cells compared to parental MCF-7 cells. To
determine if loss of IGF-1R expression in involved in the loss of FoxO1
expression in TamR cells, IGF-1R was exogenously expressed and FoxO1
expression was measured. IGF-1R expression increases FoxO1 levels and
partially restores tamoxifen-induced IGFBP-1 induction in TamR cells.
These results suggest that FoxO1-mediated IGFBP-1 accumulation is altered
during the development of tamoxifen resistance and is associated with
decreased IGF-1R expression.

