Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the functional significance of mutations using
the novel precision cancer analysis system


Mounting evidence indicates that growth of pathologically identical
cancers in each individual patient is fueled by different sets of driving
mutations. The need to identify these drivers stems from the recognized
necessity for tailoring therapy and scheduling future surveillance. This
personalized medical approach has been shown to result in better
treatment outcomes. We present a novel Precision Cancer Analysis system
(PCAS) capable of identifying activated signaling pathways by means of a
transfected cell-based fluorescent reporter assay yielding a quantitative
output of particular pathway activation levels. Being a functional
platform PCAS reveals activated pathways regardless of the type of
mutation behind it, i.e. whether it is already a known mutation or a
variant of unknown significance (VUS) mutation. 20 cancer patients were
sequenced for a panel of 37 genes and analyzed by the PCAS. This system
quantifies oncogenic activity in the majority of the oncogenic signaling
pathways altered by the patients mutations through a functional assay and
does not rely on prior knowledge of the mutations. The system produces a
quantitative output enabling grading the different mutants of the same
patient, providing prioritization for better drug selection. In 3 tested
genes, 16 different mutations were identified- 4 in EGFR, 4 in PIK3CA and
8 in KRAS. Of these 10 were classified as known mutations for which
functional annotation exists, and 6 were VUS. In addition to correctly
annotating all known mutations, the PCAS further quantified oncogenic
activity in all the VUS tested. Measuring the functional mechanism behind
known mutations and VUS provides another layer of critical information to
the physician. These results clearly demonstrate the value of a
functional assay in accurately identifying the optimal course of
treatment, particularly by its ability to add actionable information to
VUS. The study produced a comprehensive delineation of the oncogenic
activity of each patient's individual mutations demonstrating the ability
of the PCAS to 1) accurately deliver comparable actionable information as
found by NGS, 2) functionally characterize mutations annotated as VUS,
and 3) monitor oncogenic activity of signaling pathways induced by
different mutations and mutation-combinations enabling informed treatment
decisions.

