Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FEM1A regulation of the NF-B/YY1/miR-29 circuitry in
rhabdomyosarcoma


Introduction: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), a malignant tumor related to
defective skeletal muscle differentiation, is the most common soft tissue
neoplasm of children, and metastatic RMS continues to have a poor
prognosis. The canonical form of transcription factor NF-B, a p50/p65
heterodimer, regulates normal myogenic differentiation, and is
dysregulated in RMS tumorigenesis. NF-B is active in myoblasts and blocks
myogenic differentiation; for myogenic differentiation to occur, NF-B
must be down-regulated, which leads to down-regulation of YY1 and
de-repression of miR-29, a microRNA that promotes myogenic
differentiation. Conversely, NF-B is up-regulated in RMS, leading to
activation of YY1, down-regulation of miR-29, and suppression of myogenic
differentiation. The mechanisms of NF-B regulation in these contexts are
incompletely understood. FEM1A is a gene most highly expressed in cardiac
and skeletal muscle. We have shown that FEM1A is up-regulated early
during skeletal muscle differentiation, and is consistently
down-regulated in RMS, both in human RMS and in mouse RMS genetic models.
However, whether down-regulation of FEM1A plays a role in RMS
tumorigenesis, or is just a marker of defective myogenic differentiation,
is unknown. In macrophages, FEM1A has been shown to inhibit canonical
NF-B, both by directly binding p50, and by binding and preventing the
degradation of p105, the precursor of p50 that also acts as a cytoplasmic
inhibitor of NF-B activation. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that
over-expression of FEM1A in RMS cells decreases NF-B activation, which in
turn results in decreased expression of YY1, leading to increased
expression of miR-29, promoting RMS myogenic differentiation.Methods:
Cultured RMS13 rhabdomyosarcoma cells were used. To determine if FEM1A
regulates NF-B/YY1/miR-29 circuitry, resulting in RMS13 differentiation,
we transfected RMS13 cells with HA-FEM1A using X-treme Gene HP
(Roche).Results: Using immunoblotting, we observed that FEM1A
overexpression decreases p50 and p65 translocation to the nucleus,
decreases YY1 protein levels, and increases myosin heavy chain
expression, a marker of skeletal muscle differentiation, in RMS13 cells.
Using qPCR, we observed that FEM1A overexpression increases miR-29 gene
expression in RMS13 cells.Conclusion: These data demonstrate that FEM1A
negatively modulates NF-B and YY1, and promotes miR-29 expression and
myogenic differentiation, in RMS cells. This indicates that FEM1A
down-regulation may play a role in RMS tumorigenesis, rather than just
being a marker of defective differentiation. Results from our study have
the potential to improve understanding of RMS tumor biology, and could
allow the FEM1A/NF-B/YY1/miR-29 circuitry to become a target for
molecular-based therapy of RMS.

