Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BKM120 is cytotoxic in neuroblastoma targeting the PI3K pathway


Background: Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor
found in children, accounting for approximately 15% of cancer-related
deaths. Many cellular processes have been discovered to play a role in
neuroblastoma's potency, including a family of lipid kinases within the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway that contribute to
cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation. Targeting this pathway
could unveil new treatment strategies that work to specifically treat
each child's unique disease. BKM120 is a novel cancer therapeutic that
targets the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and has recently been shown
to have great potential in the clinic by acting on Class IA PI3Ks. Though
Class IA PI3Ks hold multiple types, BKM120 has been shown to act
preferentially on PIK3CA mutant isoforms. In this study we show the
inhibitory effect of BKM120 on neuroblastoma cell lines that over-express
PI3KCA, suggesting a promising role in the clinic for children with this
expression profile. It has also been suggested that inhibitors of the
PI3K pathway exert their inhibitory effects on cancer cells by
destabilizing MYCN, a protein found over-expressed in approximately one
third of neuroblastoma patients that encourages malignant progression of
the disease.Methods: Neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines BE(2)-C and SMS-KCNR
cells and patient lines MGT-002-13, MGT-003-08, MGT-014-11, and
MGT-015-08 were used in these studies. Cell viability was measured using
Calcein AM fluorescent assay at BKM120 doses 0.2uM, 0.5uM, and 1.0uM.
Western blot analysis was used to measure PI3K pathway members including
pAKT, p-mTOR, mTOR, and apoptosis markers including Cleaved Caspase 3,
Caspase 3, PARP, and cPARP. ATP level per cell was measured using CyQuant
fluorescent DNA assay combined with the Cell Titer GLO luminescent cell
viability assay. IncuCyte imaging of sytox and kinetic caspase-3 reagent
was used to measure apoptosis in NB cells treated with BKM120.Results:
BKM120 is cytotoxic to NB cell lines with IC50's ranging from 0.9-5.5 uM.
BKM120 increases protein expression levels of Cleaved Caspase 3 and
cleaved PARP by inducing apoptosis and decreases MTOR, pAKT and MYCN at
increasing drug doses. BKM120 decreases ATP/cell related to glycolytic
metabolism activity in NB cell lines. Increased expression of MTOR and
PI3KCD correlate with increased resistance to BKM120.Conclusion: This
study indicates that BKM120 targets the MTOR/PI3K/AKT pathway and may
play a role in MYCN driven tumors. In addition, BKM120 inhibits NB cell
proliferation and induces caspase-mediated apoptosis in vitro in NB.
Given the current lack of effective treatments and the high incidence of
relapse and metastatic disease for patients, further assessment in
clinical trial setting is needed to assess BKM120's therapeutic activity
for children with NB.

