Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: pVAC-Seq: A genome-guided in silico approach to identify tumor
neoantigens for personalized immunotherapy


Despite the recent surge in high-throughput sequencing of cancer genomes,
the challenge of translating these data into clinically actionable
information remains. One promising approach involves the identification
of tumor-specific mutant antigens (TSMAs or neoantigens) via massively
parallel sequencing and analysis of matched cancer and normal samples
that can be used to create personalized vaccines. In the past, this
effort has primarily focused on targeting selection of shared tumor
antigens, found across many patients. Here, we advocate a more
personalized approach.These unique antigenic markers or TSMAs arise from
numerous genetic changes, acquired somatically that are present
exclusively in tumor (mutant) and not in normal (wild- type) cells.
Vaccines incorporate these short, antigen-derived peptides (called
epitopes) that aim to enhance the immune system's anti-tumor activity by
selectively increasing the frequency of anti-tumor specific CD8+ T-cell
antigens, and hence expand the ability of the immune system to recognize
and destroy cancerous cells.Selecting the best/most immunogenic epitopes
from a large number of mutations is an important challenge, in particular
in cases of high mutational load such as melanoma and lung cancer. To
address this need, we have developed an in silico based sequence analysis
method for identification and subsequent refinement of patient-specific
antigens for use in personalized vaccines. This flexible and streamlined
computational workflow for identification of personalized variant
antigens by cancer sequencing (pVAC-Seq) integrates tumor mutation and
expression data (DNA- and RNA-Seq) to shortlist candidate neoantigen
peptides for a personalized vaccine. Harnessing existing class I
prediction algorithms, high-affinity neoantigens over varying peptide
lengths are evaluated.To demonstrate the workings of pVAC-Seq, we applied
it to four metastatic melanoma patients, the clinical results for three
of whom were described previously. These patients were enrolled in a
phase 1 vaccine clinical trial employing autologous, functionally mature,
interleukin (IL)-12p70-producing dendritic cells (DC). Since melanoma
patients harbor hundreds of mutations, it can be challenging to filter
down and target the best set of potentially immunogenic neoantigens for
vaccine design. By implementing the methods developed in pVAC-Seq, we
were able to rapidly streamline the screening and identification of a
smaller number of potentially immunogenic neoepitopes within the
landscape of all neoepitopes.

