Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic and osteolytic function of histone demethylase NO66 in
castration resistant prostate cancer


Androgen ablation by pharmacological use or castration is a standard
therapy for treating prostate cancer (PCa), however, at the later stage
PCa becomes castration-resistant and is metastasized primarily to bones.
Epigenetic changes that cause dysregulated gene expression during
progression and metastasis of androgen-independent prostate cancer are
not clearly understood. We previously reported that the jumonji C
domain-containing NO66 is a histone demethylase specific for H3K4me3 and
H3K36me3, which negatively regulates osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation. By analyzing a multi-cancer tissue microarray, the
serendipitous observation was made that NO66 is overexpressed in a
variety of cancers. Our objective was to examine NO66's role in the
pathogenesis of prostate cancer and bone metastasis.Our findings indicate
that NO66 knockdown resulted in significant decreases in the
proliferation and invasiveness of prostate cancer cells (PC3 and DU145)
while overexpressing NO66 promoted their proliferation and invasion.
Furthermore, NO66 depletion resulted in a two- to three fold decrease in
colony formation and anchorage-independent growth of PCa cells suggesting
an oncogenic function of NO66. RNAseq analysis comparing between control
and NO66-depleted DU-145 cells revealed a repertoire of differentially
expressed genes. NO66 up-regulates genes with proliferative activity such
as chemokine CXCL5, growth factor IGFBP5, IL6, WNT and MAPK4 pathway,
which are known to drive PCa proliferation. Furthermore, ChIP sequencing
for NO66 and H3K9AC in NO66-overexpressing PC3 cells revealed that
interaction sites of NO66 overlap with peaks of H3K9AC in majority of the
genes. These data clearly indicate that NO66 activates a cohort of genes
which are involved in tumor progression and metastasis. Strikingly,
implanting NO66-overexpressing prostate cancer cells into the femur of
SCID male mice caused massive femoral bone loss after three weeks, which
suggests that NO66 causes osteolytic bone lesions similar to the
clinico-pathological features of advanced PCa. Finally, analysis of tumor
xenografts derived from patients by immunohistochemistry showed high
expression of NO66 in high grade advanced PCa compared to low grade and
hyperplasia suggesting that NO66 may be used as a biomarker to
distinguish aggressive prostate cancer from indolent stage. Our data
suggest that NO66 plays an important role in cell proliferation, cell
invasion and bone metastasis of prostate cancer.

