Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DUOX1 expression in lung cancer disrupts pro-oncogenic activation
mechanisms and localization of Src and EGFR


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains to be one of the leading
causes of cancer-related mortalities worldwide. The NADPH oxidase
homolog, Dual Oxidase 1 (DUOX1), is an H2O2 producing enzyme located in
the airway epithelium with key roles in mucosal host defense and wound
repair mechanisms. Recent studies indicate that DUOX1 is epigenetically
silenced in many forms of NSCLC via hypermethylation of its promoter. We
previously demonstrated that DUOX1 silencing in lung cancer cells is
associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a key feature
of tumor invasiveness and metastasis, and that RNAi-mediated DUOX1
suppression can promote EMT, but the mechanism(s) by which DUOX1
silencing promotes these outcomes are not understood. Previous findings
indicate that DUOX1-dependent epithelial host defense pathways are
mediated by redox-dependent activation of epithelial signaling via the
non-receptor tyrosine kinase, Src, and the receptor tyrosine kinase,
EGFR. We therefore hypothesized that loss of DUOX1 in lung cancer may be
associated with aberrant regulation of Src and/or EGFR, tyrosine kinases
that are frequently overexpressed and activated in lung cancer and
strongly contribute to tumor growth and survival. Furthermore, nuclear
Src/EGFR localization and phosphorylation of EGFR-Y1101 in lung cancers
was recently associated with metastatic cell behavior and poor clinical
outcome. Preliminary findings in alveolar lung cancer A549 cells, which
possesses some EMT-like features, indicate that DUOX1 overexpression
redistributes Src localization to the plasma membrane and decreases its
nuclear accumulation. Moreover, DUOX1 overexpression in A549 cells also
suppressed EGF-stimulated EGFR internalization and nuclear translocation,
in association with reduced EGFR phosphorylation on its Src target,
Y1101. Conversely, RNAi-mediated silencing of DUOX1 in the epithelial
cancer cell line H292 (which has retained DUOX1 expression) promoted
EGF-mediated EGFR nuclear translocation and Y1101 phosphorylation.
Further mechanistic studies will be performed to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms by which DUOX1 is able to alter these events. Collectively,
our findings indicate that DUOX1 silencing in lung cancer may contribute
to EMT and/or tumor invasiveness by altering Src/EGFR localization and
activation mechanisms.

