Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiotherapy and immunotherapy in cancer: A mathematical model


The rise of immunotherapy is a major breakthrough in oncology. Recently,
the combination of radiotherapy with the blockade of immune checkpoint
inhibitors such as the PD1-PDL1 axis or the CTLA4 pathway has shown a
synergistic potential: in addition to the direct cell kill induced by
irradiation, radiotherapy unleashes neoantigens that can further induce
an anti-tumoral immune response. However, this immune response can be
inhibited by the immunosuppressive nature of the tumor micro-environment
(TME). Hence, radiotherapy combined with immune check-point inhibitors is
a promising solution and is the subject of preclinical and clinical
research. However, defining the most efficient scheduling between
radiotherapy and immunotherapy is a crucial issue that cannot be properly
addressed solely by empirical trial-and-error practices. Consequently,
developing mathematical models that can describe the synergy between
immune checkpoint inhibitors and radiotherapy is critical. Hence, we have
built a pharmocodynamic model of the combination of radiotherapy with
inhibitors of the PD1-PDL1 axis and/or the CTLA4 pathway. We describe a
mathematical representation of how a growing tumor first elicits and then
inhibits an anti-tumoral immune response. This anti-tumoral immune
response is described by a primary and a secondary response. The primary
immune response appears first and is down-regulated by the PD1-PDL1 axis,
while the secondary immune response happens next and is down-regulated by
the CTLA4 pathway. We describe the effects of irradiation by a slightly
modified version of the Linear-Quadratic model. In particular, we explain
the biphasic relationship between the size of a tumor and its
immunogenicity, as measured by the abscopal immune response. The ability
of the model to forecast pharmacodynamic endpoints was retrospectively
validated by reproducing results from experimental studies investigating
radiotherapy and immune checkpoint inhibitors. This model clarifies the
issue of synchronisation of immunotherapy with radiotherapy and it also
explains why the CTLA4 blockade often occurs with a delay. The model also
explains why a sustained response to immunotherapy may or may not happen
after treatment discontinuation. We believe that this mathematical model
could be further used as a simulation tool to help decision-makers
determine the optimal scheduling between radiotherapy and immunotherapy
and could be a building block for the in-silico design of optimized
multimodal strategies.

