Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of EGFR mutations in circulating cell-free DNA of
non-small cell lung cancer patients by next-generation sequencing


[Background] Mutational analysis is essential for recent personalized
therapeutic approaches of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from plasma is an emerging topic as a
tool for liquid biopsy and possibly enable repetitive genetic diagnosis
or monitoring of cancer status. However, detection of cfDNA from the
circulation still remains challenging because of its highly fragmented
and low concentration nature. In this study, we analyzed cfDNA samples by
targeted deep sequencing at high coverage.[Materials and Methods] Twenty
matched DNA samples were collected from metastatic NSCLC patients with
EGFR mutation, which was detected by a clinical EGFR mutant enriched PCR
assay using PNA-LNA PCR clamp method. These samples were extracted from
tissue samples of fresh tumor tissue except one formalin fixed paraffin
embedded (FFPE) sample (tDNA), and plasma samples (cfDNA). Mutation
hotspots were enriched by multiplex PCR using the GeneRead DNAseq
Targeted Panels V2 Human Tumor Actionable Mutations panel (QIAGEN,
Hilden, Germany), followed by library construction, and sequenced on the
MiSeq sequencer. Resulting data was analyzed using CLC Genomics Workbench
and Genomics Server and mapped to the full human genome.[Results and
discussion] The mean read depth in target region was 59,000 reads.
Matched EGFR driver mutations between cfDNA and tDNA were detected with
an overall concordance of 25% (5 of 20 samples). The concordance rate of
exon21 L858R point mutation, exon19 deletions and exon20 T790M point
mutation were 32.5% (3 of 8 samples), 16.7% (2 of 12 samples), and 66.7%
(2 of 3 samples), respectively. The mutant allele frequencies in cfDNA
ranged from 0.1% to 44.5% (median, 0.3%). While further improvement is
mandatory, these results suggest that targeted deep sequencing of cfDNA
at high coverage may have a potential utility as a non-invasive
mutational analysis. In addition, there seemed to be a tendency of better
detection rate for point mutations (45.5%) than deletions (16.7%), while
the difference didn't reach statistical significance (p = 0.19), which
were corresponding to previous reports.

