Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor (RHAMM) in ovarian cancer


This study focuses on Hyaluronan Mediated Motility Receptor (RHAMM)
protein expression in ovarian carcinoma (OC). RHAMM protein increases
migration, invasion and is associated with poor prognosis when
overexpressed. It is a dualistic oncogenic protein located within and on
the cell surface acting as a receptor for Hyaluronan (HA). RHAMM is not
generally overexpressed in normal tissues, but is upregulated in a number
of cancers and is associated with poor clinical outcome. However, the
role of RHAMM in OC progression is unknown.Hypothesis: Elevated RHAMM
levels promote OC progression and represent a novel urinary biomarker for
OC.Procedures: Measuring RHAMM expression in OC cell protein lysate and
conditioned media (CM) was done by western blot (WB) and densitometry.
With institution approval, patient cohort urine from male and female
healthy controls and patients with cancer of the ovary, lung, breast,
prostate, cervix, colorectum, skin, endometrium, head and neck, and brain
were acquired from the H. Lee Moffit Cancer Center at the University of
South Florida. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) designed for
RHAMM detection, was used to measure patient urine expression
levels.Results: Cultured OC cells overexpress and secrete RHAMM. Using
OC, SV-40 large T-antigen transfected human ovarian surface epithelial
(IOSE) cells (HIO118, IOSE-121) and human dermal fibroblasts (HDF), we
found >2x the expression of RHAMM protein in BC (MCF7) and OC (OVCAR5,
OV2008, C13) cells by WB. WB of CM indicated >3x RHAMM levels secreted by
OC compared to IOSE cells.Urinary levels of RHAMM are elevated in OC
patients. Since RHAMM is not an integral membrane protein, but rather
loosely tethered to the plasma membrane, we determined whether RHAMM
could be detected in bodily fluids of OC patients. ELISA showed detection
of urinary RHAMM protein levels averaged 0.140 ng/ml (n = 26) in healthy
patient controls whereas OC patients averaged 0.411 ng/ml (n =
132).Conclusions: Prior to this study, overexpression and secretion of
RHAMM by OC cells had not been reported. This has expanded our knowledge
of OC etiology by delineating a functional role for RHAMM-driven OC
progression. Validating elevated urinary levels of RHAMM suggests it is a
potential diagnostic marker alone or in combination with other markers
for OC detection. Further, the ability to monitor OC through the course
of disease using urinary RHAMM levels could indicate recurrent disease or
therapeutic efficacy. Understanding RHAMM expression in OC may lead to a
possible diagnostic/prognostic indicator or therapeutic target for OC.

