Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucagon like peptide 1 (GLP1) up-regulation in hypoxic and
nutrient deprived microenvironment promotes neuroblastoma cell survival


Introduction: Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) an incretin has demonstrated
to increase insulin secretion in a glucose-dependent manner and is shown
to be neuroprotective. GLP1 also promotes angiogenesis. Hypoxia, a common
feature in solid tumors including neuroblastoma, promotes tumor
progression by upregulation of hypoxia responsive factors. Little is
known about alterations of GLP1 expression in neuroblastoma under hypoxic
condition. GLP1 is rapidly inactivated by dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV)
mediated enzymatic cleavage. Previously we have shown that DPPIV
suppresses neuroblastoma survival and angiogenesis. In this study, we
examined whether GLP1, its receptor GLP1R, and DPPIV expressions are
altered after exposing neuroblastoma cells to hypoxic conditions of
oxygen and nutrient deprivation (OND). We then examined the direct
effects of GLP1 on neuroblastoma proliferation and survival, and
evaluated if DPPIV modulates GLP1 mediated functions.Methods: We used
Neuro-2a, a mouse neuroblastoma cells as a model. In vitro experiments
were performed exposing these cells to conditions mimicking tumor areas
that display oxygen and nutrient deprivation, followed by re-oxygenation.
Immunofluorescence staining was used to analyze the protein expression of
GLP1, GLP-1R, and DPPIV. RT-PCR was used to measure mRNA levels. Effects
of DPPIV on GLP1 mediated Neuro-2a cell proliferation and survival was
evaluated by MTT and live/dead cell assay. Levels of PI3K/AKT were
determined by western blot analysis.Results: Neuro-2a cells subjected to
OND showed about 2 fold increase in the GLP1 protein and mRNA levels at
four hours ofre-oxygenation after 4 hours of OND. However, GLP1 protein
levels decreased drastically after one day of re-oxygenation, while DPPIV
levels were highly upregulated. GLP1R was also downregulated at one day
of re-oxygenation. At this time point, cell viability was decreased by
30-40%. Pre-treatment with DPPIV inhibitor rescued the protective effects
of GLP1. Furthermore, exogenous GLP1 stimulated cell proliferation and
increased Neuro-2a cell viability by 2-3 fold. GLP1dependent action was
mediated via increased levels of phosphorylated AKT, a pro-survival
signaling molecule. The effects of GLP1 were suppressed in presence of
DPPIV.Conclusion: The results indicate an inverse correlation between
DPPIV and GLP1 levels in Neuro-2a cells. Together, these studies indicate
that GLP1-DPPIV interaction may play an important role in promoting
neuroblastoma cell proliferation and survival.

