Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-complexity neutral genomic barcoding technology reveals
extensive clonal dynamics in multiple human cancer model systems


Increasing evidence of extensive intratumoral heterogeneity, along with
advances in high-throughput in vivo functional genetic screening
technologies, have together highlighted the need to observe growth in
cancer models at the clonal level. To address this, we have designed,
constructed and validated multiple high-diversity lentivirally delivered
barcode libraries, which utilize next-gen sequencing technology to read
out millions of clones in heterogeneous cancer populations. These
libraries can be used to address a multitude of biological questions in
many cancer model systems. To date, we have completed, sequenced and
analyzed three different types of barcoding applications to explore
clonal dynamics in a variety of human cancer models. First, we tested the
serial limiting dilution analysis (LDA) assay for tumor initiating cells
(TICs) in patient-derived colon tumor models. In the LDA assay, a range
of cell dilutions, down to a single cell, are transplanted into
immunocompromised mice. The TIC frequency is calculated using a
single-hit model from the proportion of tumors established at each dose.
However, quantifying minimum cell numbers required for tumor formation
does not reveal the actual diversity of clonal contribution during tumour
engraftment and progression. In fact, recent research suggests that the
single-hit model, which assumes a static hierarchy of intrinsically
determined initiating cells, may not be biologically relevant as some
clones may have the potential to form or contribute to a tumor only in
specific environment, or in cooperation with another clone. Our barcoded,
serial LDAs show interesting and informative patterns of clonal dynamics.
Second, we have performed clonal lineage tracing on established human
cancer cell lines in vitro compared to in vivo. Our findings demonstrate
the presence of TICs in standard cell lines and serve as precursors to
future in vivo genetic screens by defining upper limits of library size.
Finally, we used a patient-derived xenograft model of brain tumor
metastasis to investigate the presence of pre-existing metastatic clones
with site-specific homing abilities. In summary, given the extensive
heterogeneity present in cancer models, we propose the use of
high-complexity barcoding technology to validate novel cancer targets in
xenograft models, including LDAs and metastasis models. Furthermore, we
suggest the use of barcodes for careful optimization of the system before
genetic screens in animal models.

