Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical results of a Phase I/II trial of adjuvant therapeutic
vaccination in high risk resected prostate cancer patients using
autologous dendritic cells loaded with mRNA from primary prostate cancer
tissue, hTERT and survivin


Prostate cancer patients diagnosed with high Gleason score ( 8) and large
tumors (T2c) are considered high-risk patients and >50% will develop an
early biochemical relapse. Presently, there is no curative therapy
available for patients with biochemical relapse. Based on these findings
we initiated in January 2011 a Phase I/II dendritic cell (DC) vaccine
study. Patients included have pathological stage pT2 - pT3b, Gleason
score 7b-10, pN0, pN+ or pNx and postoperative PSA Prostate cancer
patients diagnosed with high Gleason score ( 8) and large tumors (T2c)
are considered high-risk patients and >50% will develop an early
biochemical relapse. Presently, there is no curative therapy available
for patients with biochemical relapse. Based on these findings we
initiated in January 2011 a Phase I/II dendritic cell (DC) vaccine study.
Patients included have pathological stage pT2 - pT3b, Gleason score
7b-10, pN0, pN+ or pNx and postoperative PSA < 0.2 g/L. Following surgery
autologous tumor cell lines were established from each patient using an
in-house culturing method. mRNA from the tumor cell line was produced and
used for DC vaccination in combination with mRNA hTERT and mRNA Survivin.
DCs were differentiated from enriched monocytes, cultured for 2 days with
IL4 and GM-CSF and matured with Jonuleit-maturation cocktail for 24
hours. The matured DCs were transfected separately with the 3 different
mRNAs and then frozen and stored until use. The vaccination regimen
includes one vaccine per week for four weeks, followed by monthly vaccine
boost during the first year, then every 3 months the second and third
year. Recently, a novel 3 days DC protocol using a TLR7/8-agonist
maturation cocktail has been implemented at our department. Based on
encouraging clinical results with this type of DCs in compassionate use
patients with different types of tumors, we decided to change our DCs
protocol to the new generation DCs. Of the 20 patients included in this
trial 15 patients have been given the standard fast DCs and 5 have been
vaccinated with the new type of DCs. 8 Patients given standard DC has
completed 3 years of vaccination and 4 has completed 2 years of
vaccination. 3 of 15 patient given standard DC has experienced PSA
relapse during vaccination. None of the patients given the new type of DC
has so far experienced raise in PSA levels. To our knowledge this is the
first adjuvant DC vaccine study in high risk prostate cancer and we
conclude that the study is feasible, safe and utmost promising. Extensive
immune monitoring is ongoing taking advantage of the established
autologous tumor cell lines from all patients.

