Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear -arrestin1 is a critical cofactor of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 signaling in endothelin-1-induced ovarian tumor progression


In epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), endothelin-1 (ET-1)/endothelin A
receptor (ETAR) axis has been reported to be involved in invasiveness,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, chemoresistance and metastatic
dissemination and is thereby associated with poor prognosis. In these
cells, ET-1 is able to induce the nuclear translocation and stability of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) the principal transcriptional factor
that allows cellular adaptation to hypoxia. The importance of co-factors
that trigger an epigenetic regulation of HIF-1 within tumor is not well
understood. Here we elucidate that ET-1/ETAR-induced pathway physically
and functionally couples the scaffold protein -arrestin1 (-arr1) to HIF-1
signaling. In EOC cells, ET-1 induced vascular-endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), the pro-agiogenic target downstream of HIF-1 through HIF-1
nuclear accumulation. Activation of ET-1/ETAR axis, by mimicking hypoxia,
promotes the nuclear association between -arr1 and HIF-1 on the hypoxia
responsive elements (HRE) binding sites. By ChIP assay, nuclear -arr1 was
able to interact with HIF-1, by promoting the recruitment of p300
acetyltransferase. The formation of this functional complex resulted in
enhanced histone acetylation, and gene transcription of HIF-1 downstream
targets, such as ET-1 and VEGF, required for cell invasion. The induced
release of ET-1 and VEGF by EOC cells, promoted angiogenic effects in
endothelial cells, as evaluated by cell migration and tube-like structure
formation assays. Interestingly ETAR/-arr1 promoted the self-amplifying
HIF-1-mediated transcription of ET-1 that sustained a regulatory circuit
required for invasiveness and angiogenic responses. These effects were
abrogated by the silencing of -arr1 or HIF-1 or by pharmacological
treatment with the dual ET-1 receptor antagonist macitentan. In a murine
orthotropic model of metastatic human EOC, treatment with macitentan, or
silencing of -arr1, inhibits intravasation and metastasis formation,
suggesting that ET-1, together with VEGF, represents one of such factors
that mediates tumor-endothelial cell communications, favoring a
permissive environment for metastatic spread. Collectively these findings
reveal the interplay of -arr1 with HIF-1 in the complexity of ET-1/ETAR
pathway, mediating epigenetic modifications, to an extent comparable with
hypoxia, directly involved in metastatic progression. Targeting ET-1 axis
by macitentan may represent a new opportunity to target the orchestration
mediated by nuclear -arr1/HIF-1 complex in EOC, demonstrating that this
approved small molecule interfering with stromal compartment, expressing
ETBR, and tumor cells, expressing mainly ETAR, can be used in clinical
setting for improved therapeutics in EOC.

