Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing NIR dye-IL13RA2 antibody conjugates for
biodistribution studies in xenograft tumor models by fluorescence
molecular tomography (FMT)


Background: The antibody based therapies are promising anti-cancer
therapeutic modalities with minimal toxicity and maximum efficacy. The
efficacy of these agents is regulated by their biodistribution and
targeting. The contemporary methods of testing the biodistriution of
large molecule drugs are expensive and tedious. The development of simple
and rapid methodology, such as optical imaging, can enable effective
screening of a larger number of compounds. Here we have used Fluorescence
Molecular Tomography (FMT), an optical imaging technique to study
biodistribution and tumor targeting of IL3RA2 antibody (Ab). Methods:
Different near infrared (NIR) fluorophores (max:650-800nm) were
conjugated to the Ab. The fluorophore conjugation protocol was optimized
to achieve a degree of labeling (DOL) of 1-3 for all the conjugates. The
properties of Ab-fluorophore conjugate (Ab-F) were compared to unlabeled
Ab using SEC-HPLC and cell binding assays in three cell lines with
varying expression of IL13RA2: A375(+++), U87MG(+) and H460(-). For in
vivo evaluation, Ab-F conjugates were administered intravenously at a
dose of 2 nmol fluorophore to nu/nu mice bearing A375. Similar studies
were also conducted in U87MG and H460 xenografts with selected Ab-F. The
mice were imaged longitudinally (6 time-points) for up to 96 hrs using
FMT4000 and the data were analyzed using TrueQuant software. Results: The
SEC-HPLC and flow cytometry studies demonstrated that conjugation of Ab
with most of the fluorophores did not change its stability or
functionality. The in vivo fluorescence data from all the NIR dyes showed
a peak tumor accumulation of the Ab-F at 6h and was maintained until 96
hrs. Quantitation of various Ab-F conjugated revealed that 2-6% of the
injected dose was accumulated in the A375 tumors. In contrast to tumor
profile, there was a steep decline in heart signal (a surrogate for
blood/ plasma concentration), suggesting fast clearance from blood. The
in vivo and ex vivo data suggested that there was 15-80pmol of Ab-F
conjugate accumulated in the tumors at 96h. In addition, Alexa Flour
(AF)680 and AF750 showed minimal non-specific accumulation in other
organs, whereas VivoTag (VT)680 and BODIPY630 showed a significantly
higher non-specific accumulation in liver. Conclusions: These results
show that the biological properties of Ab were not changed by conjugation
with various NIR fluorophores at DOL Background: The antibody based
therapies are promising anti-cancer therapeutic modalities with minimal
toxicity and maximum efficacy. The efficacy of these agents is regulated
by their biodistribution and targeting. The contemporary methods of
testing the biodistriution of large molecule drugs are expensive and
tedious. The development of simple and rapid methodology, such as optical
imaging, can enable effective screening of a larger number of compounds.
Here we have used Fluorescence Molecular Tomography (FMT), an optical
imaging technique to study biodistribution and tumor targeting of IL3RA2
antibody (Ab). Methods: Different near infrared (NIR) fluorophores
(max:650-800nm) were conjugated to the Ab. The fluorophore conjugation
protocol was optimized to achieve a degree of labeling (DOL) of 1-3 for
all the conjugates. The properties of Ab-fluorophore conjugate (Ab-F)
were compared to unlabeled Ab using SEC-HPLC and cell binding assays in
three cell lines with varying expression of IL13RA2: A375(+++), U87MG(+)
and H460(-). For in vivo evaluation, Ab-F conjugates were administered
intravenously at a dose of 2 nmol fluorophore to nu/nu mice bearing A375.
Similar studies were also conducted in U87MG and H460 xenografts with
selected Ab-F. The mice were imaged longitudinally (6 time-points) for up
to 96 hrs using FMT4000 and the data were analyzed using TrueQuant
software. Results: The SEC-HPLC and flow cytometry studies demonstrated
that conjugation of Ab with most of the fluorophores did not change its
stability or functionality. The in vivo fluorescence data from all the
NIR dyes showed a peak tumor accumulation of the Ab-F at 6h and was
maintained until 96 hrs. Quantitation of various Ab-F conjugated revealed
that 2-6% of the injected dose was accumulated in the A375 tumors. In
contrast to tumor profile, there was a steep decline in heart signal (a
surrogate for blood/ plasma concentration), suggesting fast clearance
from blood. The in vivo and ex vivo data suggested that there was
15-80pmol of Ab-F conjugate accumulated in the tumors at 96h. In
addition, Alexa Flour (AF)680 and AF750 showed minimal non-specific
accumulation in other organs, whereas VivoTag (VT)680 and BODIPY630
showed a significantly higher non-specific accumulation in liver.
Conclusions: These results show that the biological properties of Ab were
not changed by conjugation with various NIR fluorophores at DOL <3.
Optical imaging using fluorescent tags can effectively track and
quantitate the tumor targeting/ biodistribution of large molecule drugs.

