Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term high quality survival with single agent mifepristone
treatment despite advanced lung cancer and advanced renal cell carcinoma
- 2 case reports


The objective is to report long-term high quality survival in 2 patients
with advanced cancer treated by single agent mifepristone.Case 1: An 80
year old woman was admitted to the ICU for respiratory failure. Chest
x-ray revealed many lung lesions most consistent with lung cancer with
multiple lung metastases. She was subsequently admitted several more
times with very low arterial pO2 levels and her serum sodium
progressively decreased to 118 mmol/L. The radiologic and clinical
diagnosis was probable advanced lung cancer with the syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) from ectopic tumor production
of arginine vasopressin. She refused surgery or chemotherapy. She agreed
to experimental use of 200mg daily oral mifepristone. Her pO2 returned to
99-100 mmHg with 1 month and her sodium returned to normal. Six weeks
later all her lung lesions were gone by CT scan. Three and a half years
after initial treatment, her PO2 remains 96-98 mmHg, she is feeling fine,
and her CT-scan continues to show no tumors. Her treatment had been
approved by the FDA on a compassionate basis.Case 2 - A 60 year old male
with was found to have bilateral renal cell carcinoma with metastases to
local lymph nodes. He refused bilateral nephrectomy but agreed to only
laparoscopic right hemi nephrectomy to remove the largest lesion, leaving
the left kidney intact. He received FDA approval to use 200mg daily
mifepristone because at that time there was no chemotherapy that was
known to be effective. The left kidney lesions did not recede but stayed
stable for 10 years. Furthermore, no new lesions appeared on bi-annual CT
scan. After 10 years of therapy, he developed renal failure secondary to
diabetes. At this time he underwent bilateral nephrectomy, followed by
kidney transplant. 11 years from diagnosis he is doing well. Neither
patient has reported any side effects to 200mg mifepristone daily despite
a combined 14 years of treatment. The mechanism of action responsible for
these phenomena has not been proven thus far. The proposed mechanism is
that progesterone inhibits an intracytoplasmic immunomodulatory protein
known as the progesterone induced blocking factor (PIBF). By inhibiting
PIBF, the cellular immune cells (specifically natural killer (NK) cells)
are able to attack the rapidly growing tumor cells. The FDA has approved
an investigator initiated study for the use of single agent mifepristone
for stage IV human non-small cell lung cancer which has progressed
despite either 2 rounds of chemotherapy or 1 round of chemotherapy plus
one round of biologic therapy. Mifepristone, a progesterone receptor
modulator, has been demonstrated to inhibit the production of a 34-36 kDa
intracytoplasmic splice variant of the 90 kDa centrosomally associated
parent compound. However, this potent abortifacient failed to suppress
serum PIBF levels.

