Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the effects of inflammatory stress on human intestinal
epithelial cells in 3D enteroid co-culture system


The molecular pathogenesis of colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CAC)
has been suggested to involve oxidative stress-induced DNA damage,
resulting in mutations of tumor-suppressor genes and activation of
pro-oncogenic pathways. However, the exact relationship between
inflammation and colorectal cancer is not well understood due to the lack
of a human model system that not only recapitulates in vivo
growth/differentiation patterns, but also can be easily manipulated. In
order to gain insight into the mechanism of colitis-associated colorectal
cancer, we explored human intestinal enteroids as an ex vivo model to
study the interaction of intestinal epithelial cells with immune cells
under inflammatory conditions. Human intestinal crypts were isolated from
adult intestinal tissue and grown in Matrigel culture to form enteroids.
To model inflammation, we incorporated MHC-mismatched human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) into the Matrigel. TH1 immune response
was induced by a cocktail of cytokines including IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15. A
TH1 response was confirmed by the production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines INF and TNF over the course of 6-day treatment with the
cytokine cocktail. Several cytokines related to TH1 and TH2 responses
were induced. Interestingly, co-culture with human intestinal enteroids
significantly enhanced the level of pro-inflammatory cytokines INF, IL-6
and TNF, anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, as well as TH2 cytokine IL-13.
Immunophenotyping of PBMCs shows that both CD4+ T cells (10-30%) and CD8+
T cells (1-10%) were activated upon TH1 induction. In addition, the
percentage of activated CD8+ T cells was much higher in co-culture than
in PBMC alone controls. Moreover, the cytokine cocktail dramatically
induced the production of INF by purified CD4+ or CD8+ T cells but only
when in co-culture with enteroids and not when cultured alone. In the
enteroids, the TH1 response significantly inhibited cell proliferation
and increased the apoptosis of epithelial cells when in co-culture only.
Increased H2AX (DNA damage marker) and impaired integrity of intestinal
enteroids were also observed when in co-culture with the TH1 response.
Cell-cell contact between enteroids and immune cells is required for
these effects. Moreover, the TH1 response increases the mRNA levels of
GRP78 (master regulator of ER stress) and Nrf2 (regulator of oxidative
stress); decreases the mRNA level of Lgr5 [marker of active intestinal
stem cells (ISCs)], but has no obvious effect on Bmi1 (marker of
quiescent ISCs) in co-culture. Taken together, our data provide insight
into the interaction of intestinal epithelial cells with immune cells at
the molecular and cellular levels and establish this approach as a viable
model for exploring the mechanism of CAC. Future studies will examine
specifically for oxidative DNA damage and the effects of specific tumor
suppressor inactivation on epithelial cell responses.

