Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-specific druggable networks in lethal prostate cancer
through proteome-guided multi-omic integration


Metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) remains incurable
due to the lack of effective therapies. The need to identify new
actionable targets in this disease is crucial as we begin to examine the
resistance mechanisms related to androgen withdrawal. Pathway activation
of signaling proteins, such as kinases, are hypothesized to drive the
progression of lethal CRPC. We set out to define the global picture of
signaling pathways in lethal prostate cancer through dataset integration.
We used clinical tissue from lethal metastatic CRPC patients obtained at
rapid autopsy to evaluate and integrate previously published genomic and
transcriptomic datasets combined with a new complete and extensive
dataset of the phosphoproteome in metastatic CRPC for pathway analysis.
This included extending our analysis of the phosphoproteome to
phosphoserine and phosphothreonine peptides with our published
phosphotyrosine peptide data. Using Tied Diffusion through Interacting
Events (TieDIE), we integrated differentially expressed master
transcriptional regulators, functionally mutated genes, and
differentially activated kinases in CRPC tissues relative to treatment
nave prostate cancer to synthesize a robust signaling network consisting
of druggable kinase pathways for therapy. Using MSigDB hallmark gene
sets, six major signaling pathways with phosphorylation of several key
residues were significantly enriched in CRPC tumors after incorporation
of phosphoproteomic data. Further, we were able to gather mRNA and
phosphoproteome data from six individual patients where the integration
of tissue samples from a single autopsy program allowed us to make
inferences on the connections between the mRNA and phosphoproteome
datasets. Individual patient profiles developed using these hallmarks
revealed clinically relevant pathway information suitable for patient
stratification and targeted therapies in lethal prostate cancer. Here we
describe these pathways: personalized cancer hallmarks using an
integrative phospho-signature (pCHIPs) that sheds light on the diversity
of activated signaling pathways in metastatic CRPC while providing an
integrative, pathway-based reference for drug prioritization in
individual patients.

