Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pterostilbene, a natural phytoalexin, weakens the antioxidant
defenses of aggressive cancer cells in vivo: a pituitary gland- and
Nrf2-dependent mechanism


Polyphenolic phytochemicals have anticancer properties. However, in
mechanistic studies lack of correlation to the bioavailable
concentrations is a critical issue. We studied the underlying mechanisms
using different human melanomas (A2058, MeWo and MelJuso) and pancreatic
cancers (AsPC-1 and BxPC-3) (with genetic backgrounds correlating with
most tumors in patients), growing in nude mice as xenografts, and
pterostilbene (Pter, 3,5-dimethoxy-4-stilbenol; abundant in e.g.
blueberries and a natural dimethoxylated analog of resveratrol). RESULTS:
Intravenous administration of Pter decreased human melanoma and
pancreatic cancer growth (an effect associated with lower rates of tumor
cell proliferation and increased apoptosis) in vivo. However Pter, at
levels measured within the tumors, did not affect cancer growth or
viability in vitro. Pter inhibited pituitary production of the
adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH), decreased plasma levels of
corticosterone and, thereby, down regulated the glucocorticoid receptor-
and nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2)-dependent
antioxidant defense system in growing cancers (i.e. the glutathione and
thioredoxin systems, superoxide dismutases, catalase, and NADPH supplying
dehydrogenases). Exogenous corticosterone or genetically-induced Nrf2
overexpression in the cancer cells prevented the inhibition of tumor
growth and antioxidant defenses in these malignant cells. Glutathione
depletion (selected as a potential anti-cancer strategy) facilitated the
complete elimination by chemotherapy of cancer cells isolated from mice
treated with Pter. CONCLUSIONS: This report shows a novel link between a
neuroendocrine system- and stress response-dependent mechanism and the
regulation of cancer growth in vivo. Natural polyphenols can interfere
with the growth and defense of cancer cells by down-regulating the
pituitary gland-dependent ACTH synthesis. Lower levels of plasma ACTH
cause a decrease in the suprarenal glands-dependent glucocorticoid
production, thus decreasing the glucocorticoid receptor and
Nrf2-dependent signaling/transcription and the antioxidant protection of
melanoma and pancreatic cancer cells. Hence facilitating identification
of molecular targets to sensitize aggressive cancers to oncotherapy.

