Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing and augmenting the immune response to glioblastoma using
repurposed pharmaceuticals


In order to improve the therapeutic responses to immunotherapies in
glioblastoma (GBM) patients, a known pharmaceutical, ritanserin, was
repurposed to augment cytotoxic T cell responses and suppress tumor
growth. To determine the kinetics of the immune response to GBM, the
transplantable syngeneic glioma cell line GL261 was used in C57BL/6 mice
to assess the tumor immune response in the brain, spleen, and cervical
lymph node via flow cytometry weekly for one month. After identifying the
optimal T cell response temporally, mice with established tumors were
treated with 100mg/kg of Ritanserin for one week and harvested post
treatment. Ritanserin is able to inhibit the activity of diacylglycerol
kinase alpha (DGKA), an enzyme that converts diacylglycerol to
phosphatidic acid, and can inhibit tumor growth in mice. In addition,
DGKA is expressed in T cells, and is more highly expressed in those that
have entered an unresponsive (anergic) state, characteristic of
dysfunctional T cell responses to tumors. To determine if ritanserin can
counteract T cell anergy, T cell responses were determined by assessment
of T cell number by subset (CD8+, CD4+, CD4+FoxP3+), by activation
(CD62L-CD44+), and by tumor-specific response to ovalbumin-expressing
GL261 tumor cells in the brain, spleen, and cervical lymph nodes. In
comparison to mock-injected mice, tumor-bearing mice showed a robust T
cell response to tumors in the brain, peaking at days 21 and 28 post
injection. Treatment with ritanserin resulted in a trend toward increased
number and activation of T cells in the brain compared to vehicle-treated
mice. In addition, there was a significant increase in OVA-specific T
cells in the brain with treatment. In conclusion, T cells respond
robustly to brain tumors in mice, and ritanserin treatment appears to
increase this response by increased activation and priming of
tumor-specific T cells. This indicates that ritanserin may have
combinatorial effects on T cells when combined with checkpoint inhibitors
such as ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4) and nivolumab (anti-PD-1). Future
experiments will focus on combining ritanserin and other repurposed drugs
with these checkpoint inhibitors and further characterizing the effect of
ritanserin on T cells.

