Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRD4 amplification facilitates an oncogenic gene expression
program in high-grade serous ovarian cancer


The bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) protein, BRD4 functions as a
transcriptional co-activator through recruitment of regulatory complexes
to acetylated chromatin. Among all malignancies, the most focal, and
recurrent BRD4 gene amplification occurs in high-grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGSOC). Despite the elucidation of BRD4 dependencies in cancer,
it is unclear whether BRD4 gene amplification can result in oncogenic
activity, and hence serve as a patient selection strategy for BET
bromodomain inhibitors. To assess the oncogenic potential of BRD4
amplification in HGSOC, we assayed enforced BRD4 expression in
non-transformed immortalized surface ovarian cells (IOSE).
Physiologically relevant expression of either long or short BRD4 spliced
isoforms in IOSE (BRD4-IOSE) resulted in marked phenotypic changes
indicative of cellular transformation, including altered growth kinetics,
chromatin reorganization, and acquisition of colony formation potential.
Transcriptional profiling of BRD4-IOSE and BRD4-amplified HGSOC patients
revealed shared expression patterns, including enriched MYC, E2F1, and
VEGF gene signatures. Interrogation of BRD4 inhibitor pharmacodynamic
markers, and transcripts upregulated through enforced BRD4 expression
uncovered Neuregulin-1 as a critical BRD4 transcriptional effector.
RNAi-mediated Neuregulin-1 depletion was capable of abolishing the
oncogenic activity of BRD4-IOSE, and exogenous Neuregulin-1 was
sufficient to transform IOSE without BRD4. A novel BRD4-SWI/SNF
interaction was required for driving the oncogenic activity of BRD4-IOSE
through maintaining NRG1 expression. The sensitivity of patient-derived
HGSOC xenografts to a novel clinical candidate BRD4 inhibitor, AZD5153,
correlated with BRD4 amplification and a pharmacodynamic NRG1 response.
This study demonstrates the oncogenic potential of BRD4 amplification,
defines a relationship between BRD4 and NRG1, and further establishes
HGSOC as an appropriate patient population in which to test the
therapeutic potential of BET bromodomain inhibitors.

