Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin use among African American men reduces prostate cancer
risk: Findings from the NCI-Maryland Prostate Cancer Case-Control study


Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer death in US men. Yet, the
etiology of prostate cancer remains poorly understood, with only older
age, African ancestry, family history of the disease, and multiple
germline genetic variations being established disease risk factors.
Prostate cancer occurs more often in African-American men and Caribbean
men of African descent than in men of other race/ethnicities. The causes
of these racial and ethnic differences are multifactorial, but it has
been proposed that differences in tumor biology contribute to the health
disparity associated with prostate cancer.Previously, our laboratory
discovered immunobiology differences between African-American and
European-American men where genes involved in the inflammatory response
tended to be up-regulated in tumors of African American patients.
Accumulating evidence suggests that inflammation may be involved in
prostate carcinogenesis. Given these observations, we hypothesized that
inflammation may contribute to prostate cancer risk and the survival
health disparity observed between African-Americans and
European-Americans. To this end, we conducted a case-control study in the
greater Baltimore area where we recruited 1000 cases and 1000 controls
composed of equal populations of African-American and European-American
men. In our survey, we asked about non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) use categorized into aspirin, Tylenol, and other pain relievers
that neither contain Tylenol nor aspirin. We found a significant
association between aspirin use and prostate cancer riskwhere aspirin use
decreased the risk of prostate cancer. Strikingly, the decreased prostate
cancer risk as a result of aspirin use was most profound in
African-American men. We were also able to measure the levels of
C-reactive protein, a marker for inflammation, to further evaluate the
relationship between aspirin use, inflammation, and prostate cancer risk.
Indeed, we did observe a decrease in C-reactive protein in patients who
took aspirin. Interestingly, overall levels in healthy controls and
prostate cases were higher in African-American subjects and patients when
compared to European-Americans. Although aspirin use decreased C-reactive
protein levels in African-American and European-American cases,
African-Americans had significantly higher levels of C-reactive protein.
The robust association between aspirin consumption and prostate cancer
risk suggests that inflammation might be a driver in prostate cancer of
African-American men. Additionally, the increased levels of C-reactive
protein in African-American controls and cases might contribute to the
excessive disease risk and mortality among these men.

