Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new rabbit monoclonal antibody to FOXM1 for immuohistochemical
assessment


Purpose and Background: Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) is a major
oncogenic transcription factor regulating genes involved in G1-S and G2-M
cell cycle transitions. FOXM1 has been implicated in tumorigenesis,
facilitating tumor proliferation, angiogenesis and migration. Genome wide
microarray studies consistently demonstrated FOXM1 upregulation in many
solid malignancies. FOXM1 overexpression is associated with poor patient
prognosis through blocking cytostatic and cytotoxic activity in taxane,
platinum-based, and anthracycline anti-cancer drugs thereby increasing
chemotherapeutic resistance. FOXM1 is broadly distributed during
embryonic development, but restricted to progenitor and proliferating
cells in mature tissues. However, broad tissue immunohistochemistry (IHC)
based distribution studies are currently lacking. Furthermore,
commercially available FOXM1 IHC antibodies are limited to rabbit
polyclonals which are susceptible to batch inconsistencies. The need for
a consistent monoclonal antibody validated in IHC is currently unmet.
Herein, we report on FOXM1 distribution on a wide ranging collection of
normal and tumor tissues using a newly developed rabbit monoclonal
antibody (RabMAb), Clone EP372.Design: Rabbits were immunized with a
recombinant N-terminal FOXM1 protein fragment, allowing detection of the
three isoforms: FOXM1A, FOXM1B, and FOXM1C. Sera collected from immunized
rabbits were screened by ELISA, Western Blot (WB) and IHC. After fusion,
antibody from final hybridoma cells were characterized by ELISA and WB.
This antibody, designated as Clone EP372 was further characterized
through IHC testing using formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) human
normal and tumor tissue microarrays (TMA).Results: A single band at
approximately 100 kDa was detected by WB in Hela cell lysates. IHC
analysis on 31 cases of human normal TMA comprising 15 different tissue
types showed that FOXM1 only labeled cells in regenerative tissues, with
nuclear expression in germinal center cells in the tonsil, proliferating
colonic crypt cells, stromal cells in the endometrium, spleen and testis.
Fifteen of 30 tumor cases were FOXM1 positive, expressed in astrocytoma,
melanoma, and carcinomas of the bladder, thyroid, endometrium, ovarian,
colon, hepatocellular, lung, cervical, stomach, and breast.Conclusion:
The RabMAb FOXM1 antibody, Clone EP372 specifically labels proliferating
cells in regenerative tissues and in a broad spectrum of human tumors.
This expression pattern is concordant with results from the literature.
To our knowledge, this is the first report that systematically evaluated
FOXM1 expression across a broad number of normal human tissues and a
variety of human tumors via IHC. Additional research in the role of FOXM1
in tumorigenesis and drug resistance across tissue types will help
bolster the prognostic and therapeutic significance of this key oncogenic
regulator.

