Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MultiOmyx multiplexed tumor infiltrating lymphocyte panel provides
comprehensive immunophenotyping from a single FFPE slide


Immune checkpoint therapies target immune regulatory pathways to enhance
anti-tumor immune response. These therapies have contributed to important
clinical advances, and are a promising approach to combat cancer.
Development of effective immune checkpoint therapies requires an
understanding of the host immune response within the tumor
microenvironment. GE Healthcare, through its affiliate Clarient
Diagnostics Service Inc., has developed a multiplexed Tumor Infiltrating
Lymphocyte (TIL) Panel* consisting of 12 key cancer immune markers: CD3,
CD4, CD8, CD20, CD45RO, CD56, CD68, CTLA4, FOXP3, PD1, PD-L1 and Pan-CK.
This MultiOmyx TIL panel identifies individual Thelper (CD3+CD4+),
Tcytotoxic (CD3+CD8+), Tregulatory (CD3+CD4+FoxP3), memory T-cells
(CD3+CD4+CD45RO), anergic T-cells (PD1+CD8+), natural killer cells
(CD56+), macrophages (CD68+), and B-cells (CD20+) within the tumor and
the stromal regions.MultiOmyx multiplexed immunofluorescence technology
enables qualitative and quantitative analysis of these 12 biomarkers
expression and co-localization from a single formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) slide. MultiOmyx assay utilizes a pair of
directly conjugated Cyanine dye-labeled (Cy3, Cy5) antibodies per round
of staining. Each Cy-dye conjugated antibody recognizes different target
proteins. Each round of staining is imaged and followed by novel dye
inactivation chemistry, enabling repeated rounds of staining.Herein, we
report an analysis of immune response in the tumor microenvironment
within solid tumors including breast cancer, lung cancer, colorectal
cancer, esophageal cancer, prostate cancer, and melanoma utilizing the
MultiOmyx TIL Panel. The results revealed two distinct immunologic
phenotypes, high TIL tumors and Low TIL tumors. The high TIL tumors
showed enhanced T cell population within the tumor and in the peritumoral
stroma including CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, CD4+ helper T cells and CD45RO+
memory T cells. Increased expression of immune checkpoints markers such
as CTLA4 and PD-1 were also observed. PD-1 was predominantly expressed in
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells while CTLA4 was mostly found on CD4+ FOXP3+
regulatory T cells. PD-L1 expression was also induced, mainly on Pan-CK+
tumor cells and CD68+ macrophages. High density of PD-L1+ |CD68+
macrophages was localized in the stroma surrounding the tumor region.
Conversely, many of the immune markers were not expressed in low-TIL
tumors.Immunophenotyping analysis offered by the MultiOmyx TIL panel may
facilitate the identification of appropriate immunotherapeutic approach.
Tumor with high TIL profiling may be effectively treated with
single-agent immune checkpoint therapy, while tumor with low TIL
profiling may require combination therapy with an agent that enhances
endogenous antitumor response.*MultiOmyx TIL panel is currently research
use only tool.

