Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exogenous pyruvate supports oxygen-independent tumor cell
proliferation by serving as an oxygen surrogate to maintain homeostasis
of NAD+/NADH


Hypoxia is usually associated with solid tumors and ischemic lesions.
Because oxygen is the common final electron acceptor in a variety of
metabolic reactions, hypoxia leads to cell injury and death in normal
tissues but promotes tumor progression and metastasis. Hypoxic cells use
pyruvate from glycolysis as electron acceptor to support ATP production;
anaerobic glycolysis, in which the glycolytic product pyruvate is
converted to lactate, has been well established as an adaptive energy
strategy for hypoxic cells. In tumor cells, pyruvate may also be used as
a substrate to support an active biosynthesis, as well as to maintain the
homeostasis of NAD+/NAD. However, whether exogenous pyruvate promotes
hypoxic tumor cell proliferation by serving as an electron acceptor or a
biosynthetic substrate remains unclear. By using both hypoxia and 0 cell
with defective mitochondrial electron transfer chain, we show that
exogenous pyruvate sustains the proliferation of tumor cells that cannot
use oxygen as the electron acceptor. Pyruvate-derived metabolites
including acetyl-coA, -ketoglutarate, succinate, alanine, and aspartate
were not able to substitute pyruvate to support oxygen-independent
proliferation. Knockdown of metabolic enzymes including pyruvate
carboxylase, pyruvate dehydrogenase and citrate synthetase showed no
negative effects on pyruvate-facilitated hypoxic cell proliferation,
whereas knockdown of lactate dehydrogenase significantly inhibited
proliferation, indicating that the crucial role of exogenous pyruvate is
to serve as the electron acceptor other than a substrate for
proliferating biosynthesis. Consisting with this notion, we show that
exogenous pyruvate significantly increased lactate generation and
increased the ratio of NAD+/NADH. We also show that in our model cells,
hypoxia did not cause accumulation of reactive oxygen species, suggesting
that pyruvate-facilitated proliferation of hypoxic cells is not achieved
by alleviating oxidative stress. Finally, we show that well-oxygenated
cells release pyruvate, providing an in vivo source of pyruvate exogenous
to the hypoxic cells. Taken together, our data support a novel model that
well-oxygenated cells release pyruvate, which is utilized by hypoxic
cells as an electron acceptor to facilitate proliferation. This model
provides a potential new therapeutic target to suppress tumor progression.

