Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad activity for the combination of BET and MEK inhibitors
across solid and hematologic cancers


BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) family proteins are epigenetic
readers that modulate expression genes involved in cell growth and
oncogenesis. Selective small molecule BET inhibitors, such as the GSK
I-BETs (I-BET762, I-BET151), abrogate binding of BET proteins to
acetylated chromatin and inhibit transcription of BET targetgenes. We and
others have previously demonstrated single agent activity for BET
inhibitors in a number of pre-clinical solid and hematologic tumor
models. Transcriptomicsand mechanistic studies from several of these
tumor types indicate that BET inhibitors influence numerous signaling
pathways at the transcriptional level, including RAS/RAF/MEK signaling.
Here we describe the synergistic effects of combining BET and MEK
inhibitors in various solid and hematologic cancer models. We observe
synergistic growth inhibition and apoptosis in a subset of cell lines
representing multiple tumor types, as well as patient-derived xenograft
models treated with the combination ex vivo. Additionally, combination of
BET and MEK inhibitors results in improved tumor growth inhibition in
cell line xenograft models compared to either single agent therapy.
Further exploration of the combination in sensitive tumor types
highlights multiple mechanisms potentially driving synergy, and suggests
possible markers associated with sensitivity to the combination. Taken
together, our data highlight the potential of BET/MEK inhibitor
combinations to improve upon the efficacy observed for these agents as
monotherapies in a wide variety of preclinical cancer models.All studies
were conducted in accordance with the GSK Policy on the Care, Welfare and
Treatment of Laboratory Animals and were reviewed by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee either at GSK or by the ethical review
process at the institution where the work was performed. Human biological
samples were sourced ethically and their research use was in accord with
the terms of the informed consents.

