Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biochemical and cellular monitoring of the activity of the
ecto-5-nucleotidase (CD73), a key cancer modulator using HTS-formatted
bioluminescent technology


The ecto-5-nucleotidase (CD73) is glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)
anchored cell surface protein that is involved in switching on
adenosinergic signaling. Its enzymatic and nonenzymatic activities (via
its interaction with extracellular matrix components) are involved in
cancer associated processes and not completely independent of each other.
It catalyzes the hydrolysis of AMP into adenosine and phosphate, where
adenosine plays important role in tumor immune escape. It is
overexpressed in many types of cancer cell lines and patient's biopsies
including breast, colon, ovarian, gastric, ovarian, etc. In addition to
being important as clinical and prognostic marker in cancer patients,
overexpression of CD73 is associated with resistance to antitumor agents,
and inhibition of CD73 activity or knocking it down by SiRNA reversed
chemoresistant phenotype of glioblastoma multiforme cells. Because of the
significant role of CD73, it is of importance to develop an assay that
monitor the activity of CD73 in order to develop modulators of its
activity. Towards this goal, we have developed a bioluminescent assay to
monitor the activity of the enzyme in biochemically pure as well cellular
anchored enzyme forms. The assay is homogenous and formatted for HTS
screening research, very sensitive, and robust as indicated by the high
Z. We also show that the use of inhibitors such as adenosine
5-(--methylene) diphosphate (APCP) generates data with biochemically pure
enzyme similar to the cellular bound form. We also demonstrate that cells
that are enriched in CD73 can be easily identified from those that have
low CD73. Thus, the current assay is robust, sensitive, and easy to use
making it an ideal assay for HTS screening for new modulators of CD73 and
generation of potential novel cancer therapeutics

