Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel microfluidic blood-brain niche to study breast cancer
metastasis to the brain


Metastasis from the primary tumor site to the brain is the most lethal
complication of advanced cancer. Once a patient has developed brain
metastasis, treatment involves surgical resection or radiation and is
often only palliative. Poor prognosis following these therapies as well
as the presence of concurrent disease outside of the nervous system
emphasize the need for new systemic therapies that can reach and are
active within the brain. In order to study the process of brain
metastasis and develop potential therapies, models that mimic the human
blood-brain niche must be used. Models currently utilized are murine in
vivo models and various in vitro methods that do not accommodate all the
biophysical characteristics of a blood-brain barrier. In vivo murine
models are costly, time intensive, very slow to manifest metastases, and
the metastatic process is seldom amenable to monitoring in real time.
Current in vitro models are faster and more cost effective; however the
models currently used do not have the same micro-environment complexity
as live models. Here we describe a novel microfluidic device that
accurately mimics the physical and cellular components of the human
blood-brain niche to study the brain metastatic process.This device is
composed of two chambers separated by a porous membrane. The top chamber
and apical side of the membrane is seeded with human brain endothelial
cells with and uses flow to mimic shear stress encountered within the
vasculature. Cancer cells are introduced into this chamber in which they
adhere to and migrate through the endothelium into the bottom chamber.
The bottom chamber contains astrocytes suspended in a collagen gel to
mimic the brain stroma and provide room for invading cancer cells to
colonize and grow. Barrier integrity is monitored using TEER
(trans-endothelial electrical resistance), and fluctuates as the tight
junctions of the endothelium are compromised by invading cancer cells.
Throughout all time points, from introduction into the flow chamber,
adherence to the endothelium, extravasation through the barrier,
migration into the stroma, and proliferation the cancer cells can be
monitored via microscopy or TEER.This device provides a powerful novel
tool to study the brain metastatic process and can be used to determine
differences in brain metastatic potential of various cell lines or
patient derived material, study the molecular mechanisms that promote
brain metastasis, and test potential new therapies.

