Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging and targeting of hypoxic microenvironments in prostate
cancer


Cancer cells display an adaptive response to hypoxia through the
activation of several genes mediated by the binding of hypoxia inducible
factors (HIFs) to hypoxia response elements (HRE) in the promoter region
of target gene that results in their increased transcription [1]. HIFs
promote key steps in tumorigenesis, including angiogenesis, metabolism,
proliferation, metastasis, and differentiation [1]. Bacterial or yeast
cytosine deaminase (yCD) converts the nontoxic prodrug 5-fluorocytosine
(5-FC) to the anti-cancer drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) that is widely used
in cancer treatment [2]. Using a lentivirus approach, we established
controlled expression of yCD by HRE in prostate cancer cells (PC-3).
These cells also report on HIF-1 expression with regulated luciferase
(Luc) expression, allowing detection of hypoxia, and the generation of
5-FU from 5-FC by yCD in the presence of hypoxia. Transduction efficiency
and reporter activity in response to hypoxia was evaluated by performing
luciferase assays, and bioluminescence imaging (BLI) of cells in vitro or
in vivo using a Xenogen IVIS Spectrum system. Cell viability in vitro in
response to hypoxia in the presence of 5-FC was assessed by MTS assay. In
vivo studies were performed by inoculating 2106 PC-3-HRE-Luc cells and
PC-3-HRE-yCD+Luc cells on either flank of 5-week-old male severely
combined immune deficient (SCID) mice. BLI was performed once tumors
reached 200mm3 followed by 5-FC injection through the tail vein
(200mg/kg) and intraperitoneally (250mg/kg). BLI was performed 3 days
after the first 5-FC injection and continued through the treatment
protocol. At the end of the treatment protocol, tumors were excised, and
a part of the tumor was processed for immunohistochemistry.
Bioluminescence was detected in both PC3-HRE-Luc and PC-3-HRE-yCD+Luc
cells only in response to the hypoxia mimetic cobalt chloride or hypoxia
(1% O2) confirming the regulation of luciferase by hypoxia and activation
of CD. Expression of yCD and its ability to convert the prodrug 5-FC to
5-FU, with increased cell kill was evident under hypoxia. In vivo,
engineered PC-3-HRE-yCD+Luc cells reported hypoxia, and showed
significant reduction of hypoxic regions and tumor volume.
Morphologically, PC-3-HRE-yCD+Luc tumors exhibited extensive necrosis. We
are currently evaluating the effects of eliminating hypoxic cancer cells
on distant metastasis as well as on aggressive subpopulations such as
cancer stem cells in the primary tumor.References: [1] Philip, B., et
al., Carcinogenesis, 2013. 34(8):1699-707.,[2] Longley DB, et al., Nat
Rev Cancer, 2003. 3: 330-38.Acknowledgements: This work was supported by
NIH R01CA136576 and P50 CA103175. We thank Mr. Gary Cromwell for
technical assistance

