Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of doxorubicin cytotoxicity by histone deacetylase
inhibition in human sarcoma cells


Introduction: Soft tissue and bone sarcomas are rare malignancies of
mesenchymal origin that account for about 1% of all adult solid tumors.
Surgical resection is the first treatment option but is heavily hampered
by delayed diagnosis. Due to few therapeutic treatments available, novel
and efficacious therapy is urgently needed. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACi) are emerging as a prominent class of therapeutic
agents for several cancers; however, little is known about HDACi activity
in sarcomas. By using human sarcoma models, we studied the therapeutic
activity of ITF2357, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, as an
anti-cancer agent alone or in combination with doxorubicin, on both
wild-type and mutated p53-bearing sarcoma cell lines.Materials and
methods: A wide panel of sarcoma cell lines, including both established
and patient-derived sarcoma from different histotypes, were used. Western
Blot analysis was performed to evaluate the effect of ITF2357 on histone
and non-histone protein acetylation and expression of potential
downstream targets. Cell viability was tested by MTT and CellTiterGlo
assays. Apoptosis induction and cell cycle perturbation were assessed by
flow cytometry and Western Blot analysis. Autophagy was assessed by
analysis of autophagosome formation in EGFP-LC3B expressing cells and
Western Blot analysis. Pharmacological interaction between ITF2357 and
Doxorubicin was assessed by conservative isobologram analysis. In vivo
efficacy of drug combination was evaluated in nude mice bearing sarcoma
xenografts.Results: In sarcoma cell lines, HDAC inhibition induced H3
histone and alpha-tubulin acetylation, cell proliferation inhibition and
activation of apoptotic program in a dose-dependent manner. ITF2357
cytotoxicity was independent on p53 status, despite its ability to
inhibit the expression of mutated p53 protein. Moreover, ITF2357 induced
a canonical-autophagic process, which protects sarcoma cells from
apoptotic cell death and enhances cell survival. The combination of
doxorubicin and ITF2357 was found to be highly synergistic in terms of
cell proliferation inhibition and was related to the engagement of the
apoptotic mitochondrial pathway. Noteworthy, treatment with both drugs
also showed synergistic inhibition of cell viability in a
doxorubicin-resistant osteosarcoma line, as compared with either agent
alone. The effect of the drug combination was corroborated in sarcoma
stem cells obtained from sarcoma patients. In vivo experiments in mouse
xenograft models confirmed that co-treatment increased both inhibition of
tumor growth and apoptosis, as compared with either agent
alone.Conclusions: Overall, HDAC inhibition in sarcoma may provide an
effective therapeutic modality capable of overcoming the doxorubicin
resistance, and thus may lead to more durable responses in the clinic.

