Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RD3-loss orchestrates GC-signaling independent evolution of
progressive neuroblastoma


Recently we recognized the transcriptional/translational loss of Retinal
degeneration Protein 3 (RD3) in high-risk progressive neuroblastoma
(HR-NB) and defined its novel tumor evolution stabilization function.
Studies have shown that RD3 competitively binds to guanylate cyclases
(GCs) and maintains GC expression, stability, as well as restores GC
localization. Accordingly, we investigated the role of GCs, if any, in
RD3-loss associated evolution of HR-NB. Utilizing an in vivo mouse model
of spontaneous HR-NB coupled with ex vivo approaches using metastatic
site derived aggressive cells (MSDACs), we examined the transcriptional
and translational expression of GCs and validated with high-content
confocal immunofluorescence. Further, utilizing a cGMP competitive enzyme
immunoassay, we investigated both intracellular and soluble GC activity.
Whole genome microarray analysis revealed a differential activation of GC
signaling transcriptional machinery in three different clones of MSDACs
(compared to parental SH-SY5Y cells) ex vivo. Immunoblotting identified a
consistent translation of GCs (GC-1 and GC-2) in a manifold of metastatic
tumors (compared to non-metastatic primary xenografts) in vivo and in
MSDACs ex vivo. Confocal immunofluorescence analysis validated the
near-identical expression of GC1 and GC2 both in SH-SY5Y cells and
MSDACs. cGMP immunoassay recognized indistinguishable intracellular and
soluble GC activity in clones of differentiated/undifferentiated MSDACs
as opposed to the clones of SH-SY5Y. For the first time, the results of
this study define the transcription and translation blueprint of GCs in
HR-NB and, further imply that the RD3-loss may dictate GCs-signaling
independent alternate molecular flow-through in the evolution of
HR-NB.Acknowledgements: Stephenson Cancer Center, NIH COBRE
1P20GM103639-01, Broken Arrow Lady Elks Auxiliary, and Oklahoma TSET.

