Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-terminal binding protein (CtBP): An emerging oncogene and small
molecule drug target in solid tumors


C-terminal binding proteins 1 and 2 (CtBP) are transcriptional
coregulators whose overexpression has been linked to poor prognosis
and/or chemoresistance in most common solid tumor types. CtBP exerts
oncogenic activities through modulation of gene expression programs
governing cell survival, epithelial/mesenchymal transitions,
migration/invasion, and cell cycle, and is also required for colon cancer
tumor initiating cell function. CtBP, however, has never been formally
characterized as an oncogene. We now show that Ctbp2 exhibits
transforming activity in immortalized NIH 3T3 as well as mouse and human
primary cells. Ctbp2 alone, or in cooperation with SV40 large T antigen
(LT) transformed NIH 3T3 cells and MEFs, respectively, to anchorage
independence with similar efficiency to mutant H-Ras. Human BJ foreskin
fibroblasts were also transformed to anchorage independence by CtBP2 in
cooperation with LT, SV40 small T antigen, and h-TERT with efficiency
similar to H-Ras, indicating that CtBP overexpression, as found in the
majority of human colon, ovary, breast, and prostate cancers, may be a
key oncogenic driver gene. To confirm the physiologic role of Ctbp2 in a
mouse tumor model with Ctbp overexpression, we bred Apcmin/+ mice to
Ctbp2 hemizygote (Ctbp2+/-) mice, which are otherwise healthy. CtBP is a
known target of the APC E3 ligase and is thus stabilized in APC mutated
human colon cancers and is found in high levels in APCmin polyps.
Remarkably, survival to humane endpoint at 37 weeks for Apcmin/+ vs.
Apcmin/+-Ctbp2+/- mice was 0% vs. 100% (p C-terminal binding proteins 1
and 2 (CtBP) are transcriptional coregulators whose overexpression has
been linked to poor prognosis and/or chemoresistance in most common solid
tumor types. CtBP exerts oncogenic activities through modulation of gene
expression programs governing cell survival, epithelial/mesenchymal
transitions, migration/invasion, and cell cycle, and is also required for
colon cancer tumor initiating cell function. CtBP, however, has never
been formally characterized as an oncogene. We now show that Ctbp2
exhibits transforming activity in immortalized NIH 3T3 as well as mouse
and human primary cells. Ctbp2 alone, or in cooperation with SV40 large T
antigen (LT) transformed NIH 3T3 cells and MEFs, respectively, to
anchorage independence with similar efficiency to mutant H-Ras. Human BJ
foreskin fibroblasts were also transformed to anchorage independence by
CtBP2 in cooperation with LT, SV40 small T antigen, and h-TERT with
efficiency similar to H-Ras, indicating that CtBP overexpression, as
found in the majority of human colon, ovary, breast, and prostate
cancers, may be a key oncogenic driver gene. To confirm the physiologic
role of Ctbp2 in a mouse tumor model with Ctbp overexpression, we bred
Apcmin/+ mice to Ctbp2 hemizygote (Ctbp2+/-) mice, which are otherwise
healthy. CtBP is a known target of the APC E3 ligase and is thus
stabilized in APC mutated human colon cancers and is found in high levels
in APCmin polyps. Remarkably, survival to humane endpoint at 37 weeks for
Apcmin/+ vs. Apcmin/+-Ctbp2+/- mice was 0% vs. 100% (p <0.001). As CtBP
also encodes a targetable intrinsic dehydrogenase that forms an
NADH-dependent oligomerization surface, our cell and mouse model data
supports the idea that CtBP could be an attractive small molecule drug
target in tumors where it is upregulated. We have therefore synthesized a
series of dehydrogenase substrate competitive inhibitor compounds based
on CtBP's natural substrate 4-methylthio-2-oxobutyric acid (MTOB) that
utilize a phenylpyruvate backbone and demonstrate nanomolar enzymatic
IC50's with micromolar cellular GI50s, while exhibiting minimal off
target inhibition of lactate dehydrogenase. Phenylpyruvatebased CtBP
inhibitors biochemically caused dissolution of CtBP oligomers, which are
the active transcriptional conformation, and exhibited on-target
transcriptional effects in cells, with reversal of CtBP transcriptional
repression of key cancer target genes, such as E-cadherin, Bik, and
BRCA1. In summary, we have characterized CtBP2 as a cellular
proto-oncogene that can transform primary mouse and human cells in a
manner similar to activated H-Ras, genetically validated Ctbp2 as a
therapeutic target in the Apcmin/+ mouse model, and identify promising
small molecule lead inhibitors for future therapeutic development.

