Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ketone body -hydroxybutyrate down regulates c-Myc signaling in
a malignant glioma model


Glioblastoma (GB) is the most common primary malignant brain tumor with a
dismal median survival of 1.5 years. To address the need for novel
therapeutics for the treatment of GB, investigations into high fat, low
carbohydrate ketogenic diets (KD) have been explored as potential
adjuvant therapeutic modalities. Preclinical studies of the KD in a mouse
model of malignant glioma demonstrated that the KD extended median
survival when used alone and substantially potentiated both radiotherapy
and chemotherapy. However, the underlying mechanisms by which the KD
exerts its therapeutic benefits remain poorly understood. A key result of
the KD is the production of the ketone bodies -hydroxybutyrate (HB),
acetoacetate, and acetone. Of these, BHB is the most prevalent ketone
body produced. In order to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms
of the KD, we have examined the interactions between BHB and the mouse
glioma cell line GL261-Luc2. Previously, we demonstrated the ability of
HB to recapitulate the in vivo effects of the KD in tumor cells in an in
vitro model. In the present study, we demonstrate that the ketone HB is
able to significantly down regulate the master transcription factor
c-Myc, which is intimately involved in cell cycle progression, apoptosis,
proliferation, DNA damage and repair, and metabolism. Overexpression of
c-Myc is tied to a variety of human malignancies. In GB, upregulation of
c-Myc signaling has been connected to an increase in tumor glucose
metabolism. Furthermore, downregulating c-Myc expression has been
demonstrated to confer sensitivity to tumors. We show that doses of both
5mM and 10mM HB significantly reduced the expression of c-Myc in the
GL261-Luc2 cell line when evaluated by both immunocytochemistry and
western blot. Downregulation of c-Myc may, in part, be a mechanism by
which HB and thus the KD exert their radiosensitizing and
antiproliferative effects on tumors. We intend to further investigate the
role of c-Myc in the KD by investigating downstream targets of c-Myc as
well as potential regulators of c-Myc transcription that are affected by
BHB.

