Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat3 signaling in erbB3-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in erbB2-positive breast cancer cells


Introduction: Understanding the mechanism of metastatic program is
essential to reducing the mortality of cancer patients. It is well known
that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to cancer
metastasis. Recently, numerous studies have documented the role of
erbB3-mediated oncogenic signaling in breast cancer progression. In this
study, we have focused on investigating the effect of Stat3 activation on
EMT-induced by erbB3 receptor in erbB2-positive (erbB2+) breast cancer
cells.Methods: Immunofluorescence analyses were performed to study the
localization and expression of EMT markers in erbB2+ breast cancer cells.
Lentiviral vector containing shRNA was used to specifically knockdown
erbB3. Western blot analyses were performed to assess the expression and
activation of proteins. Cell growth (MTS) assays were used to determine
cell viability. Wound healing and transwell assays were used to examine
the motility and migration of cells.Results: We discovered that ectopic
expression of erbB3 facilitated EMT, as evidenced by change of cell
morphology, induction of mesenchymal markers Vimentin, Snail, Slug, ZEB1
and repression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin in erbB2+ breast
cancer cells. Wound healing and transwell assays indicated that the
capability of cell motility and migration was enhanced. In contrast,
specific knockdown of erbB3 abrogated the observations described above.
Moreover, elevated expression of erbB3 potently stimulated activation of
Stat3, which has been validated to act as a promoter of tumor invasion
and metastasis in many type cancers. Suppression of Stat3 signaling via
its inhibitor, S3I-201, significantly alleviated EMT and cell
motility/migration that were triggered by activation of erbB3. To further
assess the clinical relevance of erbB3 signaling in cancer metastasis, we
took advantage of a publicly accessible portal that allows analysis of
the effect of genes on survival using 4,142 breast cancer samples
(http://kmplot.com/analysis/). Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that
the erbB2+ breast cancer patients with erbB3-high expression tended to
have a shorter Distance Metastasis-free Survival (DMFS).Conclusion:
Activation of Stat3 signaling by erbB3 promotes EMT and shifts the
cellular phenotype toward a mesenchymal state that is advantageous for
cancer metastasis. Our data shed a new sight on erbB3's role in erbB2+
breast cancer metastasis and may facilitate the development of novel
strategy for treatment of tumor progression.Keywords: ErbB3, Stat3, EMT,
Metastasis, Breast Cancer

