Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An off the shelf, GMP-grade, IL-2-independent NK cell line
expressing the high-affinity Fc-receptor to augment antibody therapeutics


A number of approved IgG1 monoclonal antibodies (mAb) used in cancer
therapy, including trastuzumab, cetuximab, and rituximab, depend on
natural killer (NK) cell-mediated antibody dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) to induce cancer cell death, mediated through the Fc
receptor (FcR). Multiple studies report that survival benefit is
significantly improved in cancer patients receiving IgG1 antibody therapy
who have NK cells that express the high-affinity FcRIIIa receptor
(CD16-158V). Only 12% of the normal human population, however, is
homozygous for expression of this high-affinity variant CD16. We
hypothesized that infusion of an NK-92 cell line modified to express
CD16-158V (high-affinity NK cells [haNK]) in combination with an IgG1 mAb
may result in superior antitumor effects compared with IgG1 mAb alone.A
GMP-grade plasmid-transfected variant of NK-92 expressing the
high-affinity CD16 receptor was developed utilizing a novel transfection
vector containing the erIL-2 gene, enabling the resulting haNK cells to
grow independently of IL-2. Using limiting dilution, clones having
identical surface molecule expression to the parent cell line were
generated and shown to have long-term expression of CD16. The haNK cells
displayed high ADCC in combination with rituximab, trastuzumab, and
daratumumab against target cell lines that were not killed by the
parental NK-92 cells. Of note, despite non-viral transfection, the
plasmid is fully integrated into chromosome 5. The haNK cell line
secretes about 200 pg/106 cells of IL-2, and like the parental NK-92 cell
line, produces enough IFN to potentially stimulate an adaptive immune
response. A GMP-grade master cell bank of haNK cells has been
established; haNK cells can be cryopreserved with retention of ADCC
activity.In vivo studies demonstrated the efficacy of haNK cells. In a
multiple myeloma model of CD38+ NCI-H929 cells xenografted into NOD/SCID
gamma null (NSG) mice, treatment with haNK cells plus the anti-CD38 mAb
daratumumab led to prolonged survival versus mice treated with haNK cells
plus an isotype control (log rank p = 0.0169), demonstrating
therapeutically relevant in vivo ADCC. haNK cells have also been
transfected with various CARs using mRNA, thereby enabling this platform
to make a bispecific effector cell product.In summary, haNK cells are a
potent and versatile platform for cellular immunotherapy, and clinical
trials of these novel off the shelf high-affinity NK cells are scheduled
for 2016.

