Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination efficacy of the selective HDAC inhibitor ACY-241 and
paclitaxel in solid tumor models


ACY 241 is a new, orally available and selective histone deacetylase
(HDAC) 6 inhibitor in clinical development in combination with
pomalidomide and dexamethasone in multiple myeloma. Like the structurally
related drug ricolinostat (ACY-1215), ACY-241 has the potential for a
substantially reduced side effect profile versus current nonselective
HDAC inhibitor candidates due to reduced potency against Class I HDACs
while retaining the potential for anticancer effectiveness. One of the
major effects of HDAC6 inhibition is hyperacetylation of -tubulin, which
is suggestive of potential combination activity with taxanes in cancer
treatment.Paclitaxel is a chemotherapeutic agent approved for use in the
treatment of multiple solid tumor types, including breast cancer, ovarian
cancer, non-small cell lung cancer and Kaposi's sarcoma (Weaver, 2014).
Recent studies indicate that clinically relevant low concentrations of
paclitaxel caused multipolar spindle formation resulting in aberrant
mitosis and cell death, which further contributes to the anti-cancer
efficacy of paclitaxel (Zasadil et al., 2014).In cell lines, combination
treatment with ACY-241 and paclitaxel resulted in enhanced inhibition of
proliferation and increased cell death. The combination of ACY-241 plus
paclitaxel also demonstrated enhanced efficacy in xenograft models of
pancreatic and ovarian cancer. Cell-cycle analysis indicated that ACY-241
treatment in combination with paclitaxel caused synergistic inhibition of
tumor cell proliferation through enhanced reduction of DNA replication in
S-phase and increased induction of cell death and aneuploidy. ACY-241
treatment in combination with paclitaxel did not increase mitotic arrest
but did increase the frequency of multipolar spindle formation during
mitosis, leading to aberrant mitoses, abnormal nuclei, and cell death in
agreement with a previous report (Zasadil et al). At the molecular level,
the enhanced anti-cancer efficacy resulting from combination treatment
with ACY-241 and paclitaxel in cell lines was associated with further
increased hyperacetylation of -tubulin, suggesting these agents
synergistically impact the regulation of tubulin biology.
Interestingly,gamma-tubulin was not always detectable at each pole of
these multipolar spindles, suggesting that multipolar spindle formation
may be independent of centrosome amplification and/or splitting.
Additional studies investigating the association between localization of
spindle proteins and multipolar spindle formation are in progress.The
enhanced efficacy of paclitaxel plus ACY-241 observed here, in addition
to the anticipated superior safety profile of a selective HDAC6
inhibitor, provides a strong rationale for clinical development of this
combination in patients with advanced solid tumors.

