Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KPNA7 nuclear import protein - a critical regulator of cancer cell
growth


Background. In eukaryotic cells, the nucleus is separated from the
cytosol by the nuclear envelope, thus requiring a specific machinery for
the transport of macromolecules between the two cellular compartments.
The nuclear import cycle is strictly regulated and its malfunction
results in incorrect localization of proteins, ultimately leading to
variety of diseases including cancer.Karyopherin alpha 7 (KPNA7) is the
newest member of the karyopherin alpha family of nuclear importers. KPNA7
is mainly expressed in early embryogenesis and oocytes as well as in some
cancer cells. We previously showed that silencing of KPNA7 in pancreatic
cancer cell lines with high endogenous expression dramatically reduced
cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth, through a G1 cell
cycle arrest and transcriptional induction of p21 expression.Here, we
further explored the functional importance of KPNA7 in a large panel of
pancreatic and breast cancer cell lines and identified its cargo proteins
that may be responsible for the observed phenotypes.Methods. KPNA7 was
silenced in pancreatic and breast cancer cells using siRNAs. Cell numbers
was determined 72 to 96 h after transfection and compared to those in
corresponding controls. To isolate KPNA7 cargo proteins, stable tagged
KPNA7-overexpressing pancreatic cancer cell lines were established. An
affinity-based protein pull-down was performed and the KPNA7-interacting
partners were identified with mass spectrometry.Results. The silencing of
KPNA7 in six pancreatic and breast cell lines led to decreased
proliferation in all cell lines with low to medium expression level,
whereas both cancer and normal cell lines with absolutely no KPNA7
expression were not affected, thus confirming the specificity of the
phenotype to KPNA7 silencing. The results were also consistent in breast
cancer cell lines, implicating a role not restricted to pancreatic
cancer. Interestingly, in some cell lines a distinct change from round to
lobular nuclear morphology was observed, suggesting that KPNA7 may also
participate in the maintenance of nuclear architecture.The protein
pull-down followed by mass spectrometry yielded multiple proteins
co-purifying with KPNA7. These included several proteins involved in RNA
processing and nucleopore proteins. Many of these were also involved in
the regulation of cell cycle and p21 pathway, consistent with the
phenotype observed in the functional studies.Conclusions. These results
implicate KPNA7 as an important regulator of cancer cell growth and
suggest that it might also have other functions in the maintenance of
cancer cell homeostasis. We were the first to link KPNA7 to a human
malignancy and here we expand that notion beyond pancreatic cancer. We
have also identified many putative KPNA7 cargos with functions matching
the observed cellular phenotypes. This study provides additional evidence
on the role of altered nuclear transfer in cancer pathogenesis.

