Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lunatic Fringe and p53 cooperatively prevent development of
claudin-low breast cancer


Claudin-low breast cancer (CLBC) is a poor prognosis disease that
disproportionately affects younger patients and women with African
ancestry, causing significant morbidity and mortality due to
chemoresistance and lack of targeted therapy. CLBC shows stemness and
mesenchymal features, and is thought to have originated from mammary stem
cells. However, little is known on how these tumors initiate and
progress. We previously reported that deletion of Lunatic Fringe (Lfng),
a modulator of Notch signaling, in the moue mammary epithelial cells
induced development of mammary tumors, among them two-thirds are
basal-like breast cancer and one-third resemble human CLBC. Deletion of
p53 in combination with other mutations (inactivation of Rb or
overexpression of oncogenic c-Met) also resulted in mammary tumors with
mesenchymal features. We hypothesize that Lfng and p53 may cooperate to
suppress CLBC initiation and progression. To this end, we have generated
mammary-specific deletion of Lfng and p53 using MMTV-Cre. The vast
majority of Lfngflox/flox;p53flox/flox;MMTV-Cre mice succumbed to
lymphoma by 3-5 months of age before mammary tumor onset, likely due to
the leaky deletion in B- and T cells. Interestingly, deletion of both
copies of Lfng and one copy of p53 (Lfngflox/flox;p53flox/+;MMTV-Cre)
dramatically accelerated mammary tumor development compared to the
Lfngflox/flox;MMTV-Cre model, with the median tumor-free survival
shortened from 600 days to 191 days. Of note, all mammary tumors from the
Lfngflox/flox;p53flox/+;MMTV-Cre mice were consisted of
mesenchymal/spindle-shaped cells and expressed markers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), suggesting that deletion of one
copy of p53 caused a shift of tumor subtype from basal-like to
claudin-low. We found that deletion of Lfng caused up-regulation of
E-cadherin in the mammary gland, whereas additional deletion of one copy
of p53 decreased E-cadherin but dramatically increased vimentin levels,
suggesting that p53 haploinsufficiency promotes EMT in this context.
Compared with the wild type gland at 3 months of age,
Lfngflox/flox;p53flox/+;MMTV-Cre mutant gland showed down-regulation of
Notch downstream targets including Hes5, Hey1, and Hey2, suggesting
reduced Notch signaling. Given that Notch signaling is known to restrict
mammary stem cell expansion, down-regulation of Notch signaling may lead
to inappropriate accumulation of mammary stem cells during CLBC
initiation. Taken together, our results reveal genetic interaction
between Notch and p53 in the pathogenesis of CLBC. Moreover, we have
established a new mouse model for CLBC with complete penetrance and
accelerated tumor onset, providing an ideal tool in defining molecular
events leading to the initiation and progression of CLBC as well as
identifying potential therapeutic targets for this poor prognosis disease.

