Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dinaciclib induces immunogenic cell death and enhances anti-PD-1
mediated tumor suppression


Blockade of the checkpoint inhibitor PD-1 has demonstrated remarkable
success in the clinic for the treatment of a growing list of different
cancers. However, several tumor types are resistant to anti-PD-1
monotherapy. This observation has spurred numerous combination studies to
reveal what additional therapeutic interventions may complement anti-PD1
blockade. Recently it has been shown that immunogenic cell death (ICD),
induced by radiation and/or chemotherapy, improves T cell responses
against different tumor types. ICD is characterized by damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs) including surface expression of calreticulin,
and release of ATP and HMGB1. Recognition of DAMPs triggers dendritic
cell maturation and functions that are critical for tumor
antigen-specific T cell activation. Thus therapies that evoke ICD may
further augment anti-tumor immunity elicited by anti-PD-1.In mouse
syngeneic tumor models, we observed combinatorial anti-tumor activity of
anti-PD1 and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, dinaciclib. We
hypothesized that dinaciclib potentiates the effects of anti-PD-1 by
eliciting ICD. Indeed, tumor cells treated with dinaciclib express the
hallmarks of ICD including HMGB1 and ATP release and surface expression
of calreticulin. Dinaciclib treatment also increases tumor cell
phagocytosis and induces dendritic cell maturation. Furthermore, mice
immunized with dinaciclib-treated tumor cells are resistant to subsequent
tumor challenge. Tumors from mice receiving anti-PD1 and dinaciclib have
increased T cell infiltration and dendritic cell activation, indicating
the overall quality of the immune response generated may be improved with
the combo. Taken together, these findings suggest a potential mechanism
for the observed synergy between dinaciclib and anti-PD1. Dinaciclib
induces immunogenic cell death, converting the tumor cell into an
endogenous vaccine and thereby boosting the effects of anti-PD-1.

