Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long non-coding RNA HIF1A-AS2 regulates mesenchymal glioma
stem cell tumorigenicity


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary
brain tumor in adults, which initiation and progression is driven by a
subset of self-renewing GBM stem-like cells (GSCs). Long-non coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) have been recently shown to play important roles in regulating
numerous biological processes both in physiologic and pathologic
condition. Identification of functional lncRNAs important for GBM
initiation and progression may shed new light on understanding
pathophysiology of the disease. We used a custom made lncRNA Nanostring
platform to profile the expression of lncRNAs in subtype-characterized
collection of patient-derived GSCs. We demonstrated that lncRNA signature
may distinguish between GSC subtypes. Out of 73 lncRNAs we found 7 that
were overexpressed specifically in the most aggressive mesenchymal (M)
GSC subtype. Among them, HIF1A-AS2 was the most differentially expressed
lncRNA. HIF1A-AS2 was reported to be overexpressed in many types of
cancers; however its biological function and its role in GBM progression
are unknown. Knockdown of HIF1A-AS2 in M GSCs resulted in reduced growth,
increased cytotoxicity, and it strongly inhibited their neurosphere
formation capability. Using more global approach we found out that
knockdown of HIF1A-AS2 in M GSCs caused deregulation of several out of
730 cancer-related genes. Functional bioinformatic analysis revealed that
these differentially expressed mRNAs are closely related to
proliferation, transcriptional regulation and cell division. RNA
pull-down assay showed that HIF1A-AS2 may exert its effects through
specific binding of RNA helicase DHX9, a multifunctional protein with
important roles in transcription, pre-mRNA processing and translation. We
also demonstrated that HMGA1, a gene known to be regulated by DHX9, was
specifically down-regulated in HIF1A-AS2 knockdown cells both at mRNA and
protein level. Finally, we showed that silencing of HIF1A-AS2 blocked M
GSC tumor growth in vivo resulting in significant survival benefits.
Taken together, our results suggest HIF1A-AS2 as an important lncRNA in
pathophysiology of GBM.

