Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput screening using patient derived tumor cell to
conduct personalized medicine


Background:Patient-derived cell (PDC) model is one of prospective
technologies to investigate drug response for precision medicine.
Previously drug sensitivity derived PDC model has been studied in
colorectal cancer organoid culture or lung cancer model. They revealed
that PDC model recapitulates genomic characteristic and drug
high-throughput screening is amenable. We established PDC models from
metastatic cancer cohort of multiple cancer types, and revealed genomic
characteristics and matched drug response.Method:Target sequencing was
performed using OncoPanel. We called SNV, and CNV from target sequencing
using GATK, then clinically unassociated SNPs were eliminated. Somatic
submodules were identified from integrative variant profiles using HotNet
referring HPRD. Drug high-throughput screening was performed SEMCO
platform. In order to identify sensitive drug and variant gene pairs,
drug sensitivity was tested by ANOVA using IC50 values.Result:Target
sequencing of exome were generated from our 165 PDC models, and drug
high-throughput screening was performed from 30 PDCs and ant-cancer 15
drugs. We tried integrative analysis approaches from genomic profile
including mutation and copy number alteration, and identified genomic
modules related with Fanconi, Hedgehog, FGFR receptor, Cytokine-cytokine
receptor pathway. Variants of known oncogenes were successfully
identified in MET, BRAF, FGFR and PIK4CA. Especially novel and recurrent
mutations were identified in FGFR2, and corresponding samples indicated
AZD4547 sensitivity as well as known drug response case such as BRAF
V600E targeting Vemurafenib.Conclusion:Our study explains that PDC cohort
sustains cancer related pathways, and its drug response follows genomic
features. It is expected that our research would contribute to facilitate
precision medicine from PDC model to utilize genomics and drug response.

