Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization and detection of focal somatic copy number variants
in whole genome, whole exome and panel sequencing for tumor/normal
matched pairs and tumor only analysis


Often in the clinical setting, tumor samples may be derived from
historical tissue or from fresh frozen tissue and it may not be feasible
to obtain normal tissue from the individual. Comparing unmatched tissues
from different individuals possess a unique challenge of addressing
common copy number variations not faced when comparing matched samples.
In addition to the challenges of comparing unmatched samples, DNA
extracted from samples preserved as formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) tissue is often highly degraded and when compared to more intact
DNA extracted from different source (e.g. blood) can increase the
inherent noise in the system. Here we analytically characterize the
accuracy and performance of algorithmic approaches for separating
germline inherited copy number variation from somatic copy number
changes, focusing on both filtering approaches and use of pooled
reference samples sequenced under similar conditions. Example approaches
include filtering known common copy number variation within 1000 Genomes
Phase 3 and Database of Genomic Variants (DGV) Gold Standard.
Additionally, we utilized a tumor/reference pool based analysis where a
reference pool was constructed by equimolar pooling of multiple
individuals. Determination of fold changes between tumor and reference
was calculated by determining physical coverage of read pair fragments in
100 bases increments. Next, to address differences in sequencing
performance between tumor and reference, the read depth data for each
sample is collapsed/averaged into a lower resolution according to
user-selected parameters (e.g. distance between points and read depth).
Normalized log2 fold-changes between tumor and reference samples are then
calculated and an adjustable smoothing window is applied. In addition, we
utilize tumor allele frequencies of known heterozygous germline SNPs
identified within the normal to both evaluate potential false positives
and correct biases. Lastly, a segmentation algorithm is applied to
summarize the individual log2 fold-changes into intervals with a constant
copy number state. We will present the advantages and limitations of
these approaches both when a germline normal is available and when tumor
only analysis is necessary.

