Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitogen-activated protein kinase-driven Sprouty2 expression
mediates resistance to receptor tyrosine kinase-targeted therapeutics in
glioblastoma cells


The therapeutic efficacy of inhibitors of oncogenic kinases in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) has been disappointing to date. In
glioblastoma and other malignancies, resistance to targeted therapeutics
can arise through dynamic rewiring of cell signaling pathways responsible
for tumorigenesis and survival. Here, we identify one such signaling
rewiring process in glioblastoma cells that promotes expression of
Sprouty2 (SPRY2). SPRY2 expression is of interest because we recently
identified SPRY2 as a driver of glioblastoma cell and tumor proliferation
and resistance to kinase inhibitors. Specifically, we found that SPRY2
depletion reduced the ability of glioblastoma cells to form colonies in
soft agar, to form subcutaneous tumors in mice, and to resist
co-inhibition of the EGFR and MET receptor tyrosine kinases. In the
present study we found that, in a panel of glioblastoma cell lines, SPRY2
expression was initially reduced in response to inhibition of EGFR and
MET. However, at later time points (24-48 hr after receptor inhibition)
resurgent SPRY2 expression was observed even as EGFR and MET
phosphorylation remained suppressed. To identify regulators responsible
for resurgent SPRY2 expression, we undertook a quantitative systems
biology approach based on partial least squares regression (PLSR)
modeling wherein the phosphorylation states of multiple signaling
pathways known to be regulated by EGFR and MET were measured at six time
points during the 48 hrs after treatment of cells with EGFR and MET
inhibitors. The PLSR model identified late stage (48 hr) phosphorylation
of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) as having a role in
cellular resistance to the inhibitors distinct from ERK phosphorylation
at all other times. Inspection of the experimental data revealed that
phosphorylated ERK, which was initially suppressed in response to EGFR
and MET inhibition, also displayed a resurgence that paralleled the trend
in SPRY2 expression. This correlation between ERK phosphorylation and
SPRY2 expression is consistent with the documented ability of ERK to
regulate SPRY2 expression transcriptionally. The importance of resurgent
ERK phosphorylation was confirmed in experiments showing that its
suppression through the use of a MEK inhibitor prevented resurgent SPRY2
expression and augmented cell death in response to EGFR and MET
inhibitors. We hypothesize that resurgent ERK phosphorylation and
resultant SPRY2 expression occur due to the ability of glioblastoma cells
to activate receptor tyrosine kinases other than EGFR and MET in response
to inhibition of those receptors. Antibody microarray experiments have
provided some initial clues about the identity of those receptors, and
experiments are ongoing to validate those results.

