Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary iron intake, genetic variants in microRNA related iron
regulatory pathway genes, and the risk of non-small cell lung cancer


As an essential nutrient that facilitates DNA synthesis, cell
proliferation and metabolism, iron is involved in carcinogenesis. While
epidemiological studies suggest a J-shaped model for the relationship of
serum iron level and cancer risk with both too low and too high levels
associated with increased cancer risks, the effect of genetic variants
related to intracellular iron regulatory pathway and dietary iron intake
on non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) risk is little known. In this
study, we evaluated a panel of miRNA related genetic variants in iron
regulatory pathway genes on the risk of NSCLC. In discovery phrase, 157
miRNA related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 81 genes of
iron regulatory pathway were genotyped in 1656 NSCLC cases and 1486
healthy controls. Eight SNPs in 6 genes were significantly associated
with risk of NSCLC. A SNP in 3 UTR of Iron-Responsive Element Binding
Protein 2 (IREB2) gene at 15q25 region was subsequently replicated in
dbGaP lung cancer GWAS dataset. Combining all subjects (7,352 cases,
7,296 controls), the overall P-value was 4.9 109 (Odds ratio (OR) =
0.86). eQTL analysis showed that the SNP on IREB2 alters IREB2 gene
expression (P = 3.0 1011). The SNP is predicted to alter a miR-29 binding
site on IREB2 gene and indeed the expression of miR-29 is inversely
correlated with IREB2 expression in tumor tissues. We then determined the
expression of serum miR-29a in 150 early-stage NSCLC patients and 172
healthy controls and found that miR-29a was significantly associated with
higher risk of cancer (OR = 1.78, P = 0.03). By analyzing dietary intake
information of the discovery population, iron intake was significantly
associated with risk of NSCLC in logistic regression analysis and there
was also evidence of a synergistic interaction with between the SNP and
iron intake in modulating NSCLC risk (P for interaction = 0.01). Taken
together, SNPs at miRNA binding sites of iron regulatory pathway genes
and dietary iron intake may modify risk of NSCLC individually and jointly.

