Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of tumor inoculation site on the development of cancer
cachexia


Background and AimThe incidence of cancer cachexia varies greatly among
tumor type. Although certain tumor types are more commonly associated
with cachexia, even for the same tumor type, the degree to which patients
exhibit cachexia varies. This is due to variations in tumor phenotype and
host genotype that contributes to the development of cancer cachexia. The
influence of the site of tumor growth on the development of cancer
cachexia remains unclear. In this study, we evaluated if differences in
tumor microenvironment would affect the development of cancer cachexia in
a murine model.MethodsThe same number of colon26 cells (5106 cells/mouse)
was inoculated subcutaneously or intraperitoneally in 8-week-old male
BALB/c mice. Body weight, food intake, and tumor size were monitored. On
day 14 after the tumor inoculation, mice were anesthetized and blood
collected, and the weight of peritesticular adipose tissue, gastrocnemius
muscle and heart were measured. 23 plasma cytokines were determined by
using the Bio-Plex array system and plasma Myostatin and Activin A levels
were measured by ELISA. Expression of MuRF-1 and Antrogin-1, which are
required for muscle atrophy, in gastrocnemius muscle or heart was
assessed by RT-PCR.ResultsThe body weight, adipose tissue and
gastrocnemius muscle decreased in tumor-bearing mice. Interestingly, a
reduction in heart weight was observed in the intraperitoneal tumor group
but not in the subcutaneous group. The weight loss of the body, adipose
tissue and gastrocnemius was more severe in the intraperitoneal group
than in the subcutaneous group. Atrogin 1 and MuRF1 mRNA expressions in
the gastrocnemius muscle increased significantly in both groups of
tumor-bearing mice, however, in the myocardium, expression of these mRNAs
increased in the intraperitoneal group but not in subcutaneous group. As
for plasma cytokine levels, several cytokine levels including IL-6, TNF-,
and activing A of tumor-bearing mice were significantly higher than those
of control mice. Eotaxin and G-CSF levels in the intraperitoneal tumor
group were higher than in the subcutaneous group.ConclusionBased on these
data, we believe that differences in microenvironment where tumor cells
develop can affect the progression and phenotype of cancer cachexia
through alterations in various circulating factors derived from the tumor
microenvironment.

