Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospholipids regulate the localization and oncogenic potential of
protein tyrosine kinase 6 in prostate cancer


Background: Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6, also called BRK) is an
intracellular SRC-related tyrosine kinase that does not possess canonical
localization signals. Lack of targeting yields flexibility in its
intracellular localization and access to substrates. PTK6 is observed in
the nuclei of prostate epithelial cells where it promotes differentiation
and inhibits growth. PTK6 is activated at the plasma membrane in
PTEN-deficient mouse prostate tumors where the concentration of PIP3 is
high due to PTEN loss of function. Membrane-associated PTK6 induces cell
transformation, the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and tumor cell
metastasis. In human prostate cancer, active PTK6 associates with the
plasma membrane and its increased expression correlates with metastasis
and poor survival. Our studies aimed to characterize how the
mislocalization and activation of PTK6 in prostate cancer is
regulated.Results: Based on our observation that loss of PTEN induces
accumulation of PTK6 at the membrane, we hypothesized that PTK6 binds to
the plasma membrane secondary messenger phosphatidylinositol
(3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3). Amino acid sequence alignment predicts H52,
Y53, and K54 of PTK6 as a potential PIP3 binding site, which resembles
the lipid-binding HYK domain of tyrosine kinases BTK and Abl. Using NMR
saturation transfer difference (STD) experiment, we observed that the SH2
domain of PTK6 contains a binding site for inositol trisphosphate (IP3) a
soluble PIP3 mimic. As predicted, statistical analysis identified Y53 of
the PTK6 HYK motif within the SH2 domain as a residue with substantial
chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) induced by independent titrations
with PIP3 analogs IP3, IP4, and 1,2-dihexanoyl PIP3 in 15N HSQC, as
compared to controls. Using autophosphorylated and unphosphorylated PTK6,
NMR STD experiments show that only active (pY342) PTK6 binds to IP3.
Treatment of prostate cancer cells with the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin
reduces active PTK6 at the plasma membrane.Conclusions: Our data
demonstrate that active PTK6 is recruited to the plasma membrane through
direct interactions with PIP3. Membrane association places PTK6 in close
proximity to its oncogenic substrates AKT, FAK and BCAR1, thereby
promoting tumor progression. These findings may facilitate identification
of novel PTK6 inhibitors that block its association with the membrane,
while not affecting its tumor suppressive role in the nucleus.This work
is funded by NIH grant 1R01CA188427 to ALT and VG.

