Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic implication of identifying pancreatic cancer stem
cells possessing fructose metabolic signature


The emergence of the cancer stem-cell theory in the last 20 years has
shed light on many of the unresolved challenges. For example, the current
cancer chemotherapy can mainly cause cancer remission but often fails to
cure cancer due to the existence of cancer stem cells. Therefore,
development of methods targeting cancer stem cells could facilitate the
improvement of therapeutics for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas
(PDACs). However, the key characteristics of cancer stem cells (CSCs)
remain to be determined. Accumulating evidences revealed the similar
features shared by pluripotent stem cells and cancer stem cells, we
therefore hypothesize acquisition of stemness characteristics during the
reprogramming process is superficially reminiscent of the dysplastic
transformation proposed in cancers. In the current work, comparative
genome-wide profiling analysis was initially conducted on embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and different
subpopulation of pancreatic cancer cells. We initially revealed
expression level of pluripotent transcriptional factors and surface
markers such as Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, Lin28, CD133, and ABCG2 was
significantly higher in ABCG2+CD44+ subpopulation of pancreatic cancer
cells correlated with their drug resistance and high metastatic
potentials suggesting ABCG2+CD44+ possess the features of CSCs. The
further analysis was performed on metabolic pathway and revealed, very
similar to ESCs/iPSCs, the metastatic ABCG2+CD44+ subpopulations had
evaluated level of GLUT5 & KHK and retain the expression of critical
enzymes involved in Krebs cycle suggesting ABCG2+ CD44+ CSC
subpopulations can utilize fructose efficiently and possess the
capability to be grown in different nutrient-supplying and high-oxygen
environment. Utilizing tumor-engraft mice and spontaneous pancreatic
cancer mice, we actually revealed fructose replacement enhanced cancer
drug resistance and CSC-mediated cancer progression possibly via
up-regulating ST6Gal1 as knockdown of ST6Gal1 or treatment of ST6Gal1
inhibitors can suppress self-renewal and metastasis capability of
ABCG2+CD44+ CSC subpopulations. In summary, Otto Warburg proposed in
1920s that tumor cells product energy by glycolysis followed by lactic
acid fermentation in cytosol rather than by oxidation pyruvate in
mitochondria. However, accumulating evidence from recent work actually
showed that many cancers exhibit the Warburg effect while retaining
mitochondrial respiration. The current work actually elucidated that
pancreatic CSCs possess metabolic features of pluripotent stem cells
which can utilize fructose efficiently and possess the capability to be
grown in different nutrient-supplying and high-oxygen environment.
Importantly, these key metabolic features are critical in CSC-mediated
cancer drug resistance and metastasis.

