Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased cellular stress and apoptosis induced by anti-SIAH2
therapy in human cancer cells with oncogenic K-RAS addiction


Hyperactivated K-RAS oncoproteins are known to drive cell proliferation,
tumor growth, and metastasis. Oncogene addiction is often associated with
increased ER and mitochondrial stress due to excessive reactive oxygen
and nitrogen species (ROS & NROS) production. RING finger E3 ubiquitin
ligase, Seven in Absentia homolog 2 (Siah2) is a highly conserved,
critical signaling module downstream of the EGFR/HER2/K-RAS pathway.
SIAH2 function is required for proper K-RAS signal transduction and has
been shown to target key regulators of oxidative stress for
ubiquitination and proteasome degradation. However, the mechanisms by
which SIAH2 regulates cellular stress and protects against programmed
cell death in oncogenic K-RAS-addicted cancer cells are not well
understood. Since SIAH2 is upregulated in proliferating tumor cells, we
hypothesized that SIAH2-deficient cancer cells may be compromised in
their ability to adapt to increased cellular and oxidative stress induced
by oncogenic K-RAS pathway blockade.In this study, SIAH2 knockdown was
carried out in cancer cells carrying oncogenic K-RAS mutations (A549,
MDA-MB-231 and MiaPaCa cells). Triplicates of fresh cell lysates from
SIAH2 proficient and SIAH2 deficient cells were then interrogated for
altered expression of 19 signaling molecules with known functions in
modulating stress response and apoptosis using the PathScan Stress and
Apoptosis Signaling Antibody Array kit. Differences in the protein
expression were quantified and validated by Western blots,
immunofluorescence (IF) and flow cytometry. We found that oxidative
stress was markedly increased, evidenced by mitochondrial aggregations
and dysfunction in a subset K-RAS-driven cancer cells, as we blocked
SIAH2 function downstream of the oncogenic K-RAS signaling pathway. SIAH2
deficiency in breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) and non-small cell lung
adenocarcinoma (A549) cells resulted in decreased ERK1/2 and AKT (S473)
phosphorylation, increased ROS production, compromised mitochondria
integrity and function, increased Caspase 3 and 7 activity, and PARP 1
cleavage that led to massive cell death observed in these cancer cells.
In contrast, the prominent cell death was not observed in SIAH2 deficient
pancreatic cancer (MiaPaCa) cells that expressed high levels of Survivin,
which is an anti-apoptosis protein.The anti-SIAH2 therapy is highly
effective in inducing oxidative stress, altered mitochondrial
bioenergetics, and apoptosis in a subset of invasive and metastatic
cancer lines expressing insufficient levels of Survivin. Our results
suggest that, anti-SIAH2 strategy reveals novel oncogenic K-RAS-dependent
cancer cell vulnerability in stress response that can be exploited in
future for anti-SIAH2 therapy alone, or in combination with other
anti-proliferative treatment to effectively combat KRAS-dependent cancers.

