Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPAR-delta promotes Wnt/B-catenin-driven colorectal tumorigenesis


Introduction Aberrant Wnt/B-catenin signaling activation due to mutations
in the adenomatous poliposis coli gene, APC, is a critical event in
colorectal cancer (CRC). However, to drive CRC tumorigenesis, aberrant
Wnt/B-catenin activation requires additional enhancing regulatory
mechanisms. The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta gene
(PPARD), which is upregulated in CRC, is a downstream target of aberrant
Wnt/B-catenin activation in human colon cancer cells. However, PPARD has
also been reported to inhibit intestinal tumorigenesis in mice with
germline APCmin mutations. Thus, the mechanistic interaction between
PPARD and Wnt/-catenin remains poorly understood. PPARD is a druggable
protein for which agonists and antagonists are being developed.
Determining PPARD effects on Wnt/B-catenin activation would define the
direction of its therapeutic targeting in cancer and other
diseases.Methods We developed a novel mouse model that simulates PPARD
overexpression in CRC by inducing PPARD overexpression in intestinal
epithelial cells via a villin promoter (villin-PPARD mice). We bred
villin-PPARD mice with mice that have Apc580 mutation in intestinal
epithelial cells induced by CDX2-Cre recombinase expression (Apc580mu
mice) to generate Apc580mu-PPARD-Gut mice. Apc580mu-PPARD-Gut mice and
Apc580mu control mice were monitored for CRC tumorigenesis. We also
assessed the effects of PPARD expression modulation on Wnt/B-catenin
activation in human colon cancer cell lines.Results PPARD overexpression
in colonic epithelial cells increased CRC tumorigenesis in mice with
Apc580 mutation. At 10 weeks of age, 100% of Apc580mu-PPARD-Gut mice but
only 60% of Apc580mu mice had tumors of any size, and the mean number of
tumors per Apc580mu-PPARD-Gut mouse (1.6 2.5) was significantly higher
than that per Apc580mu mouse (0.6 0.25; P = 0.02). Tumors >3.5 mm were
present in all Apc580mu-PPARD-Gut mice but only 20% of Apc580mu mice, and
the mean number of tumors >3.5 mm per Apc580mu-PPARD-Gut mouse (1.4 2.5)
was significantly higher than that per Apc580mu mouse (0.2 0.2; p =
0.005). In mice, colonic epithelial PPARD overexpression increased
activated B-catenin protein levels and Wnt/B-catenin target gene mRNA
levels. In human colon cancer cells, PPARD increased the levels of
activated -catenin, its nuclear localization and transcriptional
activity.Conclusion Our findings indicate that PPARD augments
Wnt/B-catenin signaling to promote CRC tumorigenesis and thus support the
targeted inhibition of PPARD to suppress CRC tumorigenesis.

