Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PET imaging of galectin-3 expression with [18F]FPDTG for detection
of early breast carcinoma lesions in dense breast tissue


Mammography is the gold standard for breast cancer detection with
sensitivity of 85%, which decreases to 68% in women with dense breasts
and to 48% in women with extremely dense breasts, making cancer detection
challenging. Additional methods for breast cancer screening have been
developed, including: contrast-enhanced mammography, tomosynthesis,
automated whole breast ultrasound, advanced MRI and molecular imaging
(99mTc-MIBI gamma camera; 18F-FDG). However, early detection and
differential diagnosis of malignant vs benign breast lesions remains a
major challenge in patients with dense breasts.We have been developing
novel approaches to early detection and differential diagnosis of
malignant vs benign breast lesions using PET imaging of galectin-3
(Gal-3), that is significantly overexpressed in breast carcinomas, as
compared to pre-malignant lesions. We developed a novel radiotracer
3-[18F]fluorophenylthio-digalactoside (18F-FPTDG) with high binding
affinity (Kd 14 nM) and specificity to Gal-3. In vitro radiotracer
binding studies in a panel of MCF10-derived cell lines with different
degrees of malignancy and Gal-3 expression, demonstrated a highly
significant linear relationship between the level of Gal-3 expression and
the magnitude of 18F-FPTDG binding to cell membranes (R2 =
0.99).Preliminary in vivo PET imaging studies with 18F-FPTDG in mice
bearing MCF10DCIS tumor xenografts demonstrated a rapid bi-exponential
clearance of 18F-FPTDG from the blood (fast and slow clearance
half-times: 0.5 and 10.5 min, respectively). 18F-FPTDG cleared
predominantly via the hepatobiliary route, as evidenced by high levels of
radioactivity in the liver, increasing levels in duodenum and upper
intestinal tract. The liver and kidney clearance followed
mono-exponential kinetics with half-times of 120 min and 37 min,
respectively. Renal clearance was more active in mice, as evidenced by
higher amounts of radioactivity in the bladder. The magnitude of
catabolism of [18F]FPDTG was negligible, as evidenced by very low levels
of [18F]F2 accumulation in the bone at 60-75 min post injection. The
level of accumulation of [18F]FPDTG-derived radioactivity in the lungs,
muscles, and other organs and tissues was extremely low. Also, there was
no measurable levels of [18F]FPDTG-derived radioactivity in the brain. In
contrast, there were distinct regions in the breast carcinoma xenograft
with higher levels of [18F]FPDTG, especially in the central regions
(hypoxia). The half-time clearance of [18F]FPDTG from tumors was 8 min,
which was about twice longer than clearance half-time from lungs and
muscles - 4.5 and 4 min, respectively.Additional studies are being
conducted in various breast tumor xenograft models, as well as in PyVmT
transgenic mice, to assess the utility of PET/CT with [18F]FPDTG for
differential diagnosis of benign vs malignant breast lesions and for
biopsy guidance.

