Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An established ex vivo 3D culture platform using patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) tumors replicate the anti-tumor efficacy observed in vivo


Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models closely mimic the pathological
phenotypes of the original tumors, thus they are ideal surrogates for
preclinical anticancer drugs efficacy testing. However, there is an
increasing demand to rapidly and reliably screen out candidate drugs at
earlier stages, and in vivo animal studies usually take months to produce
efficacy data. Compared to traditional two-dimensional (2D) culture,
three-dimensional (3D) culture systems more closely reflect in vivo
responses. Therefore, we developed an ex vivo 3D culture platform using
freshly isolated PDX-derived tumor cells, cultured on the natural
methylcellulose polymer as an ex vivo drug screening system to meet the
need for patient relevant, lower cost and high-throughput
methods.Single-cell suspensions freshly isolated from PDX tumors are
seeded in semisolid methylcellulose media and the drug efficacy is
quantitatively evaluated by CellTiter-Glo (CTG) luminescent assay. The
main advantage of this method is the possibility of testing cytotoxicity
within days (7 days on average), rather than months. Also, the process is
carried out in mild condition and the scaffold material is inert to avoid
unwanted cellular response. Moreover, cell spheroids can be easily
retrieved for further analysis.Dissociated primary tumor cells derived
from either fresh or frozen PDX tumors remain highly viable and form
colonies when cultured in 3D. The success rate of generating ex vivo 3D
culture from PDX tumors is higher than 90%, and over 60 PDX models were
validated from cancer of various origins. We monitored tumor colony
formation and generated a fitted drug concentration-response curve with
small variations in CTG cell viability assays. Most importantly, the ex
vivo 3D drug response profiling correlated well with the response
obtained in vivo from PDX models (over 80% in average), for anticancer
drugs with a variety of mechanisms of action including kinase inhibitor,
antineoplastic agent and antibodies. Compared with a commercialized 3D
drug testing plates, similar results were obtained in our system, with
the advantage of a significant reduction in the cost. These data suggest
that our 3D ex vivo cell culture platform from freshly isolated or frozen
PDX-derived cells is a feasible and authentic method for testing drug
efficacy in a short time period before transitioning to multiple PDX
models.To sum up, our ex vivo 3D culture platform can save time and
reduce costs, and is extremely useful for preclinical evaluation of
anticancer drug, filling the gap between cell line-based and tumor
bearing mice-based drug studies, allowing low cost, high throughput in
vitro drug screening and the clinically relevant in vivo drug efficacy
studies.

