Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying and targeting chemoresistant subclones in triple
negative breast cancer


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressively metastatic
subtype that can only be treated by chemotherapy. Nearly 50% of patients
have residual disease after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) and have
extremely poor prognoses. Recent genome sequencing studies have revealed
extensive intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) in treatment-nave TNBC.
However, the functional contribution of ITH to chemoresistance in TNBC is
unknown. To understand how this occurs, we are generating patient derived
xenograft (PDX) models from treatment-nave TNBC in order to identify and
characterize tumor cell populations that are responsible for
chemoresistance with the ultimate goal of selectively targeting resistant
tumor clones.Through an IRB-approved clinical trial using standard
techniques, samples (primary tumor, skin metastasis, and blood for
germline reference) were obtained from a patient with newly diagnosed,
untreated metastatic TNBC. Subsequently, this patient was found to have
disease resistant to chemotherapy. Tumor cells were implanted into the
humanized mammary fat pad of NOD/SCID mice to establish PDX models of the
primary (PIM1-P) and metastatic (PIM1-M) tumors. RNA sequencing and
whole-exome sequencing (300X) were performed on the patient's primary and
metastatic tumors and the first and third passage PDX tumors. Mouse
sequences were computationally subtracted from the PDX data and which was
then processed according to Genome Analysis Toolkit best practices
workflow. Variants were called using MuTect and copy number alterations
were estimated by ExomeCN. This revealed high concordance between the
genomic profiles of the patient and PDX models. While there were 81
somatic non-silent mutations shared in the patient and PDX, only a few
fell in known cancer genes, including TP53 (V143fs), ELF4 (L593H), and
ARID3A (R351P). Modeling of clonal clusters with ABSOLUTE revealed ITH in
the patient tumor that is preserved in the PDX.Both the patient and PDX
model (PIM1-P) exhibited progressive disease when treated with
paclitaxel. Only partial responses were observed in mice treated with
doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide (AC), consistent with residual disease
after standard NACT for patients with TNBC. AC treatment resulted in an
60% reduction in tumor volume which was not enhanced by repeated cycles.
Tumors rapidly re-grew when treatment was halted or if treated tumor
cells were engrafted into the mammary fat pads of new recipient mice.
This suggests that a subpopulation of AC-resistant tumor cells is present
in PIM1-P tumors. To dissect this subpopulation, we established
conditions for simultaneous tracking of thousands of PIM1-P tumor clones
in vivo using a high-complexity library of up to 30 million unique DNA
barcodes. Mice engrafted with barcoded PIM-1P tumors are being treated
with AC to identify and characterize AC-resistant tumor cells present in
PIM1.

