Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of survival and migration of neutrophils by tumor
associated a2 isoform vacuolar ATPase


Tumors associated neutrophils (TAN) regulate the tumor environment by
directly promoting tumor progression and represent a potential
therapeutic target for cancer treatment. Identifying tumor associated
factors that promote neutrophil recruitment and survival will uncover new
targets for cancer therapy. In tumor cells, a secreted peptide from the
Nterminal domain of a2 isoform vacuolar ATPase (a2NTD) promotes the
protumorigenic properties of neutrophils which in turn, enhance tumor
progression. In order to investigate the regulatory role of a2NTD on
neutrophils survival, we stimulated freshly isolated neutrophils from
healthy volunteers with recombinant a2NTD. a2NTD treatment delayed
apoptosis in neutrophils and led to 2.1 fold increase in the percentage
survival (P Tumors associated neutrophils (TAN) regulate the tumor
environment by directly promoting tumor progression and represent a
potential therapeutic target for cancer treatment. Identifying tumor
associated factors that promote neutrophil recruitment and survival will
uncover new targets for cancer therapy. In tumor cells, a secreted
peptide from the Nterminal domain of a2 isoform vacuolar ATPase (a2NTD)
promotes the protumorigenic properties of neutrophils which in turn,
enhance tumor progression. In order to investigate the regulatory role of
a2NTD on neutrophils survival, we stimulated freshly isolated neutrophils
from healthy volunteers with recombinant a2NTD. a2NTD treatment delayed
apoptosis in neutrophils and led to 2.1 fold increase in the percentage
survival (P < 0.001). In addition, a2NTD treated neutrophils (a2Neu)
showed a significant decreased gene expression of caspase-3, -6, -7 and
-8, that was associated with decreased activity of these caspases.
Further analysis of the apoptosis related molecules revealed that a2NTD
treatment upregulates the gene expression of anti-apoptotic factors;
Bcl2-A1, Bcl-xL, c-FLIP, G-CSF and downregulates the gene expression of
pro-apoptotic factors; BAX and Apaf-1. Since NF-kB pathway is an
important regulator of apoptosis, here we showed by immunofluorescence
analysis that a2NTD induces NF-kB p65 activation in neutrophils by
nuclear translocation in a reactive oxygen species generation dependent
manner. Additionally, treatment of a2Neu with specific NF-kB inhibitor;
parthenolide showed a significant abrogation in neutrophil survival as
well as downregulation of the gene expression of Bcl2-A1, Bcl-xL, G-CSF
and upregulation of BAX. Suggesting that a2NTD enhances neutrophil
survival by activating NF-kB pathway in neutrophils. Interestingly, live
imaging revealed that a2NTD stimulates neutrophil polarization which was
confirmed by the increased assembly of F-actin. Also, flow cytometry
analysis revealed that a2NTD treatment stimulates surface expression and
activation of Mac-1 integrin. Moreover, important regulators of
neutrophil migration; FAK and Src Kinases were activated in a2Neu.
Previous studies showed that IL-8; potent neutrophil chemoattractant is
secreted by neutrophils. Here, we showed that a2NTD treatment led to
upregulation of the gene expression and the secreted protein levels of
IL-8 in a time dependent manner. This enhanced secretion of IL-8 was
NF-kB dependent. Furthermore, to evaluate the influence of a2NTD on
neutrophil migration we did trans-well migration assay. a2NTD stimulation
caused 2.8 fold increase in neutrophil migration which decreased to 1.5
fold upon neutralizing IL-8 (P Tumors associated neutrophils (TAN)
regulate the tumor environment by directly promoting tumor progression
and represent a potential therapeutic target for cancer treatment.
Identifying tumor associated factors that promote neutrophil recruitment
and survival will uncover new targets for cancer therapy. In tumor cells,
a secreted peptide from the Nterminal domain of a2 isoform vacuolar
ATPase (a2NTD) promotes the protumorigenic properties of neutrophils
which in turn, enhance tumor progression. In order to investigate the
regulatory role of a2NTD on neutrophils survival, we stimulated freshly
isolated neutrophils from healthy volunteers with recombinant a2NTD.
a2NTD treatment delayed apoptosis in neutrophils and led to 2.1 fold
increase in the percentage survival (P < 0.001). In addition, a2NTD
treated neutrophils (a2Neu) showed a significant decreased gene
expression of caspase-3, -6, -7 and -8, that was associated with
decreased activity of these caspases. Further analysis of the apoptosis
related molecules revealed that a2NTD treatment upregulates the gene
expression of anti-apoptotic factors; Bcl2-A1, Bcl-xL, c-FLIP, G-CSF and
downregulates the gene expression of pro-apoptotic factors; BAX and
Apaf-1. Since NF-kB pathway is an important regulator of apoptosis, here
we showed by immunofluorescence analysis that a2NTD induces NF-kB p65
activation in neutrophils by nuclear translocation in a reactive oxygen
species generation dependent manner. Additionally, treatment of a2Neu
with specific NF-kB inhibitor; parthenolide showed a significant
abrogation in neutrophil survival as well as downregulation of the gene
expression of Bcl2-A1, Bcl-xL, G-CSF and upregulation of BAX. Suggesting
that a2NTD enhances neutrophil survival by activating NF-kB pathway in
neutrophils. Interestingly, live imaging revealed that a2NTD stimulates
neutrophil polarization which was confirmed by the increased assembly of
F-actin. Also, flow cytometry analysis revealed that a2NTD treatment
stimulates surface expression and activation of Mac-1 integrin. Moreover,
important regulators of neutrophil migration; FAK and Src Kinases were
activated in a2Neu. Previous studies showed that IL-8; potent neutrophil
chemoattractant is secreted by neutrophils. Here, we showed that a2NTD
treatment led to upregulation of the gene expression and the secreted
protein levels of IL-8 in a time dependent manner. This enhanced
secretion of IL-8 was NF-kB dependent. Furthermore, to evaluate the
influence of a2NTD on neutrophil migration we did trans-well migration
assay. a2NTD stimulation caused 2.8 fold increase in neutrophil migration
which decreased to 1.5 fold upon neutralizing IL-8 (P < 0.05). Together,
these data demonstrate a novel role of the tumor associated a2-vacuolar
ATPase on regulating neutrophil survival and migration, by the action of
a2NTD.

