Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Migratory cancer side population cells induces stem cell altruism
in bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells to resist therapy, and enhance
tumorigenic potential of non-tumorigenic cells


Stem cell may exhibit altruistic behavior that may benefit cancer cells.
We recently demonstrated altruistic phenotype in human embryonic stem
cells (Das B et al. Stem Cells 2012). The phenotype exhibited reversible
induction of high HIF-2alpha and low p53 expression, associated with high
glutathione secretion. We speculated that cancer stem cell might induce a
similar altruistic phenotype in human bone marrow (BM) derived stem cells
(hematopoietic, mesenchymal and endothelial cells). The altruistic
reprogrammed BM cells may then facilitate tumor growth, as well as resist
the toxicity of oxidative-stress inducing anti-cancer agents. To
investigate this possibility, we have obtained conditioned media (CM)
from migratory side-population (SPm) and non-SP cells of a diverse panel
of tumors including epithelial tumors. The SPm cells exhibit very high
tumorigenic capacity (Das B et al, Stem Cell, 2008). The CM was added to
in vitro bone marrow (BM) derived CD133+ cells that contain
hematopoietic, endothelial, and mesenchymal stem cells. We found that SPm
derived CM (henceforth known as SPm-CM) treatment increased the
self-renewal capacity of CD271+/CD45- BM-MSCs. Importantly, the
reprogrammed CD271+ BM-MSCs (henceforth known as R-MSCs) phenotype
exhibited enhanced stemness reprogramming, a cytoprotective mechanism
associated with stem cell altruism (Das B et al. Stem Cells, 2012). In
contrast, the treatment with CM obtained from non-SP cells did not
exhibit R-MSCs. We found that VEGF/VEGR1 autocrine signaling may be
involved in R-MSCs mechanism. Importantly, the R-MSCs derived CM
reprogrammed non-CSCs to CSCs, and reduced the toxicity of chemotherapy
on non-SP cells. In vivo, R-MSCs derived CM, when injected to mice,
exhibited mobilization of CD271+ BM-MSCs to circulation. The circulatory
CD271+ BM-MSCs exhibited distinct phenotype of R-MSCs including high
expression of HIF-2alpha, and VEGFR1. Finally, in human cancer patients,
we identified R-MSC phenotype in the peripheral circulation. These
studies suggest that cancer stem cells may exploit stem cell altruism to
reprogram BM-MSCs for their own benefit. The reprogrammed BM-MSCs gene
expression may have the potential as a diagnostic marker for CSC-induced
stem cell altruism.

