Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting mir101/ EZH2/NFkb axis by FGFR1 inhibitor in mantle cell
lymphoma


Mantle cell lymphoma is classified as distinct non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
subtype characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation, which
results in overexpression of Cyclin D1. The clinical presentation often
includes extra-nodal involvement, of the bone marrow and gut. The
prognosis of patients with mantle cell lymphoma (median overall survival,
3-5 years) is poorest among B-cell lymphoma patients. However, MCL
pathogenesis has been delayed until the recent development of a tissue
culture system, using stromal cells and adipocytes, suitable for
propagating primary MCL cells. We hypothesized that tumor
microenvironment might activate survival-signaling pathways essential for
survival and maintenance of MCL, and targeting the identified signaling
pathways might be an ideal for designing of curative treatment
strategies. We developed an in-vitro culture system, mimicking bone
marrow microenvironment that can be exploited to understand the biology
of MCL resistance to death pathways. Primary MCL cells grown in
co-culture with bone marrow stromal cells grew faster than cells cultured
alone. We identified the soluble factors responsible for survival of MCL
cancer stem cells (MCL-IC) that can be targeted to prevent relapse. We
found the IL6 secretion triggered FGF-2 autocrine loop in MCL cells
contributing to cell survival and growth by regulating mir101/EZH2/NFkb
axis. The death signaling pathways inactive in MCL are restored upon
therapeutic intervention by specific pathways inhibitors. In conclusion,
we delineated three different signaling arm regulated in MCL cells to
promote cell survival and resistance. We defined the factors supporting
MCL and MCL-ICs survival essential for forming new targeting treatment
strategies. To overcome MCL resistance to death pathways we have outlined
the hMSCs-mediated support of MCL and identified drug targets to
sensitize MCL to apoptosis.

