Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG and AR-v7 involvement in taxane resistance of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancers


While taxane-class drugs remains the only chemotherapy agents shown to
improve survival of patients with metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC), most patients with mCRPC ultimately become
refractory due to the development of drug resistance. The molecular
mechanisms involved in this resistance remain an unmet need. We
previously showed that ERG, an oncogenic transcription factor, directly
interacts with soluble tubulin dimers impairing the ability of taxanes to
bind to microtubules in vitro and in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from
CRPC patients. We also demonstrated that expression of AR-v7 confers
taxane resistance in vitro and in animal models of CRPC, owing to the
lack of the microtubule-binding hinge domain which renders AR-v7
insensitive to microtubule stabilization by the taxanes. The purpose of
the present study is to evaluate the impact of ERG and AR-v7
co-expression in prostate cells and to characterize their cooperative
role in mediating taxane resistance. We generated multiple isogenic cell
lines over-expressing ERG alone or in combination with AR-v7, and
engineered VCaP cells (harboring endogenous ERG rearrangement and
expressing AR-v7) to express a TetOn-shRNA targeting ERG mRNA. We also
developed and optimized a Digital Droplet PCR (DD-PCR) assay to quantify
the expression of ERG derived from the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion and of
AR-v7. We tested the sensitivity and specificity of the assays using VCaP
cells spiked into healthy donor blood samples. We detected ERG and AR-v7
co-expression in single VCaP cells. We also found that ERG and AR-v7 form
a protein complex and we are testing their potential co-binding at common
target genes using ChIP-seq. To determine the clinical relevance of our
findings we queried available RNAseq data from benign prostate, locally
advanced hormone nave prostate cancer and a subset of the
Stand-up-to-Cancer cohort of CRPC patients. We found high levels of AR-v7
expression in CRPC samples and in none of the benign or PCa samples and a
co-overexpression of AR-v7 and ERG with 75% of ERG positive CRPC also
expressing AR-v7. We are currently using our assays to characterize ERG
and AR-v7 co-expression in CTCs of mCRPC patients samples collected at
baseline, on treatment and relapse- as part of a fully-enrolled clinical
trial (TAXYNERGY). We expect an enrichment overtime of CTCs that are
positive for both ERG and AR-v7. In conclusion, determining ERG and AR-v7
status in mCRPC patients and their involvement in taxane resistance
mechanism will aid refer ERG and AR-v7 positive mCRPC patients to an
effective therapy.

