Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum miR-30e and miR-223 are promising non-invasive biomarkers
for hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the world's third most common cancer
and causes 600,000 deaths annually. Early detection is the key for
improving the survival of HCC patients. Current diagnostic markers, such
as alpha fetoprotein or fibroscan have their own limitations.
Investigating serum microRNA as biomarkers for early diagnosis of cancer
has become an important tool in clinical research. In this study, we
tested the hypothesis that serum microRNAs (miRNAs) can be used as a
potential biomarker for HCC. We analyzed serum miRNA using reverse
transcriptase-quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) from serum samples. Our study
revealed that two miRNAs, miR-30e and miR-223, were expressed at
significantly lower levels (P Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the
world's third most common cancer and causes 600,000 deaths annually.
Early detection is the key for improving the survival of HCC patients.
Current diagnostic markers, such as alpha fetoprotein or fibroscan have
their own limitations. Investigating serum microRNA as biomarkers for
early diagnosis of cancer has become an important tool in clinical
research. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that serum microRNAs
(miRNAs) can be used as a potential biomarker for HCC. We analyzed serum
miRNA using reverse transcriptase-quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) from serum
samples. Our study revealed that two miRNAs, miR-30e and miR-223, were
expressed at significantly lower levels (P < 0.003) in the sera of HCC
patients as compared to healthy volunteers. Further, expression of these
miRNA was compared between sera from chronic liver disease (CLD) and HCC
patients. miR-30e and miR-223 expression was significantly lower in HCC
sera as compared to sera from CLD patients. Both miRNA expression levels
were lower in HCC liver biopsy specimens as compared to normal liver RNA.
Taken together, our results indicated that serum miR-30e and miR-223 are
useful biomarkers of HCC irrespective of etiology.

