Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the Lin28A/B axis reverts stem cell-like phenotype and
tumor-initiating properties in prostate cancer


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent the most tumorigenic, metastatic and
therapy resistant cell subpopulation within human tumors. Current
therapies target bulk tumor cells while spare the most aggressive CSC
subpopulation. Understanding the mechanisms responsible for the
acquisition and maintenance of the CSC phenotype will help to identify
new strategies to target CSCs. In this study, we describe a link between
deregulated expression of the ETS transcription factor ESE3/EHF and
upregulation of Lin28A and Lin28B in prostate CSC-enriched
subpopulations. Furthermore, using various cell line models and in
vitro/in vivo experimental systems we demonstrate the efficacy of
targeting the Lin28A/B axis for selective elimination of cancer cells
with tumor-initiating and stem-like properties. Mechanistically, we found
that ESE3/EHF represses transcription of Lin28A and Lin28B in normal
prostate epithelial cells. Downregulation of ESE3/EHF in prostate tumors
led to upregulation of Lin28A and Lin28B and consequent reduction of
microRNAs (miRNAs) of the let-7 family, which exert tumor suppressor
functions. These events promoted cell transformation and expansion of the
prostate CSC subpopulation. Conversely, targeting Lin28A/Lin28B with
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) in transformed prostate epithelial cells
and prostate cancer cell lines restored the levels of let-7 miRNAs,
decreased expression of several CSC marker genes, and restrained
tumor-sphere formation and self-renewal properties in vitro and
tumor-initiating capability in vivo. Notably, systemic treatment with a
siRNA targeting Lin28B reduced growth of prostate tumor xenografts in
mice. This was associated with a significant contraction of the CSC
subpopulation in tumor xenografts, as demonstrated by the reduced content
of ex vivo tumor-sphere forming cells, reduced expression of CSC marker
genes, and upregulation of let-7 miRNAs. Furthermore, tumor cells derived
from siLin28B-treated xenografts exhibited reduced in vivo
tumor-initiating and self-renewal capability, in line with a persistent
loss of CSC properties. Collectively, these data establish the
Lin28/let-7 axis as a critical element in malignant transformation and
acquisition of tumor-initiating and stem-like properties and identify a
valid therapeutic strategy to antagonize CSCs in human prostate cancer.

