Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caloric restriction augments the chemotherapeutic response in a
murine triple negative breast cancer model


Purpose:Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) are a highly aggressive
subtype of breast cancer, linked with a poor prognosis. TNBC tumors have
a higher propensity for metastasis and unfortunately have fewer treatment
options due to their lack of estrogen, progesterone or Her-2/neu
receptors. We sought to determine if caloric restriction (CR) could
augment the response of chemotherapy including docetaxel and cisplatin in
a TNBC model and improve survival.Methods:An orthotopic mouse model using
a highly metastatic, luciferase-tagged TNBC cell line (4T1), was used to
generate palpable tumors. Mice were then treated with CR, cisplatin
alone, docetaxel alone or a combination of CR and chemotherapy. Three
times a week, primary tumors were measured with calipers and in vivo
imaging was performed to evaluate the metastatic burden of disease.
Molecular evaluation of the tumors was performed, generating a
mechanistic hypothesis for increased sensitivity to
chemotherapy.Results:Combining either docetaxel or cisplatin with CR,
significantly decreased the rate of primary tumor growth (pPurpose:Triple
negative breast cancers (TNBC) are a highly aggressive subtype of breast
cancer, linked with a poor prognosis. TNBC tumors have a higher
propensity for metastasis and unfortunately have fewer treatment options
due to their lack of estrogen, progesterone or Her-2/neu receptors. We
sought to determine if caloric restriction (CR) could augment the
response of chemotherapy including docetaxel and cisplatin in a TNBC
model and improve survival.Methods:An orthotopic mouse model using a
highly metastatic, luciferase-tagged TNBC cell line (4T1), was used to
generate palpable tumors. Mice were then treated with CR, cisplatin
alone, docetaxel alone or a combination of CR and chemotherapy. Three
times a week, primary tumors were measured with calipers and in vivo
imaging was performed to evaluate the metastatic burden of disease.
Molecular evaluation of the tumors was performed, generating a
mechanistic hypothesis for increased sensitivity to
chemotherapy.Results:Combining either docetaxel or cisplatin with CR,
significantly decreased the rate of primary tumor growth (p<0.001).
Average time to metastases (19 days in ad lib group) was increased by an
average of 10.5 +/- 3 days with the addition of either docetaxel or
cisplatin, and increased by an additional 6 days in the CR+cisplatin (35
days until metastases, pPurpose:Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) are
a highly aggressive subtype of breast cancer, linked with a poor
prognosis. TNBC tumors have a higher propensity for metastasis and
unfortunately have fewer treatment options due to their lack of estrogen,
progesterone or Her-2/neu receptors. We sought to determine if caloric
restriction (CR) could augment the response of chemotherapy including
docetaxel and cisplatin in a TNBC model and improve survival.Methods:An
orthotopic mouse model using a highly metastatic, luciferase-tagged TNBC
cell line (4T1), was used to generate palpable tumors. Mice were then
treated with CR, cisplatin alone, docetaxel alone or a combination of CR
and chemotherapy. Three times a week, primary tumors were measured with
calipers and in vivo imaging was performed to evaluate the metastatic
burden of disease. Molecular evaluation of the tumors was performed,
generating a mechanistic hypothesis for increased sensitivity to
chemotherapy.Results:Combining either docetaxel or cisplatin with CR,
significantly decreased the rate of primary tumor growth (p<0.001).
Average time to metastases (19 days in ad lib group) was increased by an
average of 10.5 +/- 3 days with the addition of either docetaxel or
cisplatin, and increased by an additional 6 days in the CR+cisplatin (35
days until metastases, p<0.01). The addition of CR to chemotherapy
decreased the overall number and volume of lung metastases, and increased
overall survival as compared with those groups receiving chemotherapy
alone. Molecularly, CR was noted to augment the effect of chemotherapy by
decreasing inflammation that results from IL-1 mediated acute RT toxicity
and molecular effectors in the insulin (insulin, IGF-1, IGF-BP3 and
IGF-1R) and adipokine signaling pathways (decreased leptin and increased
adiponectin).Conclusions:CR augments the effect of systemic chemotherapy
in an aggressive TNBC mouse model, in part by decreasing the inflammatory
response. The novel use of CR in combination with systemic chemotherapy
has the potential to enhance clinical outcomes for patients with triple
negative breast cancer and should be tested in the clinical setting.

