Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteogenomic analysis of alternative splicing: the search for
novel biomarkers for colorectal cancer


IntroductionEarly detection of colorectal cancer (CRC) and its precursor
lesions (adenomas) is crucial to reduce mortality rates. The fecal
immunochemical test (FIT) is a non-invasive CRC screening test detecting
blood-derived protein hemoglobin. However, FIT sensitivity is suboptimal
especially in detection of CRC precursor lesions. As adenoma-to-carcinoma
progression is accompanied by alternative splicing, tumor-specific
proteins derived from alternatively spliced RNA transcripts might serve
as candidate biomarkers for CRC detection.Materials and methodsRNA and
proteins were isolated from CRC cell line SW480 before and after
siRNA-mediated down-modulation of the splicing machinery: SF3B1, U2AF1,
and SRSF1. To identify splice variants, mRNA was sequenced (Illumina
HiSeq) and analyzed. RNA-seq analysis included quality checks (FASTQ,
RSeQC), reads mapping (STAR), differential gene expression (DESeq2) and
differential expression of splicing isoforms between conditions (MATS).
Results from the in silico analysis were validated by qRT-PCR. Proteins
were analyzed by in-depth tandem mass spectrometry (QExactive). A
proteogenomic data analysis pipeline was established to enrich the
sequence database, against which the mass spectra are searched, with the
predicted protein splice variants and identify protein isoforms. To
further extend the splice-variant database, PacBio sequencing of
full-length transcripts is being performed for the SW480 siSF3B1- and
control-samples.ResultsDifferential expression analysis on RNA and
protein level proved that the knock-down experiments were performed
successfully. The RNA-seq analysis revealed hundreds of mRNA splice
variants, including positive controls described in literature. For
example, down-modulation of SF3B1 resulted in quantitative mRNA changes
of spliced isoforms of ADD3 both in RNA-seq and RT-PCR data. The
proteomics experiment yielded over 6000 proteins per sample, among which
a number of protein isoforms resulting from alternative
splicing.Conclusions and discussionWe established a proteogenomic
pipeline for the analysis of alternative splicing and provided
experimental proof of concept.We expect, however, that the true
complexity of RNA variant information remains highly underestimated. We
therefore are performing PacBio long-read RNA-seq to validate our
approach and to identify additional (novel) splicing events. In future
studies we will apply the mRNA-seq based proteogenomic pipeline for
detection of protein alterations to a series of adenomas at low- and
high-risk of progression, and CRCs to validate the isoforms in a
clinically relevant setting. Novel findings will be evaluated for their
performance as screening markers for CRC.This work was financially
supported by KWF project nr: VU 2013-6025.

