Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The influence of adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cell
environment and WNT antagonism on breast tumour cells


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in Australian women,
with an average of 1 in 8 women being affected. Emerging evidence
suggests that a close relationship exists between a tumor and the
adjacent non-tumor tissue, which considerably affects the overall
progression of the disease. Amongst the non-tumor cells, mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs), known to be essential for tissue and organ health, are
potentially important in this regard. In our study, we focussed on the
interaction between adipose tissue-derived MSCs (ADSCs) and breast tumor
cells. Considering the clinical relevance of these interactions, it is
imperative to understand the exact mechanisms underlying such cellular
crosstalk. Here, we investigated the influence of ADSCs on breast tumor
cell lines MDA MB 231 and MCF7 by using both conditioned media and
extracellular matrix derived from ADSCs. We observed that the
ADSC-conditioned media (ADSC-CM), harvested at specific time-points,
inhibited the proliferation of tumor cells as well as their associated
cancer stem cells. Further, by using molecular fractionation techniques
on ADSC-CM, we identified that the Breast cancer is the most commonly
diagnosed cancer in Australian women, with an average of 1 in 8 women
being affected. Emerging evidence suggests that a close relationship
exists between a tumor and the adjacent non-tumor tissue, which
considerably affects the overall progression of the disease. Amongst the
non-tumor cells, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), known to be essential for
tissue and organ health, are potentially important in this regard. In our
study, we focussed on the interaction between adipose tissue-derived MSCs
(ADSCs) and breast tumor cells. Considering the clinical relevance of
these interactions, it is imperative to understand the exact mechanisms
underlying such cellular crosstalk. Here, we investigated the influence
of ADSCs on breast tumor cell lines MDA MB 231 and MCF7 by using both
conditioned media and extracellular matrix derived from ADSCs. We
observed that the ADSC-conditioned media (ADSC-CM), harvested at specific
time-points, inhibited the proliferation of tumor cells as well as their
associated cancer stem cells. Further, by using molecular fractionation
techniques on ADSC-CM, we identified that the <30KDa fraction of ADSC-CM
retained the potential for inhibiting proliferation. We also observed
decreased migration of tumor cells when treated with ADSC-CM. Further, we
observed an inhibition in proliferation rates of tumor cells when treated
with ADSC-deposited extracellular matrix (ADSC-ECM). Since Wnt signaling
is an important pathway driving both breast tumor growth and influencing
ADSC behaviour, we examined the effect of the Wnt antagonist- secreted
frizzled-related protein 4 (sFRP4) and its associated peptides on tumor
cells. When tumor cells were treated with sFRP4 or its peptides along
with ADSC-CM/ADSC-ECM, we observed an additive inhibitory effect on tumor
cell proliferation. We further observed an increase in caspase-dependent
apoptosis in tumor cells following treatment with ADSC-CM and in
combination with the Wnt antagonists. The effect contributed by the ADSC
environment and Wnt antagonists differed in mechanism, based on the tumor
cell characteristics. We can conclude that the interaction of ADSCs with
tumor cells had a significant impact on tumor cell growth in terms of
decreasing proliferation and migration, while increasing the rate of
apoptosis, which was further elevated in the presence of Wnt antagonists.
This study sheds light on novel therapeutic approaches that could be
considered while devising novel anti-cancer strategies.

