Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential glycosylation of extracellular matrix specifically
modulates lung cancer initiating cells subsets


In lung cancer CD133+ cells have properties of cancer initiating cells
(CICs) as stemness features, high tumorigenic potential and
chemoresistance. Within the CD133+ CICs, we have recently identified a
specific subset, defined as CD133+CXCR4+EpCAM-, endowed with high
dissemination and metastatic potential (metastasis initiating cells,
MICs). In normal tissues stem cells reside in specialized niches composed
of both stromal cells and extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) while
factors responsible for CICs maintenance and modulation are relatively
unknown. Collagen, the most abundant protein of ECM, plays a pivotal role
in mediating regulation of adhesion, survival and proliferation of tumor
cells. The relevance of collagen glycosylation, a fundamental
post-translational modification controlling several biological processes,
remains however largely unexplored.To investigate the effects of
interactions between tumor cells and differentially glycosylated ECM
epitopes, we cultured primary (LT73) and established lung cancer cell
lines (A549, H460) on type I collagen films neo-glycosylated with
glucose, galactose or sialic acid residues. Our results showed a general
increase of CICs subsets, evaluated by flow cytometry, in tumor cells
cultured on glycosylated collagen compared to pristine collagen or tissue
culture plates with a concomitant increased expression of
stemness-related genes. Particularly, we observed that collagen
functionalized with glucose had the highest efficiency in enriching for
MICs (3-fold change). Analysis of proliferation and viability of tumor
cells cultured on collagen films showed that glucose residues were
particularly proficient in causing G1 phase growth arrest and cell death
compared to pristine collagen resulting in an overall decrease in the
bulk population and CICs enrichment. In PKH label-retention assays,
glucose-glycosylated collagen also selected and increased the fraction of
PHK-labeled quiescent tumor cells, enriched for MICs component,
confirming the preferential selection/survival of MICs subset. Using LT73
cell line depleted for CD133+ cells, we then proved that CICs increase
was also due to a de novo generation of CD133+ cells and in particular of
CD133+CXCR4+EpCAM- metastatic subset through non-CICs to CICs conversion.
The immunophenotypic increase of CD133+ cells was functionally validated
in vivo by a limiting dilution tumorigenic assay that estimated a 4.6
higher frequency of CICs in LT73 cells cultured on glucose-glycosylated
collagen compared to control group. Moreover tumors derived from cells
exposed to glucose residues retained a higher contents of MICs associated
with an increased dissemination potential compared to controls.Our
results suggest that differential collagen glycosylation could play an
essential role in the creation of a niche favorable for the generation
and selection/survival of lung metastasis initiating cells.

