Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high dose priming strategy with the novel RNAi therapeutic GS-10
elevates RISC Ago2, Ago4 and GW182 protein levels to enhance RNAi
efficacy in a metastatic solid tumor model


A high initial priming dose of the novel RNAi therapeutic GS-10 was
investigated as a strategy to elevate important RISC complex proteins
that have the potential to increase efficacy of subsequent RNAi treatment
regimens in solid tumor cancers. GS-10 is a tumor-targeted 20 nm
crystalline capsule bearing single-stranded RNAi oligos against Protein
Kinase CK2 (CK2), and a ligand-coated shell derived from Tenascin-C
(tenfibgen). Tenascin-C is upregulated in multiple solid tumors, and is a
promising targeting ligand for tumors throughout their lifecycle. The
ultrasmall capsule size enables efficient raft-mediated delivery of
oligos to the perinuclear space of the target cell, and the ability to
reach metastases without reliance on EPR. To date, strategies for
RNAi-treatment of solid tumor cancers have been sub-optimal due to, at
least in part, the varied levels of RNA degradation machinery across
patients, tumors and tissues. For example, we have found wide variation
in Ago2 protein levels, a key RISC component for RNA cleavage, in human
head and neck cancer (HNC) tissues. Here we investigate a strategy for
overcoming this limitation for an RNAi therapeutic in solid tumors. We
have previously established that SQ doses of GS-10 at 10-100 ug/kg/day
have antitumor efficacy, coincident with CK2 protein knockdown, in
several mouse models. In an SCC-47 HNC xenograft model, tumor growth
inhibition of 86% was observed after GS-10 treatment compared to
controls, despite low baseline Ago2 levels. Interestingly, these tumors
express relatively high Ago4 levels. FISH analysis of GS-10-treated
SCC-47 tumors revealed numerous punctate structures containing mRNA CK2
transcript. Similarly, structures containing Ago4 and GW182 were observed
by confocal microscopy, altogether suggesting these RISC proteins mediate
transcript sequestration by forming GW-bodies, resulting in tumor
inhibition. Now, we are evaluating a strategy using high-dose IV bolus
injection as priming to elevate expression of multiple RISC proteins,
including Ago2, Ago4 and GW182, in the SCC-47 model. A priming dose of
GS-10 at 10 mg/kg showed a 4-fold increase in Ago2 levels in primary
tumors vs. treatment controls at 72 hours post-injection. Similarly, a
2-fold increase in Ago4 and GW182 levels was also observed. To establish
that GS-10 was reaching tumors in vivo to induce these changes,
distribution of an isotopic tenfibgen surrogate of GS-10 to primary tumor
and lymph node metastases was confirmed following IV bolus
administration. Additional RISC protein and tumor efficacy data from a
later timepoint is being analyzed and will be reported. In summary, these
data suggest that high-dose IV priming with GS-10 can elevate multiple
RISC proteins, setting tumors up for more effective response to
subsequent low-dose treatment using this novel therapeutic candidate.

