Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the gene expression of frozen tissue-derived prognostic
signatures in FFPE colorectal cancer samples


OBJECTIVE: Defining molecular features that can predict the recurrence of
colorectal cancer (CRC) for stage II and stage III patients remains a
challenging problem in cancer research. Most available clinical samples
are Formalin Fixed and Paraffin Embedded (FFPE). Nanostring nCounter and
Affymetrix GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 (HTA) are the two
platforms marketed for high throughput measurement of mRNA expression
from FFPE tissue samples. In this study, to identify an optimal platform
for the gene expression profiling of FFPE CRC samples, we compared the
expression of genes that make up published frozen tissue-derived
prognostic signatures measured by these two platforms. METHODS: FFPE
primary tumor tissue blocks were identified from 500 patients with stage
II or III CRC and complete pathological information. We removed samples
with neoadjuvant therapy, inadequate clinical follow-up or tumor
specimens, samples with failure of RNA extraction and highly degraded
samples. We identified 194 eligible FFPE-derived CRC primary tumors with
a 7.4-year mean follow up. To measure the gene expression of the 194
samples, we designed a custom nCounter codeset using 536 gene elements
from multiple published frozen tissue-derived prognostic signatures for
CRC. We also performed gene expression profiling using the HTA platform
on a subset of 84 of the 194 samples. For the nCounter data, samples with
low total average count or with more than 20% genes having lower average
count than the synthetic negative control genes were omitted to ensure
adequate data quality. RESULTS: In total, for CRC samples from 42
patients, the gene expression data of 516 common genes measured by both
platforms were of sufficient quality for comparative analysis. Based on
HTA platform-derived data, we found that (1) 36 and 97 of the 516 common
genes are significantly associated with overall survival (OS) and
disease-free survival (DFS) at the single gene level (FDR OBJECTIVE:
Defining molecular features that can predict the recurrence of colorectal
cancer (CRC) for stage II and stage III patients remains a challenging
problem in cancer research. Most available clinical samples are Formalin
Fixed and Paraffin Embedded (FFPE). Nanostring nCounter and Affymetrix
GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 (HTA) are the two platforms
marketed for high throughput measurement of mRNA expression from FFPE
tissue samples. In this study, to identify an optimal platform for the
gene expression profiling of FFPE CRC samples, we compared the expression
of genes that make up published frozen tissue-derived prognostic
signatures measured by these two platforms. METHODS: FFPE primary tumor
tissue blocks were identified from 500 patients with stage II or III CRC
and complete pathological information. We removed samples with
neoadjuvant therapy, inadequate clinical follow-up or tumor specimens,
samples with failure of RNA extraction and highly degraded samples. We
identified 194 eligible FFPE-derived CRC primary tumors with a 7.4-year
mean follow up. To measure the gene expression of the 194 samples, we
designed a custom nCounter codeset using 536 gene elements from multiple
published frozen tissue-derived prognostic signatures for CRC. We also
performed gene expression profiling using the HTA platform on a subset of
84 of the 194 samples. For the nCounter data, samples with low total
average count or with more than 20% genes having lower average count than
the synthetic negative control genes were omitted to ensure adequate data
quality. RESULTS: In total, for CRC samples from 42 patients, the gene
expression data of 516 common genes measured by both platforms were of
sufficient quality for comparative analysis. Based on HTA
platform-derived data, we found that (1) 36 and 97 of the 516 common
genes are significantly associated with overall survival (OS) and
disease-free survival (DFS) at the single gene level (FDR < 0.05),
respectively; and (2) two of the nine reported multi-gene signatures, for
which sufficient information from the original papers enabled such
evaluation, can divide patients into high-risk and low-risk groups with
significantly different DFS (p 0.05). Based on nCounter platform-derived
data, no individual gene was found to be significantly associated with
survival at the single gene level (FDR OBJECTIVE: Defining molecular
features that can predict the recurrence of colorectal cancer (CRC) for
stage II and stage III patients remains a challenging problem in cancer
research. Most available clinical samples are Formalin Fixed and Paraffin
Embedded (FFPE). Nanostring nCounter and Affymetrix GeneChip Human
Transcriptome Array 2.0 (HTA) are the two platforms marketed for high
throughput measurement of mRNA expression from FFPE tissue samples. In
this study, to identify an optimal platform for the gene expression
profiling of FFPE CRC samples, we compared the expression of genes that
make up published frozen tissue-derived prognostic signatures measured by
these two platforms. METHODS: FFPE primary tumor tissue blocks were
identified from 500 patients with stage II or III CRC and complete
pathological information. We removed samples with neoadjuvant therapy,
inadequate clinical follow-up or tumor specimens, samples with failure of
RNA extraction and highly degraded samples. We identified 194 eligible
FFPE-derived CRC primary tumors with a 7.4-year mean follow up. To
measure the gene expression of the 194 samples, we designed a custom
nCounter codeset using 536 gene elements from multiple published frozen
tissue-derived prognostic signatures for CRC. We also performed gene
expression profiling using the HTA platform on a subset of 84 of the 194
samples. For the nCounter data, samples with low total average count or
with more than 20% genes having lower average count than the synthetic
negative control genes were omitted to ensure adequate data quality.
RESULTS: In total, for CRC samples from 42 patients, the gene expression
data of 516 common genes measured by both platforms were of sufficient
quality for comparative analysis. Based on HTA platform-derived data, we
found that (1) 36 and 97 of the 516 common genes are significantly
associated with overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) at
the single gene level (FDR < 0.05), respectively; and (2) two of the nine
reported multi-gene signatures, for which sufficient information from the
original papers enabled such evaluation, can divide patients into
high-risk and low-risk groups with significantly different DFS (p 0.05).
Based on nCounter platform-derived data, no individual gene was found to
be significantly associated with survival at the single gene level (FDR <
0.05), but one of the nine published multi-gene signatures can divide
patients into two groups with significantly different OS (p 0.05). Our
results also showed moderate correlations between paired FFPE samples
measured by nCounter and HTA platforms (the median correlation
coefficient is 0.52). CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that while both
platforms may identify gene or gene set expression differences associated
with survival outcomes, the HTA appears to provide a more robust gene
expression analysis dataset when using genes selected from published gene
signatures.

