Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Asbestos exposure-related DNA methylation markers: a validation
study in non-small cell lung tumors


Introduction. We have earlier explored the epigenome-wide DNA methylation
in lung tumors. The study subjects, mostly smokers, consisted of lung
cancer patients highly exposed to asbestos and those without exposure. We
found methylation markers that associated either with sample type or
exposure (asbestos or tobacco smoke) (Kettunen et al submitted). In this
validation study, we focused on estimating the prevalence of the distinct
methylation markers in a larger material of lung tumor patients with
detailed exposure data available.Study design, subjects, and methods. We
investigated the DNA methylation of selected markers in a validation set
of 69 non-small cell lung cancer cases, tumor (T) and normal lung (N)
from each. The patients, given a written informed consent, had been
interviewed for detailed data on work and smoking history (as tobacco
smoking pack-years, PY), and the pulmonary asbestos fiber counts
quantified. Smoking-related methylation was studied in lung cancer groups
of heavy-smokers (PYs higher than 36) vs lighter-smokers (PYs 36 or less)
whereas methylation in asbestos-exposed lung tumor patients were compared
with that in non-exposed lung tumor patients. DNA methylation was studied
in tumor (T) and matched peripheral normal (N) lung tissue using
pyrosequencing.Results. Numerous CpG positions in T vs N and eleven sites
in asbestos-exposed tumors had indicated significant methylation
variation (MVPs). Twenty-six differentially methylated positions (DMPs)
having mean delta beta of at least 10% had been revealed in T vs N.
Tobacco smoking- and asbestos exposure-related methylation sites were
distinct, involving different CpG sites. We chose to validate five MVPs
and four DMPs, both hypo- and hypermethylated CpG sites that were
investigated using two instrumentation PSQ96MA and Pyromark Q24. The
validation study set indicated good performance in pyrosequencing and we
could demonstrate methylation of selected sites in relation to malignancy
and exposure in this larger material.Conclusions. The central
observations of the methylation showing distinct changes in relation to
sample types and patients exposure status could be validated in a larger
material. Significant methylation variation was observed in lung tumors.

