Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stabilityof injectable phospholipid nanoparticles loaded with
paclitaxel: influence oflipid composition, drug concentration, storage
temperature, lyophilization, andadditives


Paclitaxel is one of the most effective chemotherapeutic drugs for solid
tumors including breast, lung and ovarian cancers. It has been formulated
as a nanoparticle formulation, Abraxane, to improve its solublity
(0.35-0.7 g/mL) and to avoid the use of harmful solvents like cremophor
EL. We previously reported the next-generation Abraxane - Cynviloq - a
polymeric micelle paclitaxel formulation which uses a chemical polymer
instead of biological polymer to stabilize the nanoparticle [1]. Here we
investigate and report the use of phospholipids instead of a chemical
polymer for the creation of the next-generation Abraxane. The effect of
lipid composition on drug loading and physical stability of
paclitaxel-loaded lipid-coated nanoparticle formulation was evaluated
before and after lyophilization. The nanoparticles were prepared by
microfluidization-solvent evaporation method. The formulation parameters
included type of phospholipids, phospholipid fatty acid chain length,
ratio of phospholipid and lysophospholipid combination, and
drug-phospholipid ratio. The process parameters such as microfluidization
pressure and number of microfluidization cycles were studied and their
impact on drug loading, particle size and physical stability were
evaluated. The short-term stability evaluation of nanoparticles prepared
with different phospholipid ratios demonstrated that 4:1 as the optimum
phospholipid-lysophospholipid ratio to achieve a loading of more than 60%
paclitaxel with particle size of approximately 200nm. The nanoparticle
size increased with an increase of carbon chain length of the
phospholipid fatty acid, but no significant trends were observed for drug
loading with changes in microfluidization pressure or number of cycles.
The stability of the formulation was evaluated at different temperatures
before and after lyophilization. The optimization of phospholipid
composition, drug-lipid ratio, process parameters and additives for
stability on lyophilization led to a physically stable paclitaxel-loaded
phopholipid-coated nanoparticulate formulation that maintains size,
charge and particulate integrity during storage. Phospholipid bound
paclitaxel nanoparticle was successfully manufactured in lab scale with
the desired properties. Scaling up and additional work-up for clinical
evaluation is being evaluated.Reference:1. Motamed K, Goodman Y, Hwang L,
Hsiao C, Trieu V. (2014). IG-001 - A non-biologic nanoparticle paclitaxel
for the treatment of solid tumors. J Nanomater Mol Nanotechnol 3:1.
doi:10.4172/2324-8777.1000136.

