Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High mobility group A1 chromatin remodeling protein expands the
intestinal stem cell compartment and Paneth cell niche through
Wnt/-catenin signaling and Sox9


The High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) gene is overexpressed in most poorly
differentiated cancers and high levels portend adverse clinical outcomes,
although the molecular mechanisms through which it functions are poorly
understood. HMGA1 encodes the HMGA1a and HMGA1b chromatin remodeling
proteins, which modulate gene expression by bending chromatin and
orchestrating the assembly of transcription factor complexes to DNA.
HMGA1 is highly expressed during embryogenesis, but silenced in adult,
differentiated tissues. Postnatally, HMGA1 expression is maintained in
adult stem cells, such as intestinal stem cells (ISCs); however, its role
in this setting has been unknown. Here, we report that Hmga1
overexpression in ISCs of transgenic mice drives expansion in the ISC
compartment leading to hyperproliferation, aberrant crypt formation, and
polyposis. Surprisingly, Hmga1 transgenic mice also exhibit marked
expansion in terminally differentiated Paneth cells, which comprise an
epithelial cell niche for ISCs. To dissect the mechanisms mediating these
phenotypes, we generated three-dimensional (3D) intestinal organoids with
varied expression of Hmga1. Strikingly, silencing Hmga1 in wildtype crypt
cells disrupts their ability to organize into functional 3D organoids
with bud formation, while crypt cells expressing ectopic Hmga1 exhibit
enhanced organoid formation with increased ISC number, proliferation, and
bud development. Because Wnt/-catenin signaling is central to ISC
function, we determined whether Hmga1 modulates this pathway. -catenin
protein is increased in the crypts of the Hmga1 transgenic mice and
organoids. Hmga1 amplifies Wnt/-catenin signaling by inducing both genes
that encode Wnt cell surface receptors and target genes downstream of
Wnt/-catenin. Hmga1 also directly up-regulates Sox9, which is required
for terminal differentiation to Paneth cells. This is the first example
of Hmga1 fostering terminal differentiation to establish a stem cell
niche. In human intestinal epithelium, HMGA1 and SOX9 are highly
correlated (P = 0.008), and both become up-regulated in carcinogenesis.
These results reveal a novel role for Hmga1 in intestinal homeostasis by
maintaining both the stem cell pool and epithelial niche compartment and
suggest that deregulated Hmga1 perturbs this equilibrium during
intestinal carcinogenesis.

