Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ibrutinib enhances antitumor activity in solid tumors when
combined with checkpoint inhibitors


Introduction: Anti-CTLA-4 antibodies enhance antitumor immunity by
activating antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes and depleting
suppressive regulatory T cells (Treg) from the tumor microenvironment.
Anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 blocks negative regulators of T-cell activation
and response, facilitating immune-mediated antitumor activity. These
therapeutic antitumor approaches via immune checkpoint blockade may be
enhanced by ibrutinib (ibr), a first-in-class oral inhibitor of Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK) and interleukin-2-inducible T-cell kinase (ITK). A
previous study suggested ibr may alter the Th1/Th2 T-cell balance by
inactivating ITK and potentially enhancing antitumor immune responses in
solid tumor models, including those that do not express BTK (Sagiv-Barfi.
PNAS. 2015). Here we report the combined effects of ibr and
CTLA-4/PD-1/PD-L1 blockade in a panel of established syngeneic solid
tumor models.Methods: Immunocompetent mice with matched genetic
background were inoculated subcutaneously in the right front flank with
syngeneic tumor cells. Treatment began when mean tumor size reached
approximately 70-100 mm3. Tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and tumor growth
delay (TGD) were the study endpoints. The mean and the standard error of
the mean for each group were calculated at each time point. Statistical
analysis of independent sample t-tests and one-way ANOVA were used for
comparisons between and among groups. Potential synergistic effects
between treatments were analyzed by two-way ANOVA. Tumor and blood
samples were collected for immunologic analysis at the tumor site or in
peripheral compartments by flow cytometry.Results: Treatment with ibr
alone resulted in 15%-50% TGI across various syngeneic subcutaneous mice
models, including MBT-2 (bladder cancer), MC38 (colorectal cancer), and
Pan02 (pancreatic tumor), where BTK expression is not prevalent in the
tumor lines and tumor cells are not sensitive to ibrutinib. Ibr in
combination with checkpoint inhibitors demonstrated benefits in both TGI
and TGD in the MC38 model. When ibr was combined with anti-CTLA-4
monoclonal antibody, complete regression of established MC38 tumors was
observed.Conclusion: The efficacy observed with ibr treatment alone in
solid tumor models lacking BTK expression suggests ibr can lead to
immunomodulation by altering the tumor microenvironment. Additionally,
synergistic growth suppression was observed when ibr was combined with
checkpoint inhibitors. To further understand the mechanism of action
associated with combination ibr immunotherapy in syngeneic models,
immunophenotypical analyses of tumor tissues are under investigation.

