Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of low-dose environmental chemicals on the mammary
transcriptome at critical windows of development in a rodent model


Exposure to environmental chemicals, including those commonly found in
personal care products has been linked to mammary cancer at high doses
using animal models. Their effects at low doses comparable to human
exposure, especially during critical windows of development remain poorly
understood. We investigated the effects of three prevalent environmental
chemicals - diethyl phthalate (DEP), methyl paraben (MPB), triclosan
(TCS) - and their mixture (MIX) on the transcriptome of normally
developing mammary at low doses mimicking human exposure. Using a female
Sprague-Dawley rat model, we targeted four early developmental exposure
windows - prenatal, neonatal, prepubertal and pubertal, as well as
continuous exposure from birth to adulthood (both parous and
nulliparous). Control rats were exposed to vehicle only. All exposures
were by oral gavage. Whole-transcriptomes of mammary glands were profiled
by Affymetrix rat gene arrays. Differentially expressed genes were
identified by linear models. Despite dynamic transcriptome changes in the
normal developing mammary, exposure to environmental chemicals induced
detectable gene expression changes in a window-specific fashion. We
discovered that puberty represented a window of heightened sensitivity to
MPB and DEP exposure with 341 and 175 altered genes relative to controls,
respectively (false discovery rate (FDR) Exposure to environmental
chemicals, including those commonly found in personal care products has
been linked to mammary cancer at high doses using animal models. Their
effects at low doses comparable to human exposure, especially during
critical windows of development remain poorly understood. We investigated
the effects of three prevalent environmental chemicals - diethyl
phthalate (DEP), methyl paraben (MPB), triclosan (TCS) - and their
mixture (MIX) on the transcriptome of normally developing mammary at low
doses mimicking human exposure. Using a female Sprague-Dawley rat model,
we targeted four early developmental exposure windows - prenatal,
neonatal, prepubertal and pubertal, as well as continuous exposure from
birth to adulthood (both parous and nulliparous). Control rats were
exposed to vehicle only. All exposures were by oral gavage.
Whole-transcriptomes of mammary glands were profiled by Affymetrix rat
gene arrays. Differentially expressed genes were identified by linear
models. Despite dynamic transcriptome changes in the normal developing
mammary, exposure to environmental chemicals induced detectable gene
expression changes in a window-specific fashion. We discovered that
puberty represented a window of heightened sensitivity to MPB and DEP
exposure with 341 and 175 altered genes relative to controls,
respectively (false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.25, fold change (FC) 1.5).
Chronic DEP exposure from birth to adulthood resulted in changes in 1151
and 427 genes in parous and nulliparous rats, respectively, compared to
corresponding controls (FDR Exposure to environmental chemicals,
including those commonly found in personal care products has been linked
to mammary cancer at high doses using animal models. Their effects at low
doses comparable to human exposure, especially during critical windows of
development remain poorly understood. We investigated the effects of
three prevalent environmental chemicals - diethyl phthalate (DEP), methyl
paraben (MPB), triclosan (TCS) - and their mixture (MIX) on the
transcriptome of normally developing mammary at low doses mimicking human
exposure. Using a female Sprague-Dawley rat model, we targeted four early
developmental exposure windows - prenatal, neonatal, prepubertal and
pubertal, as well as continuous exposure from birth to adulthood (both
parous and nulliparous). Control rats were exposed to vehicle only. All
exposures were by oral gavage. Whole-transcriptomes of mammary glands
were profiled by Affymetrix rat gene arrays. Differentially expressed
genes were identified by linear models. Despite dynamic transcriptome
changes in the normal developing mammary, exposure to environmental
chemicals induced detectable gene expression changes in a window-specific
fashion. We discovered that puberty represented a window of heightened
sensitivity to MPB and DEP exposure with 341 and 175 altered genes
relative to controls, respectively (false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.25,
fold change (FC) 1.5). Chronic DEP exposure from birth to adulthood
resulted in changes in 1151 and 427 genes in parous and nulliparous rats,
respectively, compared to corresponding controls (FDR < 0.25, FC 1.5).
Importantly, the number of differentially expressed genes across
development in exposed rats was significantly reduced compared to control
rats, suggesting possible alteration in developmental pace by
environmental chemicals. We used a joint random forest algorithm to
construct co-expression networks and identified gene modules with
distinct connectivity patterns between treatments and controls. Results
indicated a loss of correlation structure in exposed rats compared to
controls. For example, genes such as Ntn4, Tmcc3, Lalba and Lcn2 showed
fewer connected edges in the co-expression network of the DEP, MPB and
TCS groups compared to controls. These results highlight critical windows
of exposure and implicate the potential health effects of these
ubiquitous environmental chemicals in human populations.

