Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of kinase signaling for miR-205 regulation in
gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cell lines


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death in the world.
Platinum-based combination regimen or molecular target drugs, such as
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and ALK inhibitors are used
for first line chemotherapy of NSCLC. Somatic mutation in the tyrosine
kinase domain of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been
identified in NSCLC and those mutations confer sensitivity to the
EGFR-TKIs such as gefitinib. Unfortunately, it is well known that the
almost cases are developed to drug resistance after chemotherapy. Several
EGFR-TKI resistant mechanisms have been reported, including gatekeeper
mutation (T790M), c-MET amplification and ErbB3 activation. Re-biopsy is
generally required for determine the resistance mechanism and second line
chemotherapy. However, re-biopsy is invasive test for cancer patients.
Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs) are paid attention as biomarkers for cancer
diagnosis and sensitivity to chemotherapy in various cancers. In the
previous study, we revealed that the miRNA biosynthesis pathway is
critical for maintain the cisplatin resistant phenotype. Further, it was
reported that EGFR modulated microRNA maturation through the
phosphorylation of AGO2. Protein phosphorylation is one of most important
post transcriptional modification mechanisms and miRNA is also associated
with fine tuning of mRNA expression. Thus, we focused on the relationship
between miRNA expression and kinase signaling in gefitinib resistance. In
this study, we performed characterization of gefitinib resistant cell
lines, PC-9/MET200 and PC-9/MET1000 established from NSCLC cell line,
PC-9, which were confirmed to have a c-MET amplification using miRNA
microarray and quantitative PCR. Furthermore, we analyzed miRNA activity
and kinase signaling using a luciferase reporter assay system, siRNA,
RTK/phosphokinase protein array and kinase inhibitors. We revealed that
miR-205 was significantly elevated in both gefitinib resistant cell
lines. By the computational analysis using miRNA target prediction
database, we found that ErbB3 was a target of miR-205. However, ErbB3
expression levels were rather up-regulated and highly phosphorylated in
both resistant cell lines compared with a parental cell line. Under ErbB3
knockdown condition, miR-205 expression levels were slightly down
regulated. Furthermore, under c-MET knockdown or Foretinib treatment
condition, miR-205 activity were down regulated and ErbB3
dephosphorylated in resistant cell lines. This down-regulation of miR-205
appears to be mediated by inhibition of kinase signals. Moreover, we
found that some kinase inhibitors suppressed miR-205 activity in
gefitinib resistant cell lines. In conclusion, our results suggest that
alterations of kinase signals are more effective for miR-205 regulation
than protein expression of target molecule itself, such as ErbB3.

