Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mouse tumor biology database (MTB): An integrated data
resource for mouse and patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of human
cancer


The laboratory mouse is the premier model organism for understanding the
genetic basis of human cancer and is a powerful platform for
investigating novel targets for therapeutic intervention. Research using
genetically engineered mouse models has led to key insights into the
genetics of cancer susceptibility, the function of tumor suppressors and
oncogenes, and therapy responses in pre-clinical and co-clinical studies.
Patient Derived Xenografts (PDX) models are another model system for in
vivo cancer studies. PDX models are created by implanting patient tumors
into immunodeficient or humanized mouse hosts. PDX models are a powerful
translational research platform for pre-clinical and co-clinical studies.
The number of mouse models and the volume and heterogeneity of data
related to the characterization of these models has increased
dramatically in recent years, making integrated searches of these data
and identifying relevant models a significant barrier to their effective
use. The Mouse Tumor Biology database (MTB)
(http://tumor.informatics.jax.org) provides on-line query tools to
facilitate cohesive searches and visualization of these varied data, thus
enabling the identification of novel mouse models of human cancer and
potential therapeutic treatments.The Mouse Tumor Biology database is an
expertly curated resource for information and data about genetically
modified mouse strains and PDX models of human cancer. Enforcement of
standard gene and strain nomenclature and use of controlled vocabularies
within MTB enables complete and accurate searching of the published
literature for relevant mouse models. MTB contains data from spontaneous
or endogenously induced tumors from genetically defined mice including
tumor classification, incidence and latency, tumor associated QTLs,
pathology reports, images and genetic changes in the tumor (somatic) and
background strain (germline) genomes. The PDX resource enables searches
based on tumor type, cancer diagnosis, and genomic properties of the
engrafted tumors. Information in MTB is obtained from curation of
peer-reviewed scientific publications and from direct data submissions
from individual investigators and large-scale programs. MTB contains over
71,000 Tumor Frequencies, and over 2,080 Pathology Reports with over
5,800 images from over 3,600 references. MTB also provides access to
detailed clinical, pathological, expression and genomics data from over
450 PDX models. Information in MTB is integrated with cancer models data
from other bioinformatics resources including PathBase, the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO), and ArrayExpress. MTB is supported by NCI grant
CA089713.

