Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilization of K48 poly-ubiquitin modulation as a biomarker of
target engagement for a protein homeostasis inhibitor in the clinic:
Preclinical validation with CB-5083, a first-in-class inhibitor of the
AAA ATPase p97


Background:Pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers are an increasingly valuable
tool for decision-making and prioritization of lead compounds during
preclinical and clinical studies as they link drug-target inhibition in
cells with biological activity. They are of particular importance for
novel, first-in-class mechanisms, where the ability of a targeted
therapeutic to impact disease outcome is unknown. We recently discovered
CB-5083, a novel small molecule inhibitor of p97, a protein involved in
several facets of protein homeostasis, including ubiquitin-dependent
protein degradation, endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD)
and autophagy. Accumulation of K48 poly-ubiquitinated proteins is a
hallmark of protein degradation inhibition, and we used this proximal
biomarker to follow CB-5083 target engagement on p97 in various
pre-clinical models.Results:CB-5083 is a potent inhibitor of p97, with a
biochemical IC50 of 11 nM. When cancer cells are exposed to CB-5083,
biological consequences linked to p97 inhibition are detected, including
ERAD inhibition, ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress, ER stress-mediated
cell death and accumulation of poly-ubiquitinated proteins. In mouse
models, CB-5083 is orally bio-available and causes rapid and sustained
accumulation of K48 poly-ubiquitin in tumor xenografts after a single
administration. Concurrent with increases in K48 poly-ubiquitin levels,
activation of ER stress response pathways and induction of apoptosis
markers are also observed. Accumulation of K48 poly-ubiquitin also occurs
in other tissues in the body and we developed a quantitative method to
detect accumulation of K48 poly-ubiquitin as a marker of target
engagement in whole blood. With this method, we were able to compare the
kinetics and level of K48 poly ubiquitin accumulation following CB-5083
administration in both tumor and whole blood. We also performed a dose
escalation of CB-5083 in cynomolgus monkeys and defined the minimal
plasma AUC and Cmax required to see accumulation of K48 poly-ubiquitin in
monkey whole blood. This approach allowed us to predict human exposures
that should lead to target engagement and consequent biological activity
in our ongoing phase 1 studies where a flow cytometry based assay is
being used to monitor K48 poly-ubiquitin levels in patient blood
samples.Conclusion:K48 poly-ubiquitin is a target engagement biomarker of
p97 inhibition. CB-5083, a p97 inhibitor, can induce sustained induction
of K48 poly-ubiquitin, not only in tumor but also in surrogate tissues
such as whole blood. K48 poly-ubiquitin accumulation is currently being
assessed to follow target engagement in the blood of patients in our
ongoing phase 1 dose escalation studies of CB-5083.

