Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-1 blockade suppresses gastric cancer development by promoting
antitumor immunity in mice


Since advanced gastric cancer is difficult to cure with chemo and/or
radiation therapy, new therapeutic approaches are clearly needed.
Targeting immune checkpoints such as CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 has shown
promising antitumor immunity in many malignancies by modulating T cell
activity. PD-L1 and to a lesser extent of PD-L2 are expressed in human
gastric cancer and expression of PD-L1 is associated with poor prognosis.
Therefore, developing immunotherapies is an attractive strategy for the
treatment of gastric cancer. We evaluated the efficacy of anti-PD-1
therapy in a mouse model of gastric cancer. Gastrin-deficient (GAS-KO)
mice have been shown to develop large antral tumors with the combination
of N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) and Helicobacter felis (H. felis)
infection. Tumors developed in GAS-KO mice exhibited increased expression
of PD-L1 and higher mutation rates than those in wild-type mice. To study
the effect of anti-PD-1 antibody in tumor initiation or an early stage of
progression, GAS-KO mice were induced with H.felis/MNU to develop tumors,
one week later (10 weeks post-MNU) treated with anti-PD-1 antibody or
isotype control (10 mg/kg IP qw) and sacrificed at 30 weeks post-MNU. We
confirmed that GAS-KO mice treated with isotype control had moderate
tumor burdens. Of interest, however, less and much smaller tumors were
observed in mice treated with anti-PD-1. To compare immune cell
populations in spleen tissue and peripheral blood from each group of
mice, flow cytometric analysis was performed. Anti-PD-1-treated mice
showed an increase in T cells including cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and a
decrease in regulatory T cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC)
populations compared with controls. In accordance with this, CD3-positive
T lymphocytes were more frequently found in gastric tumors of
anti-PD-1-treated mice than controls. Furthermore, qRT-PCR analysis
revealed differential cytokine gene expression profiles including Il6,
Il1b, and Il23 following anti-PD-1 treatment. Together, these data
implicate that PD-1 blockade promotes immune infiltrates and therefore
potentiates antitumor immune responses, suggesting targeting PD-1 as a
potential new anticancer strategy in gastric cancer. Understanding
anti-PD-1 therapy at the cellular and molecular level could provide new
strategies for developing highly efficacious combination therapies.

