Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serous ovarian cancer risk factors by grade: Evidence for
etiologic heterogeneity


Background: Growing evidence suggests that high grade serous ovarian
carcinomas may arise from the fallopian tube, while low-grade serous
ovarian cancer may develop on the ovaries. Previous studies have
suggested differences in ovarian cancer risk factors by histologic
subtypes, but few have evaluated differences in risk factors for high-
vs. low-grade serous cancers. In the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium
(OC3), a pooling project of individual-level data from 23 prospective
cohort studies, we evaluated associations of hormonal, reproductive,
demographic and lifestyle factors, and family history of cancer with for
serous ovarian cancer subtypes.Methods: Among 16 studies that abstracted
grade information from pathology reports, 3,095 serous ovarian cancers
were identified during follow-up (125 well differentiated, 506 moderately
differentiated, 1671 poorly differentiated, 793 undetermined). We used
competing risks Cox proportional hazards regression to compute relative
risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for differences in
association by grade. Models were stratified on study and year of birth
and adjusted for age, parity and OC use; subtype heterogeneity was
evaluated by likelihood ratio tests.Results: Although sample sizes were
small for low-grade tumors, there was evidence for heterogeneity in the
associations for oral contraceptive (OC) use, age at menopause,
endometriosis, and family history of ovarian cancer. For example, each
5-year increase in OC use was associated with a 21% decrease in risk of
low-grade serous ovarian cancer (RR: 0.79; 95% CI: 0.62-1.00), but only a
10% decrease in risk of high-grade serous cancers (RR: 0.90; 95% CI:
0.84-0.96; p-heterogeneity = 0.09). Consistent with a prior report in the
Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium, endometriosis was associated with
increased risk of low-grade serous tumors (RR: 3.77; 95% CI: 1.24-11.48),
but not with high-grade serous tumors (RR: 1.11; 95% CI: 0.70-1.74;
p-heterogeneity = 0.12).Conclusion: Our results demonstrate heterogeneous
associations of risk factors with subtypes of serous ovarian cancer,
supporting the idea that the high- and low-grade serous tumors develop
through different pathways. Despite the small sample size for low-grade
serous tumors, most risk factors were more strongly associated with
low-grade tumors compared to high-grade serous carcinomas, suggesting
that risk prediction may be more challenging for the most fatal subtype.
Identifying subtype-specific risk factor and biomarkers is important both
for better understanding ovarian cancer etiology and for targeted
development of novel prevention approaches. These results underscore the
importance of consortial projects to evaluate rare subtypes (low-grade
serous cancers) for the better understanding of etiologic heterogeneity
of this deadly disease.

