Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASIC1 regulates neuronal differentiation of neuroblastoma through
Notch signaling pathway


Background: Neuroblastoma arises when neuroblasts of the sympathetic
nervous system fails to undergo proper differentiation. The Notch
signaling pathway is critical for cell differentiation, growth and
proliferation. In neurons, it has been shown that up regulation of Notch
activity either inhibited neurite extension or caused retraction of
neurites. Conversely, inhibition of Notch1 signaling facilitated neurite
extension. Acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs) are proton-gated cation
channels. In addition to the role in synaptic plasticity, learning and
memory, a good correlation has been found between ASIC1a expression and
spine density suggesting that ASIC1a plays an important role in the
processes of spine morphogenesis, maintenance and remodeling which are
involved in the process of neuronal differentiation. The underlying
mechanism however remains elusive. We hypothesize that ASIC1 regulates
neurite growth through Notch signaling in neuroblastoma. Methods: 1) We
employed proteomic approach and pathway analysis to examine changes in
Notch signaling by ASIC gene deletion. By comparison adult ASIC1a-/- and
WT mice, quantitative mass spectrometric techniques of spectral counting
followed by analysis with SEQUEST were used to identify reliable
proteins. 2) We determined the effects of ASIC1a on neurite growth in a
mouse neuroblastoma cell line, NS20Y cells by down regulating ASIC1a
expression with shRNA or inhibiting ASIC1a function with PcTX, a specific
pharmacological inhibitor. 3) We determined the effects of DAPT, a Notch
signal inhibitor on neuronal differentiation in NS20Y cells. Results: 1)
The enrichment analyses by the bioinformatics system Metacore showed that
development Notch signaling pathway (p = 1.526E-05), development
Notch-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT, p = 3.902E-05) and
development Notch-mediated pathway for NF-B modulation (p = 2.323E-04)
were changed in WT mice compared to ASIC1a-/-. 2) Down regulation of
ASIC1a in NS20Y cells with shRNA inhibits CPT-cAMP induced neurite
growth, while over expression of ASIC1a promotes its growth. 3) Down
regulation of ASIC1 by shRNA increased Notch1 and its target gene
Survivin in NS20Y cells. 4) DAPT, an inhibitor of Notch significantly
protects inhibition of CPT-cAMP induced neurite extension by
down-regulation of ASIC1 in NS20Y cells. Conclusion: These data indicate
that Notch1 signaling may be required for ASIC1 mediated neurite growth
and neuronal differentiation of neuroblastoma. Promoting neural
differentiation of neuroblastoma in vitro provides insight into potential
clinical applications in the treatment of patients with neuroblastoma
(This work is supported by R01NS066027, NIMHD S21MD000101, and U54NS08932)

