Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crucial factors of the inflammatory microenvironment
(IL-1/TNF-/TIMP-1) promote the selection of highly malignant hemopoietic
clone of myelofibrosis


Myelofibrosis (MF) is a clonal disorder of the hemopoietic
stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs). Together with molecular abnormalities
(mutations in JAK2, Calreticulin (CALR) and MPL genes), chronic
inflammation is the major hallmark of MF pathogenesis. It is argued that
the up-regulated production of pro-inflammatory cytokines selects for the
malignant clone. However, the key players linking inflammation and cancer
in MF are still poorly known. Here, we investigated the in vitro effects
of crucial factors of the inflammatory microenvironment (Interleukin
(IL)-1, Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)-, Tissue Inhibitor of
Metalloproteinases (TIMP)-1 and ATP) on the functional behaviour of
MF-derived HSPCs.Plasma TIMP-1, TNF- and IL-1 were measured by ELISA
assay. Circulating CD34+ cells from MF patients (JAK2V617F (10 cases) and
CALR (10 cases) mutations) or cord blood (CB; 8 samples) were
functionally characterized after incubation with or without ATP (1000 M),
IL-1 (10 ng/mL), TNF- (10 ng/mL) or TIMP-1 (100 ng/mL) (alone or in
combination). Cells were then analyzed for survival/apoptosis
(Annexin-V/Propidium Iodide staining), cell cycle and clonogenic
capacity. Migration was assessed towards a C-X-C motif chemokine 12
(CXCL12) gradient in the presence or absence of the pro-inflammatory
factors. MF-derived CD34+ cells were co-cultured with normal mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSCs) in the presence of the pro-inflammatory factors and
then evaluated for survival.Regardless mutation status, the plasma levels
of IL-1, TNF- and TIMP-1 are increased in MF patients and the presence of
pro-inflammatory cytokines confers a survival advantage of MF-derived
CD34+/CD34+CD38- cells. In addition, MF-derived CD34+ cells promoted
cell-cycle progression to the S-phase. Whereas in the JAK2V617F mutated
group, the addition of IL-1 or TNF- TIMP-1 impaired the erythroid
clonogenic output of the CALR mutated patients. Of note, IL-1 + TNF-
TIMP-1 highly promoted the in vitro migration of MF-derived CD34+ cells
in the presence of CXCL12. Intriguingly, MF-derived CD34+ cells revealed
increased clonogenic ability after migration toward CXCL12 and IL-1 +
TNF- TIMP-1, suggesting a pivotal role of inflammation in the selection
of the malignant clone. Finally, co-cultures of normal MSCs with
MF-derived CD34+ cells sustained the survival effects of
IL-1+TNF-TIMP-1.Overall, our data indicate that the behavior of the
MF-derived HSPCs can be influenced by regulatory signals provided by the
microenvironment through the cooperation between various pro-inflammatory
factors. The interplay of these pro-inflammatory factors promotes and
selects the circulating MF-derived HSPCs with higher proliferative
activity, clonogenic potential and migration ability. Targeting these
micro-environmental interactions may be a clinically relevant approach.

