Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adolescent fiber intake and mammographic breast density in
premenopausal women


Background: Some, but not all, previous studies have suggested that
higher adolescent fiber intake may be associated with a reduced risk of
breast cancer. Consistently, adolescent fiber intake has been suggested
to reduce breast cancer risk in adulthood in some of the previous
studies. To date, there is limited epidemiologic evidence that diet has a
strong influence on mammographic density and inconsistency in results for
specific dietary factors. While some earlier studies demonstrated an
inverse association between adolescent fiber intake and breast density
(defined as parenchymal patterns), a more recent study did not find
significant associations. We investigated the associations of adolescent
fiber intake with mammographic density, a strong and consistent predictor
of breast cancer, in premenopausal women. This is by far the largest
study that investigated these associations.Methods: This study included
743 premenopausal women within the Nurses Health II cohort with no
history of breast or other cancer. Percent breast density, absolute dense
and non-dense areas were measured from digitized film mammographic images
using a computer-assisted thresholding technique. Adolescent and adult
diet was assessed with a food frequency questionnaire and energy-adjusted
nutrient intakes were estimated for each of the questionnaires.
Information regarding breast cancer risk factors was obtained from
baseline or biennial questionnaires, closest to the mammogram date. We
used generalized linear regression to quantify associations between
quartiles of adolescent fiber intake and each of the breast density
measures, adjusting for age, body mass index, and other known and
suspected predictors of mammographic density. Absolute measures were
square root-transformed in analyses to improve normality. Associations
were examined separately for total fiber intake; fiber from fruits,
vegetables, legumes, and cereal; and food sources of fiber (fruits,
vegetables, and nuts).Results: In multivariable analyses, total fiber
intake during adolescence was not associated with percent breast density
(p for trend = 0.64), absolute dense area (p for trend = 0.80), or
non-dense area (p for trend = 0.75). Similarly, neither consumption of
nuts, fruits, or vegetables nor specific sources of fiber intake (fruits,
vegetables, legumes, or cereal) during adolescence were associated with
any of the mammographic density phenotypes.Conclusions: Our findings do
not support the hypothesis that adolescent fiber intake is associated
with premenopausal mammographic density. If observed associations with
breast cancer risk are causal, then the effect may not be mediated
through mammographic density.

