Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SKI-178, a single agent co-targeting sphingosine kinase 1 and
microtubule dynamics, as a therapeutic strategy for treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous and rapidly progressing
blood cell cancer caused by numerous cytogenetic alterations. Although
significant improvement in treatment of AML has been made, the
unfortunate reality is that currently available treatments are largely
ineffective for most AML patients. Thus, there is a critical need for new
therapeutic targets and agents for the treatment of AML.The sphingolipid
metabolic pathway is an untapped source of new therapeutic targets for
the treatment of AML. Sphingosine Kinase 1 (SphK1) plays a central role
in the sphingolipid metabolic pathway as the key enzyme regulating the
intracellular equilibrium between pro-apoptotic Ceramide (Cer) and
pro-mitogenic/pro-survival Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a.k.a. the
Sphingolipid Rheostat. As SphK1 activity increases in the cell,
pro-mitogenic/pro-survival S1P signaling predominates and AML cells
become dependent upon S1P signaling (non-oncogene addiction), while
depletion of Cer levels makes them more resistant to chemotherapies.We
previously developed a novel SphK1-selective inhibitor (SKI-178) that is
potently cytotoxic to multiple AML cell lines including multi-drug
resistant lines. Our recent, thorough examination of the apoptotic
mechanism-of-action of SKI-178, including direct target engagement assays
employing the Cellular Thermal Shift Assay (CETSA) revealed that SKI-178
also acts as a colchicine binding site directed microtubule disrupting
agent (MDA). Numerous studies have demonstrated that agents that promote
Cer accumulation, including SphK inhibitors, synergistically induce
apoptosis, in combination with MDAs by the simultaneous activation of
pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins and inhibition of anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family proteins, respectively. SKI-178 uniquely accomplishes these
two separate cellular effects as a single agent.We examined the
therapeutic efficacy of SKI-178 in three mouse models of AML. Using a
retro-viral transduction model of the MLL/AF9 t(9;11)(p22;q23)
translocation, we have shown that SphK1 is necessary for the development
of MLL/AF9-driven AML and that SKI-178 effectively induces complete
remission of AML in this model system. Separately, in a human AML cell
line (MOLM-13; MLL/AF9+, FLT3-ITD) xenograft model, SKI-178 significantly
extended survival relative to vehicle controls. Lastly, employing a
Patient Derived Xenograft model of a human primary AML sample (FLT3-ITD,
NPM1+), SKI-178 also significantly extended survival relative to vehicle
treated cohorts. In all 3 models, SKI-178 was well tolerated and did not
affect normal hematopoiesis. Together, these data demonstrate the
therapeutic efficacy of a strategy co-targeting SphK1 inhibition and
microtubule dynamics and suggest that SKI-178 should be further developed
as a novel therapeutic agent for AML.

