Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy, senescence and proliferative recovery subsequent to DNA
damage in radiation sensitization by PARP inhibition


Radiotherapy continues to be a primary modality in the treatment of
cancer. DNA damage induced by radiation can promote apoptosis as well as
both autophagy and senescence, where autophagy and senescence can
theoretically function to prolong tumor survival. A primary aim of this
work was to investigate the hypothesis that autophagy and/or senescence
could be permissive for DNA repair, thereby facilitating tumor cell
recovery from radiation-induced growth arrest and/or cell death. In
addition, studies were designed to elucidate the involvement of autophagy
and senescence in radiation sensitization by PARP inhibitors and the
re-emergence of a proliferating tumor cell population. In the context of
this work, the relationship between radiation-induced autophagy and
senescence was also determined. Studies were performed using DNA repair
proficient HCT116 colon carcinoma cells and a repair deficient Ligase IV
(-/-) isogenic cell line. Irradiation promoted a parallel induction of
autophagy and senescence that was strongly correlated with the extent of
persistent H2AX phosphorylation in both cell lines; however inhibition of
autophagy failed to suppress senescence, indicating that the two
responses were dissociable. Irradiation resulted in a transient arrest in
the HCT116 cells while arrest was prolonged in the Ligase IV (-/-) cells;
however, both cell lines ultimately recovered proliferative function,
which may reflect maintenance of DNA repair capacity. The PARP inhibitors
(Olaparib) and (Niraparib) increased the extent of persistent DNA damage
induced by radiation as well as the extent of both autophagy and
senescence; neither cell line underwent significant apoptosis by
radiation alone or in the presence of the PARP inhibitors. Inhibition of
autophagy failed to attenuate radiation sensitization, indicating that
autophagy was not involved in the action of the PARP inhibitors. As with
radiation alone, despite sensitization by PARP inhibition, proliferative
recovery was evident within a period of 10-20 days. While inhibition of
DNA repair via PARP inhibition may initially sensitize tumor cells to
radiation via the promotion of senescence, this strategy does not appear
to interfere with proliferative recovery, which could ultimately
contribute to disease recurrence.

