Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligoamide-based mimics of double-stranded B-DNA as a new class of
DNA topoisomerase I catalytic inhibitors


Since the discovery of Topoisomerase I as a specific target for the
treatment of cancers more than 30 years ago, only two inhibitors derived
from the natural compound camptothecin (CPT) have been approved in the
clinic for the treatment of colon, lung and ovarian cancers: topotecan
and irinotecan. The cytotoxicity of these Top1 poisons relies on their
capability to stabilize covalent Top1-DNA complexes, leading to
replication-mediated DNA double-strand breaks. However tumor cells
develop multiple resistance mechanisms that are limiting their efficacy.
Though new CPT derivatives and other Top1 poisons with various chemical
structures have been developed, they share the same resistance
mechanisms. Aside from conventional approaches focus on compounds with
higher potency to stabilize Top1-DNA complexes, we investigated the
possibility to inhibit Top1 binding to DNA and/or DNA cleavage by using
DNA mimics that would act as decoys, a strategy that was never explored
before. To this aim, single chain oligoamides composed by iteration of
mQQ units (Q: 8-amino-2-quinoline carboxylic acid; mQ:
8-aminomethyl-2-quinoline carboxylic acid) were synthesized. These
molecules fold into helices that are stabilized by electrostatic
repulsions and hydrogen bonds between the amide functions and endocyclic
nitrogen atoms at adjacent residues. When Q and mQ precursors are
functionalized by negatively charged residues, the positions of these
residues in the folded structure match the position of phosphate residues
in duplex B-DNA. Because distances between residues in mQQ and QmQ units
are slightly different, it is possible to define a major groove and a
minor groove, as in B-DNA, with the possibility to impact on groove width
by changing the positions of the substituents (Q4 or Q5 for substitution
in position 4 or 5 of the quinoline monomer, respectively), clearly
establishing (mQQ5)n and (mQQ4)n as potential DNA-mimics of an
unprecedented kind.We found that both (mQQ5)n and (mQQ4)n oligomers
inhibited the activity of Top1-mediated relaxation of supercoiled DNA in
vitro. Inhibition increased with the length of the oligoamide to reach an
IC50 value (concentration inhibiting 50% of Top1-mediated DNA relaxation)
around the nM range for the longest oligomer that was tested i.e.
(mQQ4)16, corresponding to a double-strand DNA of 16 base pairs. By
comparison, CPT had an IC50 of 10 M in the same conditions. Top1
inhibition was rather selective as a (mQQ4)8 oligomer moderately
inhibited Top2-mediated activity and did not affect the activity of
various DNA interacting enzymes such as restriction enzymes XhoI and NdeI
or nucleases such as DNAse I, S1 nuclease, benzonase or Flap-endonuclease
I. Because these oligomers are resistant to proteases and nucleases and
can be synthesized rapidly by solid phase synthesis with the possibility
to modify its substituents without altering their helicity, they
represent good candidates for drug development.

