Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reintroduction of DAXX suppresses alternative lengthening of
telomeres in osteosarcoma


The unlimited proliferative capacity of cancer cells is closely linked to
maintenance of their telomeres, which shorten with each cell division in
normal cells. Cancer cells are able to maintain telomere length by
multiple mechanisms, including activation of telomerase and the
recombination based alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) pathway.
ALT is prevalent in osteosarcoma, with approximately 50% of osteosarcoma
cases using ALT for telomere maintenance. Mutations in the ATRX/DAXX
chromatin remodeling complex and histone H3.3 correlate with activation
of the ALT pathway in several tumor systems. While loss of ATRX is a
frequent event in osteosarcoma tumors, alterations of DAXX have not been
reported. We characterized the telomere maintenance mechanisms utilized
by 11 osteosarcoma cell lines. Of these, 45% (5/11) were ALT positive and
45% (5/11) were telomerase positive. One cell line possessed features of
both telomere maintenance mechanisms. Among ALT positive osteosarcoma
cell lines, we observed frequent loss of ATRX expression (4/5) and a
previously unreported translocation resulting in disruption of DAXX. The
translocation abolishes recruitment of DAXX to nuclear PML bodies and
prevents normal DAXX function. By reintroducing full length DAXX, we were
able to suppress telomere maintenance by ALT as evidenced by multiple
assays including loss of C-circles and ALT-associated PML bodies, thus
demonstrating that continued DAXX deficiency is necessary for maintenance
of the ALT mechanism. Suppression of ALT by DAXX reintroduction did not
result in compensatory activation of telomerase. This first demonstration
of ALT suppression by DAXX supports a mechanistic connection between loss
of the ATRX/DAXX chromatin remodeling complex and telomere maintenance by
ALT. Understanding this relationship may uncover vulnerabilities specific
to ALT tumors that could potentially lead to the development of targeted
therapies for diverse cancers that depend on the ALT pathway.

