Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA miR-31 regulates oral squamous cell carcinoma cell
migration by targeting critical enzyme of peroxisomal lipid metabolism


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small endogenous non-coding RNAs that play
important roles in a variety of cellular processes, such as growth,
differentiation and metabolic homeostasis. Dysregulation of microRNA has
been linked to the development of various types of human diseases,
including cancer. Our previous study has identified that miR-31 is
significantly up-regulated in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
tissues. Further gain- and loss-of-function analyses revealed that miR-31
promotes OSCC by enhancing the migration and invasiveness of OSCC cells
but not cell proliferation. However, the exact role of miR-31 in OSCC
neoplastic development, especially metastasis, has not been explored.
Computational microRNA target prediction and pathway analysis showed an
enrichment of putative targets in lipid metabolism pathway. In this
study, we aimed to investigate the role of miR-31 in the regulation of
lipid metabolism and to establish the relationship between lipid
metabolism and tumor pathogenesis in OSCC cells.First, we demonstrated
that ACOX1, the rate-limiting enzyme in peroxisomal -oxidation, is the
direct target of miR-31. We further analyzed publicly available mRNA and
miRNA deep sequencing datasets and found that the expression levels of
miR-31 inversely correlate with those of ACOX1. Furthermore, we
discovered that depletion of miR-31 significantly decreased the intensity
of cellular lipid droplets (LDs), and knockdown of ACOX1 conversely
showed an increase of LD formation. These data suggested that miR-31 may
regulate lipid metabolism by targeting ACOX1. In cultured OSCC cells, the
migration capability and invasiveness were significantly increased after
knockdown of ACOX1. We further confirmed that ACOX1 depletion enhances
ERK1/2 expression and phosphorylation and increases the expression levels
of MMP9 in OSCC cells. Collectively, our findings suggest that the
elevated expression of miR-31 in OSCC cells directly contributes to the
down-regulated expression of ACOX1, subsequently leading to accumulation
of lipid metabolites and elevated OSCC migration and invasion through ERK
pathway.

