Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential mechanisms for thrombocytopenia and neutropenia induced
by antibody-drug conjugates


Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia are common adverse events in cancer
patients treated with antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs). We used human
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in vitro and various ADCs to investigate
the potential mechanisms of thrombocytopenia and neutropenia.Two ADCs,
AGS-16C3F and T-DM1, were selected for the investigation of
megakaryocytes (MKs) as they both induced thrombocytopenia in patients.
AGS-16C3F is an ENPP3-targeting antibody conjugated to
microtubule-disrupting agent MMAF (licensed from Seattle Genetics) via a
non-cleavable linker (mcMMAF) tested in a phase 1 trial in kidney cancer
patients. T-DM1 (KADCYLA) is an anti-HER2 antibody conjugated to the
maytansine derivative DM1, approved for the treatment of advanced Her-2
positive breast cancer. HSCs were differentiated to MKs and percentage of
CD41 positivity from FACS analysis was used to measure the effect of ADCs
on MK differentiation. Results showed that while MKs do not express ENPP3
or Her-2, both AGS-16C3F (IC50 = 40nM) and T-DM1 inhibited MK
differentiation. MKs express FcRIIA to which T-DM1 (IgG1) and, to lesser
degree, AGS-16C3F (IgG2) can bind; however, blockage of FcRIIA failed to
rescue MKs from cytotoxicity induced by either T-DM1 or AGS-16C3F
suggesting that binding to FcRIIA is not critical for MK cytotoxicity.
AGS-16C3F is internalized into MKs via macropinocytosis and causes
significant disorganization of tubulin structure as observed by confocal
microscopy.HSCs were also differentiated to neutrophils which were
characterized by the percentage of CD66b positivity in FACS analysis.
Several antibodies to targets absent in neutrophils were conjugated to
both MMAE and MMAF and were tested for cytotoxicity during neutrophil
differentiation. Our results showed that ADCs containing MMAE via a
cleavable linker were more cytotoxic to neutrophil differentiation than
the same ADC containing MMAF via a non-cleavable linker, in agreement
with clinical results. Different from MKs, results showed that
neutrophils have low macropinocytosis activity. Secretion of cathepsins
increased during neutrophil differentiation, and a membrane impermeable
cathepsin inhibitor blocked ADC cytotoxicity to neutrophils, suggesting
that extracellular protease cleavage is critical for neutrophil
cytotoxicity in vitro. Neutrophils express high levels of FcRIIA and
saturation of this receptor by control IgG inhibited ADC binding to
neutrophils and at least partially rescued neutrophils from ADC
cytotoxicity, suggesting that FcRIIA can play a role in neutropenia
induced by ADCs, particularly with IgG1 isotype.In conclusion, applying
these in vitro data to clinical experience suggests that thrombocytopenia
may be mediated by macropinocytosis of ADC in MK and neutropenia by
secreted proteases and interactions with their FcRs. Understanding these
toxicities may help design new ADCs with improved toxicity profile.

