Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation induced by environmental
carcinogen dibenzo[def,p]chrysene in ovarian tissues of mice


We and others have demonstrated that the administration of
dibenzo[def,p]chrysene [also known as dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DBP)], a
representative example of the class of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH), by ip, oral gavage, or topical application onto the oral cavity
induced tumors in multiple organ sites in mice; the ovary was the most
susceptible tissue. We further demonstrated that the capacity of the
target organs to metabolize DBP to active intermediates that can form DNA
adducts may account for its tissue selective tumorigenicity. In addition,
formation of DNA adducts by certain chemical carcinogens has been linked
to aberrant DNA methylation, including the most extensively studied
prototype PAH benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P). The goal of this study is to
examine whether alteration of DNA methylation occurs in the ovarian
tissues of mice treated with DBP during the early stage of tumor
development. In this study, we employed a previously established animal
protocol in which the levels of DBP-DNA adducts as a function of time had
been determined in the ovary following the oral administration of DBP (24
nmol, 3/week for 5 weeks) or vehicle (DMSO) to female B6C3F1 mice (six
weeks old, n = 3/group). DNA was isolated from ovary and subjected to
enhanced reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (ERRBS) which is a
single nucleotide resolution technique used to study DNA methylation in
CpG sites and the surrounding regions. Briefly, DNA was digested by MspI
followed by end repair, adenylation and adapter ligation with a
modification of bead size selection to capture MspI fragments of 70-320
bp size. The resulting libraries were bisulfite-converted followed by PCR
amplification and read by 150 bp on HiSeq 2500. Base calls of bisulfite
treated sequencing reads were mapped to the mm9 mouse assembly and
methylation calls were performed using Bismark v0.10.1 (Babraham
Bioinformatcis, UK). The methylKit v0.9.2 R package was then used to
calculate the differential methylation. Differentially methylated bases
with q-value 25% were extracted. Among 179 differentiated methylation
sites (DMS) identified between DBP and vehicle-treated mice, 68 are
hypermethylated and 111 are hypomethylated. About 25% of DMS are located
in promoter or exon, 32% in intron and 44% in intergenic regions. DMS are
located in genes including oocyte specific homeobox 2, transforming
growth factor alpha, and tumor necrosis factor. Ingenuity Pathways
analysis of the genes with altered methylation patterns identified top
canonical pathways as growth hormone signaling, spermine biosynthesis,
threonine degradation, trehalose degradation and L-serine degradation.
Collectively, our previous results together with those presented here
demonstrate that both genetic and epigenetic alterations may account for
the carcinogenicity of DBP in the mouse ovary. Support: NIEHS R21ES020411
and NCI R01-CA173465.

