Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined treatment of fisetin and cabazitaxel significantly
inhibits tumor growth and metastasis of prostate cancer cells


Drugs that affect microtubule dynamics are among the most effective
anticancer agents in routine clinical use. However, the effectiveness of
these drugs has been impaired by severe side effects and subsequent
development of drug resistance. Continued investigation into the
development and discovery of new drugs, and exploring new treatment
strategies that reduce side effects and circumvent drug resistance may
provide more effective therapeutic options for cancer patients.
Considering these facts we believe that natural agents from dietary
sources could offer a safe and effective alternative to existing
repertoire of microtubule-targeting agents in combination with standard
of care. In line with this we have observed that fisetin is a microtubule
stabilizing agent and significantly affects microtubule dynamics. We
hypothesized that fisetin will enhance the efficacy of cabazitaxel in
advanced and metastatic human PCa cells both in vitro and in vivo. We
determined the effect of fisetin alone and in combination with
cabazitaxel on in vitro and in vivo in a subcutaneous xenograft mouse
model. Human prostate cancer PC-3M-luciferase cells (3103) were injected
into 24 athymic nude mice. Two weeks post cell implantation, mice were
divided into four groups of 6 animals, and then treated with fisetin (20
mg/kg; 3 times/week), cabazitaxel (5 mg/kg; once/week), combination of
fisetin (20 mg/kg; 3 times/week) and cabazitaxel (5 mg/kg; once/week), or
vehicle (control) via intraperitoneal route for 8 weeks. Tumor growth of
live mice was monitored manually and by IVIS imaging system. Combination
treatment with fisetin and cabazitaxel significantly (p = 0.0008)
inhibited the growth of tumors compared to control and individual
treatment groups. We observed only 2.7 fold increase in tumor volume in
the combination group over three weeks, while cabazitaxel or fisetin
alone resulted in 5 fold increase, and tumor in the control group
increased by 7 folds. In addition, we also observed that treatment with
fisetin and cabazitaxel alone resulted in 10% and 12% inhibition in tumor
growth respectively. However, combination of fisetin and cabazitaxel
resulted in 71% inhibition in tumor growth. We next tested the effect of
the combination in vitro using PC-3M-luciferase cells. We observed
significant inhibition in the protein expression of Ki-67 and PCNA and
metastatic markers MMP9 and MMP2 in the combination group compared with
each agent alone. In addition, PC-3M-luciferase cells treated with
fisetin (20 M) for 48 hours and then treated with cabazitaxel (5nM)
significantly inhibited the migration, invasion and proliferation of
these cells. The combination resulted in significant reduction in the
effective dose of cabazitaxel. Taken together, these results suggest that
fisetin can be used in combination with cabazitaxel to inhibit tumor
growth and metastasis of advanced human prostate cancer.

