Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low doses of metformin increase expression of microRNAs that
regulate innate immune genes in breast cancer cells


Background: Metformin (MF), the most widely used anti-diabetic drug, has
also been shown to impact the incidence of breast cancer (BrCa), although
the molecular mechanisms responsible for the therapeutic effects of MF
are poorly understood. Unfortunately, until now in vitro studies have
used high doses of MF (5-20 mM) and may not accurately model MF
mechanisms of action at clinical doses.Objectives & Hypothesis: Metformin
is thought to inhibit cancer cell growth by decreasing available cellular
energy, creating a fatal metabolic deficit in cancer cells. Recent
evidence suggests that innate immunity may play a role in the regulation
of metabolism. We hypothesize that: 1) metabolic pathways targeted by MF
impact innate immune pathways modulated by IRAK4 in BrCa cells and 2)
metabolic and innate immune pathways in BrCa are regulated by common
microRNAs (miRs). Therefore, we examined the effects of a)
pharmacologically relevant MF concentrations on the expression of
selected miRs and proteins associated with innate immunity and
metabolism, and b) various concentrations of MF on BrCa cell lines that
differ in their metastatic potential.Methods: Highly metastatic 231s and
moderately metastatic 468s were cultured in low glucose medium and 15uM
MF for 0, 2, 6, 12 and 24hrs. Changes in the expression of 43 miRs
associated with innate immune and/or metabolic pathways were determined
from total RNA by qRT-PCR using a miR array. MF-induced changes in IRAK4
protein expression were compared with known MF targets AMPK and its
upstream regulator LKB1. The effects of MF concentrations up to 1 mM on
BrCa cell growth and migration were also tested.Results: MF enhanced
levels of hsa-miR-124-3p (which targets LKB1and AMPK) >2-fold at 2 and
6hrs in 468s. In contrast, hsa-miR-302c (which targets IRAK4) was
up-regulated (>2-fold) by MF in 231s but not 468s at 2 and 6hrs.
Expression of total IRAK4 protein was reduced after 12hrs of exposure to
MF in 231s and after 6 and 12 hours in 468s. As reported previously, LKB1
was not expressed in 231s, whereas LKB1 was constitutively expressed in
468s. AMPK activation was inhibited at 2 and 12hrs in 231s, while in 468s
AMPK activation was highly variable. Neither cell line showed changes in
proliferation or migration in the presence of MF.Conclusions: Low
concentrations of MF were sufficient to increase levels of two miRs known
to regulate innate immune transcripts. MF treatment reduced IRAK4 levels
by 6hrs (468s) to 12hrs (231s). Cell-specific differences in AMPK and
LKB1 activation likely reflect differences in their metabolic rates and
programs. Our data suggests that MF-sensitive metabolic pathways are
involved in IRAK4-dependent innate immunity in breast cancer cells.
Future studies will continue to unravel the effects of low doses of MF on
BrCa.

