Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Garcinol inhibits cancer stem cell-like phenotype via suppression
of the Wnt/-catenin /STAT3 axis signalling pathway in human non-small
cell lung carcinomas


Innate or acquired drug resistance and consequently, tumor relapse in
lung cancer patients have been linked to the activities of cancer stem
cells (CSCs). Therefore, targeting CSCs is suggested as an effective
approach for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) therapy. In this study,
we demonstrated that Garcinol, a polyisoprenylated benzophenone isolated
from the fruiting bodies of Garcinia indica, possessing
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, acetyltransferase inhibitory and
anticancer activities, modulates the activities of lung cancer stem cells
(LCSCs) and their associated aggressiveness. Here, we demonstrated the
inhibitory effect of Garcinol on LCSC phenotype of human NSCLC cells by
using the analytical drug cytotoxicity or cell viability, flow-cytometric
and functional assay approach. Garcinol significantly diminished the
ability of NSCLC cell lines, H441 and A549 to form spheres. In parallel
assays, Garcinol inhibited differentiated lung cancer cell and LCSCs
viability in a dose-dependent manner. Consistent with these observations,
Flow cytometric data showed that Garcinol reduced putative LCSC pool,
evidenced by the dose-dependent decreased proportion of side-population
(SP) cells and associated ALDH activity in Garcinol-treated H441 cells,
compared to the control group. Additionally, functional assays showed
that Garcinol markedly diminished the ability of H441 and A549 cells to
form colonies. Mechanistically, Garcinol impaired phosphorylation of
LRP6, a co-receptor of Wnt and STAT3. In same assay, Garcinol
downregulated -catenin, Dvl2, Axin2, and Cyclin D1 expressions in
NSCLC-generated spheres, suggesting its ability to regulate the
Wnt/-catenin signalling pathway. Put together, we demonstrated here that
Garcinol modulates the LCSC phenotype via regulation of the Wnt/-catenin
signalling and inactivation of STAT3, thus, presenting Garcinol as a
putative novel anti-LCSC therapeutic agent.Keywords - Garcinol, non-small
cell lung cancer, cancer stem cells, Wnt/-catenin signalling pathway,
anti-cancer therapy, STAT3

