Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of ALDH1A1 with cisplatin resistance via modulation of
NEK-2 in ovarian cancer stem-like cells


Cisplatin (CDDP) resistance is the foremost obstacle in the treatment of
ovarian cancer patients. According to the cancer stem cell hypothesis,
the recurrence and chemoresistance are presumed to be linked to cancer
stem/progenitor cells. Here, we investigated the cancer stem cell like
phenotypes and mechanism of chemoresistance in CDDP resistant ovarian
cancer cells.A well-established CDDP sensitive ovarian cancer cell line
A2780 and its resistant clone A2780 Cp were used and we also developed a
supra resistant clone (SKOV3 Cp) from a naturally CDDP resistant cell
line SKOV3 by six shocks treatment. Sensitiveness to CDDP was evaluated
by MTT assay and self renewal efficiency by sphere formation, noble agar
and clonogenic assays. A few cancer hallmarks and stem-cell markers were
characterized using flow cytometry. Molecular analysis was performed
using quantitative PCR and western blotting. For the silencing of
selected genes small interfering RNA (siRNA) based approaches was
utilized.Both CDDP resistant A2780 Cp and supra resistant SKOV3 Cp cell
lines showed significantly (P Cisplatin (CDDP) resistance is the foremost
obstacle in the treatment of ovarian cancer patients. According to the
cancer stem cell hypothesis, the recurrence and chemoresistance are
presumed to be linked to cancer stem/progenitor cells. Here, we
investigated the cancer stem cell like phenotypes and mechanism of
chemoresistance in CDDP resistant ovarian cancer cells.A well-established
CDDP sensitive ovarian cancer cell line A2780 and its resistant clone
A2780 Cp were used and we also developed a supra resistant clone (SKOV3
Cp) from a naturally CDDP resistant cell line SKOV3 by six shocks
treatment. Sensitiveness to CDDP was evaluated by MTT assay and self
renewal efficiency by sphere formation, noble agar and clonogenic assays.
A few cancer hallmarks and stem-cell markers were characterized using
flow cytometry. Molecular analysis was performed using quantitative PCR
and western blotting. For the silencing of selected genes small
interfering RNA (siRNA) based approaches was utilized.Both CDDP resistant
A2780 Cp and supra resistant SKOV3 Cp cell lines showed significantly (P
< 0.05) higher self-renewal ability in sphere formation, noble agar and
clonogenic assays than their parental counterparts. They also showed
significant resistance to apoptosis and sub-G1 arrest upon CDDP
treatment. Stem cell marker ALDH1 positivity rates were higher both in
A2780 Cp and SKOV3 Cp cell lines, quantified by ALDEFLUORTM assay kit
using flow cytometry. Hoechst 33342 dye effluxing side populations were
increased about five folds in A2780 Cp cells and two folds in SKOV3 Cp
cells compared to A2780 and SKOV3 cells respectively. Among major
stemness related genes (OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, NESTIN, BMI1, KLF4 and
ALDH1A1) quantitative PCR analysis showed significantly higher expression
of ALDH1A1 and KLF4 genes in both resistant and supra resistant cells
than their parental clones. Of two genes, silencing ALDH1A1 in A2780 and
A2780 Cp cells using siRNA greatly reduced the stem cell population as
detected by ALDEFLUORTM assay and sensitized cells to CDDP. Moreover,
silencing of ALDH1A1 reduce the level of its downstream target NEK-2. We
also observed the downregulation of ABC transporters (ABCB1, ABCG2 and
ABCC1) by silencing either ALDH1A1 or NEK-2 gene.Taken together, present
study showed for the first time that stemness gene ALDH1A1 can be
involved in CDDP resistance via the upregulation of NEK-2 in ovarian or
solid cancer.

