Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical development of next generation inhibitors of the
enzymes indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase as
cancer immunotherapies


The enzymes tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) and indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO1) catalyse oxidation of the essential amino acid
tryptophan (Trp) leading to the formation of immunosuppressive kynurenine
(Kyn) pathway metabolites that dampen the immune response in the tumor
microenvironment. Both IDO1 and TDO have been shown to be up-regulated in
a variety of cancers and blockade of their activity has been shown to
stimulate the anti-tumour immune response in pre-clinical animal models.
We have discovered and optimized multiple novel chemical series of both
highly selective and dual-acting inhibitors of IDO1 and TDO. We describe
the characterization of molecules that we are progressing into the
clinic.We have characterized the IDO1 and TDO-selective inhibitors and
dual-acting inhibitors which demonstrate nM potencies. In IFN-stimulated
A172 glioblastoma cells expressing both enzymes, the dual-acting
molecules fully inhibit Kyn production, whilst selective inhibitors yield
only a partial response, demonstrating the utility of dual enzyme
blockade in cancer cells. The compounds also relieve inhibition of T-cell
proliferation in cancer cell conditioned media/T-cell co-culture assays
and demonstrate highly favourable physico-chemical and pharmacokinetic
properties. These properties translate to superior PK/PD effects
following oral dosing in rodents with profound and sustained modulation
of plasma Kyn levels, combined with an exceptional safety profile. In a
mouse model of LPS-induced IDO1 activation, our IDO1 inhibitors fully
ablate elevation of Kyn in both plasma and lung in a dose-dependent
manner. Following oral administration, the IOmet IDO1 inhibitors provide
excellent single-agent tumor growth control in PAN02 pancreatic
adenocarcinoma syngeneic models. In addition, combining IOmet IDO1
inhibitors with standard-of-care chemotherapy (gemcitabine/abraxane) in
the PAN02 model completely inhibits tumor growth.In summary, we describe
the characterization of novel potent, selective and dual-acting IDO1 and
TDO inhibitors. These candidate molecules demonstrate excellent rodent in
vivo PK/PD, safety and anti-tumor profiles, supporting their progression
into the clinic.

