Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MHC class I polypeptide-related sequence A (MICA) as a factor of
aggressive prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) remains the second most common cancer in American
men, with higher incidence and death rates in African American men (AAM)
relative to Caucasian American men (CAM). MHC class I polypeptide-related
sequence A (MICA) is a transmembrane protein responsible for activation
of immunocytes, by binding the NKG2D receptor. The expression of MICA
under normal conditions is low. However under stress conditions such as
those found in neoplasms, MICA expression is increased. The soluble form
of MICA (sMICA) is released by tumor cells and promotes immune evasion by
binding and downregulating the NKG2D receptor in immune surveillance
cells. Increased levels of sMICA have been found in patient sera of
several types of cancer, including PCa. We hypothesized that low oxygen
levels, a condition of the microenvironment present in aggressive tumors,
would modify the levels of sMICA in PCa cell lines. Likewise we
speculated that when compared to CAM, MICA would be differentially
expressed in tumors from AAM, known to suffer a more aggressive disease.
To address those questions, LNCaP cells were cultured under 20% O2
(normoxia) and 2% O2 (hypoxia) at various time points, supernatants were
collected and the presence of sMICA in culture supernatant and patient
sera was detected by ELISA. After 48 hours, the cells grown in hypoxia
expressed about 5-fold more sMICA than cells grown in normoxia. When
assessed in patient plasma, PCa patients had 2-fold more sMICA compared
to healthy controls. In additional experiments cells growing under
different oxygen levels were lysed and used in Western blot analysis to
detect cellular MICA. Normal oxygen levels increased MICA protein by
3.5-fold. Hypoxia reduced MICA expression by 11%. A tissue microarray
(TMA) was stained with MICA polyclonal antibody. The TMA was composed of
34 tumor samples and 30 controls. The samples came from 32 CAM and 32
AAM. The staining intensity was scored as 0, 1, 2 or 3 and scores 2 and 3
were defined as high intensity. Association of the staining result to
presence of tumor was evaluated using the Fisher's exact test. A higher
proportion of high intensity in tumor site (50%) was found when compared
to non-tumor site (20%, p = 0.019). Interestingly, stronger association
was expressed in CAM (p = 0.036) than in AAM (p = 0.265). The results
found in the cell line suggest that different oxygen levels affect the
expression of sMICA. Higher expression of MICA in prostate tumor tissue
and sMICA in patient sera are consistent with data previously reported in
other cancers. Lower intensity in MICA staining in AAM patients may be
related to better capacity of the tumor to evade the immune system.
Overall our findings suggest the involvement of MICA on aggressive PCa.
More studies are needed to decipher the biological mechanisms of MICA's
immune evasion in prostate tumors and to establish its contributing role
to aggressive disease in minorities.Funding sources: PCRP
W81XWH-14-1-0151, UMMC Office of Research

