Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated serum monocyte chemotactic protein 4 (MCP4) as a novel
noninvasive prognostic and predictive biomarker for detection of
metastasis in colorectal cancer


Purpose. Despite the recent progress in diagnosis and treatment for
colorectal cancer (CRC), prognosis of CRC patients still remains poor.
Metastatic recurrence is the major causes of cancer-related death in CRC
patients, and recent progress in treatment options, especially technical
advances in invasive treatment for metastatic lesion, have improved the
prognosis of CRC patients with metastasis. Furthermore, almost half of
patients that receive chemotherapy derive no clinical benefit, though all
are exposed to these severe toxic and expensive therapeutic regimens in
patients with metastatic CRC patients. In view of these underlying
issues, for improvement of patient's prognosis, there is a keen interest
in developing robust biomarkers that can identify the subset of patients
who can benefit from intensive post-treatment surveillance protocols for
early detection of recurrence, and prompt decision of appropriate
treatment protocol. Herein, we systemically and comprehensively evaluated
differentially levels of serum cytokines using array-based techniques to
identify novel and reliable serum biomarker to predict metastasis and
poor outcome in CRC.Methods. The study design included an initial dual
screening phases, and followed by a subsequent clinical validation phase
in this study.In discovery phase, we examined cytokine profiling using
preoperative serum from two different CRC cohorts (n = 30) to identify
differentially expressed serum cytokines in CRC patients with metastasis.
In validation phase, serum levels of MCP-4 were assessed in 194 CRC
patients by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and their relationships
with clinicopathological findings, including recurrence and survival,
were investigated.Results. In discovery phase, three cytokines (elevated:
MCP-4, ENA-78; decreased:Ckb8-1) were overlapped as a differentially
expressed cytokines in serum from CRC patients with metastasis compared
those without metastasis. High serum MCP-4 was significantly associated
with older age (p = 0.033), advanced T stage (p = 0.029), distant
metastasis (p = 0.011) and UICC stage classification (p = 0.006). Cox
regression analysis showed that elevated MCP-4 was a significant and
independent prognostic factor of disease free survival (HR:2.6,
95%CI:1.0-6.7) and overall survival (HR:2.7, 95%CI:1.3-5.9) in all CRC
patients. Furthermore, logistic regression analysis revealed that high
serum MCP-4 level was an independent marker in predicting distant
metastasis in CRC (OR:3.8, 95%CI:1.3-10.9).Conclusion. Our comprehensive
study highlights the clinical feasibility of serum MCP-4 as a prognostic
and predictive biomarker for distant metastasis and recurrence in CRC
patients. Quantification of serum MCP-4 concentration might support the
early detection/prediction of recurrence and may contribute to the
prediction of clinical outcomes in CRC.

