Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of bcl-2 family proteins in phorbol ester-induced apoptosis
of acute myeloid leukemia cells


Human acute myeloid cell lines undergo genetic re-programming in response
to differentiation inducers. The M3 AML cell line, HL-60, has served as a
model system for studying phorbol ester-induced myeloid differentiation
into macrophage-like cells. Macrophage differentiation is preceded by
cell cycle arrest and followed by apoptosis. Therefore, the system
elucidates the changes in the leukemia cell gene expression program
necessary to override the genetic alterations driving continuous cell
division, preventing myeloid differentiation, and blocking programmed
cell death. We hypothesize that defining the evolving transcriptome as
AML cells reverse their proliferative, undifferentiated, and pro-survival
phenotype will reveal genes regulating these processes and possibly
identify new targets for AML treatment. Whole genome exon DNA microarray
analyses identifies 1260 genes whose RNA expression levels change
significantly during the reprogramming. Among these genes are members of
the BCL-2 family that encode both pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins (BBC3,
PMAIP1, BID and BCL2, MCL1, BCL2A1, respectively). Myeloid cell leukemia
1 (MCL1) is a BCL-2 family protein defined as an anti-apoptotic protein,
however MCL1 increases in expression following phorbol ester treatment in
HL-60 cells, as well as other AML lines including THP-1, Kasumi-1, and
KG-1. The MCL1 gene can be alternatively spliced to generate a transcript
encoding a BH3-only variant (MCL1S) known to exhibit pro-apoptotic
function. Western blotting demonstrates the accumulation of MCL1S protein
prior to the initiation of apoptosis in phorbol ester treated cells. Here
we present evidence for splice variant switching and explore the
possibility that reduction in the pro-survival form, MCL1L, and
accumulation of MCL1S mediates the p53-independent initiation of
apoptosis. Currently, we are evaluating the effects on the leukemic
phenotype and apoptotic response to phorbol ester in HL-60 cell lines
overexpressing MCL1L, MCL1S, and PMAIP1, as well as HL-60 lines
containing CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockouts of MCL1 and PMAIP1.

