Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic discovery of biomarkers for ovarian cancer by using the
Human Protein Atlas database


Purpose: The extensive accumulation of human protein expression datasets
in normal and cancer tissues provides unique opportunities to perform
systematic selection of tumor biomarkers. This study aims to discover
biomarkers for ovarian cancer (OC) by data mining the Human Protein Atlas
databases in a systematic manner.Design methods: The Human Protein Atlas
website (HPA, www.proteinatlas.org) is a publicly available database with
spatial distribution of 20,356 proteins in 44 different normal human
tissues and 20 different types of cancers. It is ideal for biomarker
discovery. SAS software version 9.4 was used to data mine HPA database.
All the potential biomarkers should meet the following criteria: the
protein have 75% high or medium expression in OC but have low or no
expression in other types of cancers, and the protein have low or no
expression in at least one type of tissues of ovary included in the HPA
database, the overall expression in normal tissues is 40%. Then ELISA was
used to test the diagnostic performance of some of the selected
biomarkers.Results: Nineteen out of twenty different types of cancers
included in the HPA database were studied in our study, carcinoid was
excluded in the selection process due to the lack of proper normal
control tissues. In general, PLAT might be a universal biomarker for 19
cancers. In total, 2,593 potential biomarkers for OC were selected.
Ninety seven proteins out of 2,593 proteins might be OC-specific
according to the available data. After an intensive manual search from
the website, twelve proteins (STC1, MSLN, LSM3, WFDC2/HE4, ZNF2, CRIP3,
XAF1, SLC35E2B, IFT88, ATP13A3, ZNF787 and TROAP) were selected for
further research. Among them, WFDC2/HE4, MSLN have already been reported
to have good diagnostic performance in OC by other researchers. ELISA was
further used to test whether serum autoantibodies against PLAT or MSLN
can distinguish 44 OC patients from 48 normal controls. The AUC of
anti-PLAT and anti-MSLN were 0.783 (P Purpose: The extensive accumulation
of human protein expression datasets in normal and cancer tissues
provides unique opportunities to perform systematic selection of tumor
biomarkers. This study aims to discover biomarkers for ovarian cancer
(OC) by data mining the Human Protein Atlas databases in a systematic
manner.Design methods: The Human Protein Atlas website (HPA,
www.proteinatlas.org) is a publicly available database with spatial
distribution of 20,356 proteins in 44 different normal human tissues and
20 different types of cancers. It is ideal for biomarker discovery. SAS
software version 9.4 was used to data mine HPA database. All the
potential biomarkers should meet the following criteria: the protein have
75% high or medium expression in OC but have low or no expression in
other types of cancers, and the protein have low or no expression in at
least one type of tissues of ovary included in the HPA database, the
overall expression in normal tissues is 40%. Then ELISA was used to test
the diagnostic performance of some of the selected biomarkers.Results:
Nineteen out of twenty different types of cancers included in the HPA
database were studied in our study, carcinoid was excluded in the
selection process due to the lack of proper normal control tissues. In
general, PLAT might be a universal biomarker for 19 cancers. In total,
2,593 potential biomarkers for OC were selected. Ninety seven proteins
out of 2,593 proteins might be OC-specific according to the available
data. After an intensive manual search from the website, twelve proteins
(STC1, MSLN, LSM3, WFDC2/HE4, ZNF2, CRIP3, XAF1, SLC35E2B, IFT88,
ATP13A3, ZNF787 and TROAP) were selected for further research. Among
them, WFDC2/HE4, MSLN have already been reported to have good diagnostic
performance in OC by other researchers. ELISA was further used to test
whether serum autoantibodies against PLAT or MSLN can distinguish 44 OC
patients from 48 normal controls. The AUC of anti-PLAT and anti-MSLN were
0.783 (P < 0.001) and 0.666 (P = 0.006), respectively.Conclusions: HPA
database have made systematic discovery of cancer biomarkers possible.
PLAT and MSLN can distinguish OC from normal controls. Another 11
proteins have great potential to serve as OC biomarkers and further
validation studies are warranted to test their diagnostic performance and
whether these biomarkers are OC specific.Keywords: ovarian cancer, tumor
associated antigen, big data, data mining, systematic discoveryThis study
was supported by grants from the General Program of National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 81172086 and No.81372371). We would also
like to acknowledge the Border Biomedical Research Center (BBRC) Core
facilities at The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) for their help,
which were funded by NIH Grant (5G12MD007592).

