Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPEN stimulates primary cilia formation, cell migration and is
associated with metastasis in breast cancer


The primary cilium (PC) is a microtubule-based and non-motile organelle
that functions as animal cells antennae, regulating a number of
signalling pathways, including the mTOR, PDGFR and Wnt pathways, in
addition to being essential for activation of the canonical Hedgehog (Hh)
pathway. In breast cancer, the PC is a structure that is frequently lost
due to transcription- and mutation-driven alterations in cilium-related
genes. In a study aiming to delineate the hormone-independent
transcriptional program regulated by SPEN, a gene that we have identified
as a tumour suppressor gene in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast
cancers, we found that SPEN was co-expressed (R>0.95) with a number of
genes involved in ciliary biology (P = 1.64E-19), including the
ciliogenic transcription factors RFX2, RFX3 and FOXJ1. Interestingly, the
overexpression of SPEN resulted in the restoration of the PC in T47D
cells, which have previously been shown to lack this structure.
Consistent with the re-establishment of a PC in T47D cells,
SPEN-overexpressing T47D cells had decreased mTOR signalling,
hyperactivation of PC-dependent pathways, including the Hh and PDGFR
pathways, and increased migration. Silencing SPEN expression in the
non-tumorigenic MCF10A cells, which express high endogenous levels of
SPEN and show a high prevalence of PC (36%), considerably decreased PC
levels in MCF10A cells and was accompanied with increased mTORC1 activity
as well as attenuated cell migration. We also found that SPEN silencing
in MCF10A cells decreased the expression of the ciliogenic transcription
factor RFX3 and that SPEN interacts with DNA upstream of RFX3 gene
transcription start site in chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments.
Collectively, these observations indicate that SPEN may mediate its
effects, at least in part, through the transcriptional regulation of
RFX3. Accordingly, RFX3 expression levels were strongly positively
correlated (R = 0.55, PThe primary cilium (PC) is a microtubule-based and
non-motile organelle that functions as animal cells antennae, regulating
a number of signalling pathways, including the mTOR, PDGFR and Wnt
pathways, in addition to being essential for activation of the canonical
Hedgehog (Hh) pathway. In breast cancer, the PC is a structure that is
frequently lost due to transcription- and mutation-driven alterations in
cilium-related genes. In a study aiming to delineate the
hormone-independent transcriptional program regulated by SPEN, a gene
that we have identified as a tumour suppressor gene in estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancers, we found that SPEN was co-expressed
(R>0.95) with a number of genes involved in ciliary biology (P =
1.64E-19), including the ciliogenic transcription factors RFX2, RFX3 and
FOXJ1. Interestingly, the overexpression of SPEN resulted in the
restoration of the PC in T47D cells, which have previously been shown to
lack this structure. Consistent with the re-establishment of a PC in T47D
cells, SPEN-overexpressing T47D cells had decreased mTOR signalling,
hyperactivation of PC-dependent pathways, including the Hh and PDGFR
pathways, and increased migration. Silencing SPEN expression in the
non-tumorigenic MCF10A cells, which express high endogenous levels of
SPEN and show a high prevalence of PC (36%), considerably decreased PC
levels in MCF10A cells and was accompanied with increased mTORC1 activity
as well as attenuated cell migration. We also found that SPEN silencing
in MCF10A cells decreased the expression of the ciliogenic transcription
factor RFX3 and that SPEN interacts with DNA upstream of RFX3 gene
transcription start site in chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments.
Collectively, these observations indicate that SPEN may mediate its
effects, at least in part, through the transcriptional regulation of
RFX3. Accordingly, RFX3 expression levels were strongly positively
correlated (R = 0.55, P<0.0001) with SPEN levels in a cohort of 82
clinical samples from triple negative breast cancer patients. Notably,
high SPEN RNA levels were also predictive of early metastasis in two
independent cohorts of 77 (HR = 2.25, P = 0.03) and 170 (HR = 2.23, P =
0.004) ER-negative breast cancer patients. Together, our findings
highlight a role for SPEN in the regulation of PC formation and support
important functions in the inhibition of mTORC1 and activation of Hh and
PDGFR pathways as well as cell migration, a process that may contribute
to early metastasis in ER-negative breast cancers.

