Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved therapeutics for hepatocellular carcinoma


Eighty percent of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) within the USA is
diagnosed late when chemotherapy provides only 2 months increased
survival. We fortuitously found that treatment with an alkylating agent,
methylnitrosurea (MNU), prior to tumorigenesis reduced tumor prevalence
later in life by 50% in C3HeB/FeJ male mice, a model of spontaneous HCC.
A similar effect was observed with temozolomide (TMZ), a glioblastoma
therapy that induces the same DNA damage at similar proportions to MNU.
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) repairs the highly
mutagenic and cytotoxic O6-methylguanine lesions induced by TMZ, and MGMT
abundance influences therapy response in glioblastoma. MGMT is reduced in
1/3 of human HCC, leading us to hypothesize that TMZ could be effective
in treating HCC. We proposed to combine TMZ with suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, to maximize
efficacy, reasoning that SAHA would allow TMZ greater access to DNA to
induce greater levels of damage. We tested this drug combination in two
human HCC cell lines, Huh7, with reduced MGMT expression, and SNU398,
with higher expression. TMZ and SAHA synergistically reduced cell
viability in both cell lines with multiple dose combinations. Based on
this outcome, we tested the drugs in tumor-bearing C3HeB/FeJ mice.
Surprisingly, DMSO treated solvent control mice showed reduced tumor
burden. The DMSO treatment was repeated adding a sham control group and
confirmed that DMSO significantly reduces tumor burden. The TMZ cohort
also displayed a significantly lower tumor burden compared to the sham
cohort, but no significant difference was found with SAHA alone or
SAHA+TMZ. We previously showed that a hMGMT transgene protects from
hepatocarcinogenesis in C3HeB/FeJ mice, but surprisingly, there is not
additional protection when transgenic mice are treated with MNU. These
results suggest that the more prevalent cytotoxic lesions induced by MNU
and TMZ, e.g. N7-methylguanine, may be more important in HCC than
O6-methylguanine. These lesions are recognized by methylpurine-DNA
glycosylase (MPG) and repaired through base excision repair. Therefore,
we directly tested the role of MPG in TMZ therapy through altered
expression of MPG in Huh7 and SNU398 cell lines and showed that it does
affect sensitivity to TMZ.

