Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the origins of anaplastic large cell lymphoma in murine
models via forced lineage specificity of NPM-ALK expression in T cells


Background:Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a T cell lymphoma
representing 10-15% of all childhood non Hodgkin lymphomas, whereby those
positive for aberrant expression of Anaplastic Lymphoma kinase (ALK)
account for 50-80% of cases. The oncogene Nucleophosmin 1 (NPM)-ALK is
considered the main driver of pediatric ALCL identified in 83% of ALK+
cases. ALCL cells rarely express a T cell receptor (TCR), CD4 nor CD8
despite displaying an activated cytotoxic T cell phenotype (production of
perforin and Granzyme B). Expression of NPM-ALK in mice from the T-cell
specific CD4 promoter (which gives rise to expression throughout thymic
development) gives rise to thymic lymphomas not mimicking human ALCL
suggesting other events are required for peripheral T cell lymphoma
development and/or expression of NPM-ALK at different stages of T cell
progression: some theories have revolved around the possibility of an
infectious aetiology, or subversion of the development of T cells within
the thymus in the pathogenesis of ALCL.Objective:To assess the potential
cell of origin of ALCL through lineage restriction of NPM-ALK to defined
T cell lineages (CD4 or CD8) using TCR transgenic mice.Experimental
procedure:Disease presentation following backcrossing of the CD4/NPM-ALK
mouse to a clonal transgenic TCR OT1 (CD4/NPM-ALK/OTI) or OTII
(CD4/NPM-ALK/OTII) genetic background in the presence and absence of RAG
was monitored. The OTI and OTII transgenic mice express a transgenic TCR
which is MHC class I restricted, with a CD8 or MHC class II with a CD4
developmental skew respectively. The TCR in these mice has been
engineered to recognise ovalbumin peptides (ova).Results:CD4/NPM-ALK/OTI
mice develop peripheral disease histopathologically mimicking human ALCL.
Conversely, CD4/NPM-ALK/OTII mice develop cortical thymic lymphomas
similar to the parental CD4/NPM-ALK strain and mostly of a CD4 single
positive T cell phenotype (64%). Intriguingly, the peripheral T cell
tumours that develop in the CD4/NPM-ALK/OTI mice do not express the
transgenic OTI TCR (or endogenously rearranged TCR). Additionally,
haemopoietic tumors only occur on a RAG competent genetic background or
in the absence of ova stimulation even though TCR transgene expressing T
cells are detected in the periphery of these mice (CD4/NPM-ALK/OTI +
MHV-ova administration or CD4/NPM-ALK/OTI/RAG-/-).Conclusions: These data
represent the first murine model resembling human ALCL and suggest that
restriction of NPM-ALK to the CD8 T cell lineage results in a disease
more closely resembling human ALCL. Furthermore, our data suggest that in
the periphery, signaling though the TCR may be pejorative towards
peripheral lymphoma development.

