Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An INDEL variant confers melanoma risk through PARP1 expression
regulation


Recent genome wide association studies identified several new loci for
melanoma susceptibility including chr1q42.1 locus encompassing Poly
[ADP-ribose] polymerase 1 (PARP1). As an effort to identify effecter
genes and functional risk variants from this locus we performed
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis in 62 melanoma cell
lines. Among the genes in 1Mb area eQTL was identified for PARP1 and
subsequently validated by qPCR, where increased PARP1 levels are
significantly correlated with the risk allele (p = 0.03, copy number
adjusted). Further allele discrimination qPCR of PARP1 transcripts in 14
melanoma cell lines heterozygous and of neutral copy for the lead SNP
indicated significantly higher proportion for the risk allele (p =
.0001). Same allelic imbalance was also observed in 51 heterozygous
melanomas with neutral copy numbers from The Cancer Genome Atlas (p =
.028). To identify functional risk variants mediating these effects we
annotated this locus using six melanoma relevant cell types available
from ENCODE and Roadmap database. Based on recent fine mapping data
suggesting single-SNP model for this locus we prioritized high LD
variants for nomination. Among 65 SNPs of high LD with the lead SNP or
imputed best SNP (r2>0.6 using 1000 Genomes phase3), four exhibited
strong evidence as potential transcriptional enhancers. Electro Mobility
Shift Assays and luciferase assays on these four variants demonstrated
that one of them, a six-base pair INDEL (-/GGGCCC) in the first intron,
displayed strong allelic functionality. Consistent with the expression
data melanoma-associated deletion allele results in higher luciferase
activity while protective insertion allele binds a group of proteins with
higher affinity. Subsequent comparative mass-spectrometry for these
insertion-binding proteins identified a striking collection of
Guanine-quadruplex binding proteins including RECQ1 as potential
inhibitors of PARP1 expression. Consistent with this hypothesis
over-expression of RECQL results in more pronounced allelic difference in
luciferase activities indicating that RECQ1 contributes to allelic PARP1
expression. Further interrogation of RECQ1 and PARP1 expression
correlation analysis suggested that RECQ1 levels are inversely correlated
with PARP1 in melanomas carrying insertion alleles. These data
demonstrate that increased PARP1 expression is correlated with melanoma
risk and an INDEL variant mediates differential PARP1 expression possibly
through secondary DNA structure binding proteins including RECQ1.

