Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of bone morphogenetic protein 2 splice variant in
pancreatic cancer reveals cross-talk between endocytic and autophagy
pathways


The inherent heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer (PC) confers complex
transcription patterns that require a subset approach to identifying
novel gene targets. Thus, we performed meta-analysis on 11 COPA (Cancer
Outlier Profile Analysis) transformed datasets (www.oncomine.org)
depicting the expression profiles of 416 pancreatic tumors. This analysis
revealed Bone Morphogenetic Protein 2 (BMP-2), a pivotal regulator of
cellular proliferation, motility, & differentiation, to be increased in a
subset of PC tumors. Canonical BMP-2 signaling is mediated via type 1 &
type 2 serine/threonine kinase receptors, which upon ligand binding,
phosphorylate SMAD proteins leading to initiation or attenuation of gene
expression programs. Receptor mediated endocytosis has been shown to be
an integral regulator of BMP signaling intensity and duration whereby
endocytic internalization of activated receptors leads to their
subsequent inactivation and recycling back to the plasma membrane or
degradation via the lysosomal pathway. Our investigation of BMP-2 in PC
has revealed a novel splice variant (BMP-2 SV), which due to exclusion of
its signal peptide bearing exon, escapes the secretory pathway and is
endowed with an intracellular pattern of expression. Furthermore, this
BMP-2 isoform undergoes preferential degradation via the autophagy
lysosomal pathway (ALP). Endosomal and autophagosomal trafficking has
been previously shown to converge, through endosome and autophagosome
vesicular fusion, to form a hybrid structure described as an amphisome.
We hypothesize that endocytosed bone morphogenetic receptors and
autophagocytosed BMP-2 SV converge in the amphisome thereby promoting
signal transduction. Indeed, immunofluorescence analysis has revealed
colocalization of the exogenous BMP-2 SV with components of both the
endocytic and autophagic pathways. Furthermore, overexpression of BMP-2
SV in HEK-293 and pancreatic cancer cell lines was performed, which led
to a corresponding increased Smad 1/5/8 phosphorylation. In contrast,
biochemical inhibition of receptor mediated endocytosis with PitStop 2 or
disruption of microtubule-dependent vesicular transport with vinblastine
was found to diminish the BMP-SV dependent increase in Smad 1/5/8
phosphorylation. Likewise, increasing autophagy through Rapamycin
treatment led to a corresponding increase in Smad 1/5/8 phosphorylation.
Altogether, our results suggest a novel amphisome-mediated mechanism of
BMP-2 signaling due to convergence of endocytosed receptors and
autophagocytosed BMP-2 SV. Consequently, this intracellular mode of
signaling may endow pancreatic tumor cells with a cell-autonomous means
of driving its own growth and metastasis.

