Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapies for prostate cancer: Strategies for efficient
combinatorial approaches


Metastasis-associated protein 1(MTA1) is a cancer progression- related
epigenetic regulator, which is overexpressed in hormone-refractory and
metastatic prostate cancer (PCa). MTA1/HDAC unit is a part of the
multi-protein nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex. In
our previous studies we found that MTA1 expression is significantly
increased in prostate-specific Pten-null model, and that potent natural
analog of resveratrol, pterostilbene (PTER), exerts its anti-tumorigenic
effects by blocking MTA1-associated inactivation (deacetylation) of tumor
suppressors. SAHA (suberoylanilide hydroxamine, vorinostat) is a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that has been shown to be an effective
inhibitor of tumor cell growth. We hypothesize that targeting MTA1/HDAC
unit of NuRD complex using PTER in combination with SAHA could act
additively or synergistically to block prostate tumor progression in vivo
with higher efficacy and lower toxicity. In the current study, we
utilized the prostate-specific Pten-null mouse model to evaluate the
MTA1/HDAC mediated anti-cancer efficacy of combinatorial approach for
dietary PTER and clinically approved HDAC inhibitor, SAHA. After a series
of carefully designed breeding strategies and genotyping, we collected 30
prostate-specific luciferase expressing Pten knockout (Pten f/f;
Rosa26Luc/+; Pb-Cre4) male mice for our experiments. Prostate-specific
luciferase expression allowed non-invasive monitoring of prostate tumor
growth in these animals. Mice were randomized into four groups: Vehicle
control (10% DMSO); PTER (10 mg/kg bw) alone, SAHA (50 mg/kg bw) alone,
and PTER + SAHA. Compounds were injected daily, i.p., starting at 8 weeks
of age. Mice were sacrificed at week 18. Histopathological (H&E, SMA,
CK-8), immunohistochemical (Ki-67, cleaved caspase-3, CD31) and molecular
evaluation (MTA1, pAkt, AR) of prostate tissues showed beneficial effects
of treatments alone and more so in combination compared to the control
group.

