Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photodynamic therapy using photosensitizer and light emitting
diodes (LEDs) demonstrates oncolytic activity against prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) affects over 2 million Americans and its treatment
options include surgery, anti-hormonal drugs for androgen sensitive
tumors, and radiotherapy. However, patients undergoing androgen
deprivation therapy develop resistance leading to development of
castration resistant or androgen independent PCa. It is clear there is an
urgent need to find an effective treatment strategy to manage aggressive
PCa. An alternative treatment is the use of photodynamic therapy (PDT),
which involves the activation of a photosensitizer by a defined
wavelength of light in the presence of oxygen, generating transient
concentrations of reactive oxygen species. We hypothesize that PDT via a
photosensitizer (pheophorbide) in combination with light emitting diodes
(LEDs) [670 nm] will demonstrate oncolytic activity against PCa cells,
thus suggesting an alternative, less toxic cancer treatment. To test our
hypothesis, we used C4-2 and DU-145 PCa cell lines as an in vitro model
in this study. To explore the anti-cancer effects of PDT on PCa, cell
viability assay and wound healing assay were performed. Western blotting
was employed to identify the signaling molecules modulated by PDT. Our
cell viability assay results demonstrated significant oncolytic activity
against PCa cell lines using PDT with pheophorbide as a photosensitizer
combined with 670 nm LEDs in as little as an 88 second pulse with
increased lytic activity correlating with elevated energy intensities. We
also observed variability in cell line PDT susceptibility; wherein, C4-2
cells were more susceptible than DU-145 PCa cells. The wound healing
assay results with pheophorbide and 670 nm LEDs demonstrated significant
inhibition of migration abilities of both C4-2 and DU-145 PCa cells.
These findings implicate the anti-metastatic activity of PDT on PCa.
Further, our mechanistic analysis showed activation of BiP/GRP78, an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone, in C4-2 as well as DU-145 PCa
cells. This suggests that the anti-cancer activity of PDT with
pheophorbide and 670 nm LEDs is via ER stress. In conclusion, our results
show PDT using pheophorbide and 670 nm LEDs as a promising therapeutic
strategy for PCa.

