Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carcinoma-associated fibroblast-derived CXCL12 enhances MDA-MB-231
tumor cell migration though mDia2 formin suppression


The tumor microenvironment (TME) is a heterogeneous region comprised of
tumor cells, stromal cells, and secreted factors that make the
environment favorable for cancer formation and progression. An important
step in the shift to a pro-cancerous environment is the transformation of
normal stromal fibroblasts to carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs).
CAFs are a critical cell type to understand. They are present in a
majority of solid tumors and can have a direct effect to enhance adjacent
tumor cell motility via their innate ability to secret cytokines,
chemokine and growth factors into the TME. We sought to understand how
CAF-derived chemokines impact breast tumor cell motility through
modification of the F-actin cytoskeleton. We collected cultured media
(CM) from WS19T fibroblasts, a patient-derived breast tumor CAF cell
line. CAF-CM dramatically enhanced wound-closure in MDA-MB-231
monolayers, relative to normal fibroblast cultured media. The chemokine
CXCL12 (SDF1 alpha) has been identified as a potential secreted
CAF-directed signal driving tumor cell migration. To determine if CXCL12
was the soluble factor in CAF-CM promoting tumor cell migration,
MDA-MB-231 cells were preincubated with AMD3100, an inhibitor of the
CXCL12 receptor, CXCR4 prior to CAF-CM application and wounding. AMD3100
effectively blocked CAF-CM-induced MDA-MB-231 migration. CXCL12
incubation with MDA-MB-231 cells equally promoted MDA-MB-231 wound
closure, supporting the notion that CXCL12 is secreted by CAFs to promote
MDA-MB-231 motility. We previously showed a link between CXCL12 directed
CXCR4 signaling and a critical regulator of the dynamic F-actin
cytoskeleton, mammalian Diaphanous-related formin (mDia2). This formin
regulates the assembly and bundling of unbranched actin filaments and
plays a role in tumor cell migration and invasion programs. Western
blotting CAF-CM-treated MDA-MB-231 cells revealed a near complete loss of
mDia2 protein. mDia1 and ROCK expression were unaffected with CAF-CM
treatment. These data were consistent with treatment with a functional
mDia FH2-domain inhibitor SMIFH2, which likewise suppresses mDia2 protein
levels in MDA-MB-231 cells. It remains unclear if CAF-derived CXCL12
first suppresses mDia2 FH2 activity, leading to loss of mDia2 protein,
thus promoting tumor cell motility. Current experiments are designed to
address this gap in the knowledge, potentially indicating a role for
CAF-derived soluble factors in modulating mDia2 protein function and
expression in migrating tumor cells.

