Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of PERK as an oncology target: A role for the unfolded
protein response in cancer


The Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) is a cellular stress response to
stressors that induce accumulation of unfolded proteins in the
endoplasmic reticulum (aka ER stress). The UPR protects cells from ER
stress by increasing the capacity of the ER and attenuating bulk
translation. Intense or unresolved ER stress induces apoptosis through
pro-apoptotic factors like CHoP. The UPR is activated in tumors,
especially those of hematological origin. PERK, a UPR sensor-kinase, is
highly active in these settings and might be an attractive target in
oncology.We have generated multiple potent, selective PERK inhibitor
scaffolds. Low doses of PERK inhibitor (The Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR) is a cellular stress response to stressors that induce accumulation
of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (aka ER stress). The
UPR protects cells from ER stress by increasing the capacity of the ER
and attenuating bulk translation. Intense or unresolved ER stress induces
apoptosis through pro-apoptotic factors like CHoP. The UPR is activated
in tumors, especially those of hematological origin. PERK, a UPR
sensor-kinase, is highly active in these settings and might be an
attractive target in oncology.We have generated multiple potent,
selective PERK inhibitor scaffolds. Low doses of PERK inhibitor (< pPERK
IC50) activate the downstream pathway, whereas higher doses return the
pathway to baseline, resulting in a bell-shaped activity curve for all
pathway readouts. The activation phase results in robust, selective
killing of tumor cells in vitro and in vivo, likely through sustained
translation inhibition and CHoP induction. However, application in the
clinic will be challenging due to irreversible toxicity to pancreatic
islets at constant, high doses and difficulty managing human dosing
through a bell curve.Emerging data might provide a solution to these
challenges. PERK IP-kinase assays demonstrate that compound binding at
any dose activates PERK and this activity is retained after compound
removal. Exposure modeling in vitro demonstrates that transient dosing
followed by compound removal results in a conventional sigmoidal
dose-response curve for viability. Intermittent dosing in vivo results in
CHoP induction and tumor growth inhibition even at very high doses of
PERK, consistent with PERK activation following compound clearance. These
findings suggest that optimized scheduling might drive robust tumor
growth inhibition with reduced risk of toxicity and facilitate a standard
clinical dose escalation.

