Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common genetic variants associated with breast cancer risk used in
the Athena study to enhance models identifying women for breast cancer
chemoprevention


Background: The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that women
with a >3% five-year risk of developing breast cancer consider taking
selective estrogen receptor modifiers (SERMs) or aromatase inhibitors
(AIs) to reduce their risk. Polygenic risk score (PRS), calculated by
adding the individual breast cancer risk association for each common
genetic variant (SNP), has been found to predict women at low- to
high-risk of breast cancer. We analyze associations between SNP risk
alleles and known breast cancer risk factors (ethnicity, family history
of breast cancer and number of biopsies); furthermore, we quantify the
likely impact on chemoprevention recommendations by adding the PRS to
known risk models in a subset of women participating in the University of
California 100,000 women Athena Breast Health Network.Methods: Our
research cohort included 838 women with no previous diagnosis of breast
cancer from the University of California, San Francisco, and was enriched
for women determined to be at elevated risk for developing breast cancer
by the Gail model. A panel of 75 breast cancer risk SNPs were evaluated
on saliva and blood samples (Akesogen Inc; COGS oncochip array). The PRS
for each patient was calculated by converting the odds ratio for each SNP
into a likelihood ratio (LR) and combining LR's across SNPs. Breast
Cancer Surveillance Consortium (BCSC), Gail, BCSC-PRS and Gail-PRS scores
(risk models incorporating PRS within a Bayesian framework), were
evaluated for each patient. Associations between variables were assessed
using t-test or ANOVA. A threshold of pBackground: The U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommends that women with a >3% five-year risk of
developing breast cancer consider taking selective estrogen receptor
modifiers (SERMs) or aromatase inhibitors (AIs) to reduce their risk.
Polygenic risk score (PRS), calculated by adding the individual breast
cancer risk association for each common genetic variant (SNP), has been
found to predict women at low- to high-risk of breast cancer. We analyze
associations between SNP risk alleles and known breast cancer risk
factors (ethnicity, family history of breast cancer and number of
biopsies); furthermore, we quantify the likely impact on chemoprevention
recommendations by adding the PRS to known risk models in a subset of
women participating in the University of California 100,000 women Athena
Breast Health Network.Methods: Our research cohort included 838 women
with no previous diagnosis of breast cancer from the University of
California, San Francisco, and was enriched for women determined to be at
elevated risk for developing breast cancer by the Gail model. A panel of
75 breast cancer risk SNPs were evaluated on saliva and blood samples
(Akesogen Inc; COGS oncochip array). The PRS for each patient was
calculated by converting the odds ratio for each SNP into a likelihood
ratio (LR) and combining LR's across SNPs. Breast Cancer Surveillance
Consortium (BCSC), Gail, BCSC-PRS and Gail-PRS scores (risk models
incorporating PRS within a Bayesian framework), were evaluated for each
patient. Associations between variables were assessed using t-test or
ANOVA. A threshold of p<0.05 was used to assess significance.Results:
Women in this study carry an average of 65 risk allele SNPs (of 150, 2
per locus). By ANOVA, there is a statistically significant association
between the SNPs risk allele count and ethnicity (p = 0.014), with a
trend towards association with a family history of a first-degree
relative with breast cancer (p = 0.053). PRS is significantly associated
with a family history breast cancer (p = 0.031); neither SNP allele count
nor PRS associates with previous biopsy status.We found by adding PRS
that 12% (86/707) and 13% (104/776) of patients with a prior BCSC or Gail
score 3% five-year risk, respectively, changed classifications by adding
PRS and would no longer be eligible for chemoprevention.Conclusion: The
addition of SNP based PRS to BCSC and Gail models significantly changes
how women are classified and as a result changes whether risk reducing
agents are recommended.PRS will be combined with BCSC and genetic test
results for 9 breast cancer genes to calculate a women's breast cancer
risk in the PCORI-funded Athena WISDOM study of 100,000 women, comparing
risk-based vs. annual mammography screening.

