Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-mediated resistance to anti-PD1 therapy in lung cancer


Immunotherapies targeting programmed cell death receptor-1 (PD-1) have
shown some clinical success, validating the role of immune modulation in
the treatment of cancer. However, only 18% of non-small cell lung cancer
patients have responded to anti-PD1 treatment thus far, the remaining 82%
have not. This raises fundamental questions about mechanisms of
resistance to anti-PD1 therapy and potential strategies to overcome
resistance. Previously, our group generated an anti-PD-1-resistant
preclinical tumor model after sequential in vivo passage of the murine
lung cancer cell line 344SQ (p53R172Hg/+KrasLA1/+) into syngeneic mice,
previously treated with anti-mouse PD-1 antibodies. In this study, we
analyzed global gene expression of microRNAs and correlated with our
previous mRNA microarray data to validate potential target candidates in
order to identify mechanisms of resistance to anti-PD1 therapy. For the
microRNA microarray studies, 344SQ_P (parental) or 344SQ_R (resistant)
cells were inoculated into the right flank of 129Sv/ev mice (female mice,
12-14 weeks old, 5 mice per group). Anti-PD1 or control IgG (10mg/kg)
antibodies were given on days 4 and 7 after tumor inoculation. On day 11,
tumor tissues were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.
RNAs from three independent biologic replicates per group were used for
GeneChip miRNA 4.0 Array (Affymetrix). Significant differences in
microRNA gene expression levels between groups were defined as an
adjusted P value 2. Heatmaps were created by using the heatmap.2 function
in the gplots R package. Our previous studies demonstrated that major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II and antigen presentation
pathway, were significantly downregulated in the anti-PD-1-resistant
tumors compared with parental tumors. Here, we found that microRNAs
significantly upregulated in the anti-PD1 resistant model directly
regulates MHC class I and II and antigen presentation machinery genes,
including B2M, CIITA, PSMB8, PSMB8, TAP2 and TAPBP, promoting resistance
to anti-PD1 therapy. Because activated CD8+ tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes must bind to MHC I proteins to kill target tumor cells, one
way in which tumors can evade destruction by the immune system is through
downregulating expression of MHC I on their surfaces. Therefore, our
study identified upregulation of microRNAs that modulates the antigen
presentation pathway as an underlying mechanism by which some tumors do
not respond to anti-PD1 therapy. Our future goal is to validate these
findings on our ongoing clinical studies.

