Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different dietary patterns and reduction of lung cancer risk: a
large case-control study in the U.S


Importance: Reducing lung cancer risk by modifying diet is highly
desirable. However, the association of different U.S. dietary patterns
with lung cancer risk is poorly understood, especially for regional
dietary patterns.Objective: We investigated whether different U.S.
dietary patterns were associated with lung cancer risk and whether the
associations could be modified by genome-wide association study
identified susceptibility loci.Design, Setting, and Participants: Study
participants were accrued from a large ongoing case-control study of lung
cancer initiated in 1995. Cases were newly-diagnosed and histologically
confirmed non-small cell lung cancer patients from The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, and healthy controls without a history
of cancer were from the Kelsey-Seybold Clinics. We limited the analysis
to non-Hispanic whites, and after exclusion, 2,139 cases and 2,163
frequency-matched controls on age (5 years), sex, and smoking status
(current, former, never) were included in the final analysis.Exposures:
Dietary intake was assessed with a validated food frequency
questionnaire. Three dietary patterns (i.e., Tex-Mex, fruits and
vegetables, and American/Western) were derived using exploratory factor
analysis, and factor scores of derived dietary patterns were categorized
into quintiles.Main Outcome and Measure: The association between dietary
patterns and lung cancer risk.Results: The adjusted odds ratios comparing
the highest to the lowest quintile of the factor scores of Tex-Mex,
fruits and vegetables, and American/Western patterns were 0.45 (95% CI =
0.37-0.56), 0.68 (95% CI = 0.55-0.85), and 1.45 (95% CI = 1.18-1.78),
respectively. The effects were stronger for squamous cell carcinoma and
among former or current smokers for the fruits and vegetables pattern,
and stronger for other non-small cell lung cancer and among never smokers
for the American/Western pattern. Additionally, a variant (rs2808630) of
theC-reactive protein gene significantly modified the associations of the
fruits and vegetables (P for interaction = 0.03) and American/Western (P
for interaction = 0.02) patterns with lung cancer risk.Conclusions and
Relevance: Our study provides the first evidence that the Tex-Mex dietary
pattern is associated with reduced lung cancer risk. Also, the fruits and
vegetables and American/Western patterns affects lung cancer risk, and
the effects are further modified by host genetic background. Our results
support modifying diet to reduce lung cancer risk.

