Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution and genomic tumor heterogeneity in non-small cell
lung cancer deciphered by multiparameter ploidy profiling


BACKGROUNDGenomic intra- and intertumor heterogeneity is one main reason
for relapse and resistance to therapy. There is a shortage of studies
characterizing the level of genomic intertumoral heterogeneity of known
cancer genes in multiple longitudinal biopsies of individual patients.
Additionally, a workflow to deconvulate the intermixture of tumor and
stromal components is missing. To overcome these limitations and to
decipher the genomic heterogeneity and clonal evolution, we developed a
method and applied it on matched (primary-recurrence/metastasis)
non-squamous, non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC).METHODSMultiparameter
Ploidy Profiling (MPP) comprises the isolation of nuclei from frozen or
formalin and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues, followed by multiparamter
flow sorting. Sorted populations were subjected to genomic profiling by
high resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and
massively parallel sequencing (MPS). DAPI allowed to seperate populations
by ploidy and anti-TTF1 antibodies was used to control for tumor nuclei.
Array-CGH, combined with ploidy, was used to retrieve genome wide copy
numbers. The Comprehensive Cancer Panel that covers all-exons of 409
cancer genes was applied on all sorted tumor and stromal populations to
detect somatic mutations and their variant allelic frequency
(VAF).RESULTSMPP was successfully applied to 44 frozen or FFPE tissue
specimens from 19 patients. Array-CGH and MPS of TTF1-negative, normal
cells were concordant to germline controls. Sequencing revealed that 50%
of mutations are shared between primary tumors and metastases. Except for
one patient, mutations with VAF>0.3 are shared between primary and
metastasis. The variant allelic frequency was significantly higher in
shared mutations than mutations that were private to one tumor. Besides
common activating mutations in EGFR and KRAS we found biallelic
inactivation in tumor suppressor genes like KEAP1, NF1, STK11 and TP53.
Two clonal evolutionary patterns were found: 1) early and 2) late
divergence. Matched tumors without any shared mutations were classified
as unrelated primary tumors.CONCLUSIONThe power of MPP is to increase the
precision of downstream analysis, due to the sorting of pure populations
of tumor cells. It permitted to infer the clonal evolution of tumor
populations with unprecedented confidence. The low level of genomic
heterogeneity of mutations with VAF>0.3 in this study is in line with
recent data from Zhang et al., who showed that the poor precision of low
depth sequencing (BACKGROUNDGenomic intra- and intertumor heterogeneity
is one main reason for relapse and resistance to therapy. There is a
shortage of studies characterizing the level of genomic intertumoral
heterogeneity of known cancer genes in multiple longitudinal biopsies of
individual patients. Additionally, a workflow to deconvulate the
intermixture of tumor and stromal components is missing. To overcome
these limitations and to decipher the genomic heterogeneity and clonal
evolution, we developed a method and applied it on matched
(primary-recurrence/metastasis) non-squamous, non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC).METHODSMultiparameter Ploidy Profiling (MPP) comprises the
isolation of nuclei from frozen or formalin and paraffin embedded (FFPE)
tissues, followed by multiparamter flow sorting. Sorted populations were
subjected to genomic profiling by high resolution array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH) and massively parallel sequencing (MPS).
DAPI allowed to seperate populations by ploidy and anti-TTF1 antibodies
was used to control for tumor nuclei. Array-CGH, combined with ploidy,
was used to retrieve genome wide copy numbers. The Comprehensive Cancer
Panel that covers all-exons of 409 cancer genes was applied on all sorted
tumor and stromal populations to detect somatic mutations and their
variant allelic frequency (VAF).RESULTSMPP was successfully applied to 44
frozen or FFPE tissue specimens from 19 patients. Array-CGH and MPS of
TTF1-negative, normal cells were concordant to germline controls.
Sequencing revealed that 50% of mutations are shared between primary
tumors and metastases. Except for one patient, mutations with VAF>0.3 are
shared between primary and metastasis. The variant allelic frequency was
significantly higher in shared mutations than mutations that were private
to one tumor. Besides common activating mutations in EGFR and KRAS we
found biallelic inactivation in tumor suppressor genes like KEAP1, NF1,
STK11 and TP53. Two clonal evolutionary patterns were found: 1) early and
2) late divergence. Matched tumors without any shared mutations were
classified as unrelated primary tumors.CONCLUSIONThe power of MPP is to
increase the precision of downstream analysis, due to the sorting of pure
populations of tumor cells. It permitted to infer the clonal evolution of
tumor populations with unprecedented confidence. The low level of genomic
heterogeneity of mutations with VAF>0.3 in this study is in line with
recent data from Zhang et al., who showed that the poor precision of low
depth sequencing (<277x) contributes to an overestimation of genomic
heterogeneity (Zhang et al., Science 2014). Integrational analysis of
ploidy, chromosomal aberrations and mutations in 409 cancer genes allowed
to draw the evolutionary picture of each patient's disease. MPP appears
as a promising tool for identification of genomic vulnerabilities that
could be exploited for tailored treatment.

