Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circadian regulation of estrogen receptor alpha protein and
phosphorylation in mammary carcinoma cells


Circadian regulation of nuclear receptors in peripheral tissues is
important in the timing of key physiological processes. However few
studies have examined circadian regulation of estrogen receptor alpha
(ERa) protein in cancer or normal tissues, and no studies have evaluated
ER phosphorylation during the circadian cycle. In addition to
transcription, protein turnover and posttranslational modifications are
important regulatory mechanisms in the circadian control of protein
function. ER protein is important in regulation of the peripheral clock
proteins Period (PER), Cryptochrome (CRY), CLOCK, and brain and muscle
arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1). Several key ER phosphorylation sites, serine
118 and serine 167, important in regulating ER function contain consensus
sequences for two kinases, casein kinase 1 and 2 (CK1, CK2), that
regulate the peripheral clock proteins levels. The present study examined
ER protein levels and phosphorylation in human and rat mammary carcinoma
cells following entrainment by 50% serum shock that results in circadian
oscillation of clock genes in vitro. In human MCF-7 breast cancer cells,
ER protein levels exhibited circadian regulation after serum shock with
an approx. 60% decrease at 4 hours, recovery to baseline level or above
at 16 hours, and a 30% decline from baseline at 24 hours. Estradiol
treatment resulted in a longer sustained suppression of ER protein
levels. Rat MAT mammary carcinoma cells exhibited a similar circadian
regulation of ER protein following serum shock. In MCF-7 cells, serine
118 phosphorylation was elevated 2-7 fold 4 hours after serum shock with
a subsequent return to baseline levels by 12 hours. Estradiol treatment
resulted in a more robust circadian cycle of serine 118 phosphorylation
of up to 40 fold with peaks occurring between 4-8 hours and at 16-24
hours. A reverse phosphorylation pattern occurred for serine 167
phosphorylation. Serum shock resulted in a single induction up to 23 fold
of serine 167 phosphorylation at 8-12 hours that was suppressed by
estradiol. In rat MAT cells, serum shock resulted in circadian
oscillation of serine 167 phosphorylation up to 3 fold with peaks at 8
and 20 hours that was similar when cells were treated with estradiol. For
both MCF-7 cells and MAT cells, it was noted that peak levels of ERa
protein and ER phosphorylation were out of phase. Estradiol induction of
cyclin D1 and c-myc mRNA demonstrated functional ER signaling following
serum shock. These data demonstrate a very significant circadian
regulation of ER protein levels and ER phosphorylation in mammary
carcinoma cells following entrainment by serum shock that likely
contribute to time-dependent effects on peripheral clock function and ER
signaling in mammary cancer.[A.Y. and Y.Z. contributed equally to this
work.]

