Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple functional implications of MYB in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most common and deadliest gynecologic
malignancies in the United States, with an estimated 21,290 new cases and
14,180 deaths in 2015. Therefore, it is highly imperative to identify
novel molecular targets driving OC progression, so that an effective
treatment strategy can be developed against this devastating disease. In
the present study, we investigated the role of MYB in OC pathogenesis.
MYB/c-MYB is a cellular progenitor of v-MYB oncogenes, which encodes for
a transcription factor, and confers its oncogenic activity by regulating
the expression of several target genes. First, we examined the expression
of MYB in clinical specimens and OC cell lines by immunohistochemical and
immunoblot analysis, respectively. We observed intense staining of MYB in
the tissues of all the subtypes of OC, while no or negligible staining
was observed in normal ovarian tissues. Moreover, we found MYB to be
expressed in all the OC cell lines examined, with its heightened
expression in highly aggressive (TOV112D, SKOV3-ip) and chemo-resistant
(A2780-Cip) OC cell lines. To examine the pathological significance of
MYB in OC, we silenced its expression in TOV112D, SKOV3-ip and A2780-Cip
OC cell lines. Functional studies demonstrate that silencing of MYB led
to decrease in growth and clonogenic ability in TOV112D, SKOV3-ip and
A2780-Cip cells, as compared to their scrambled sequence-transfected
(Scr) control cells. Furthermore, MYB-silencing reduced motility and
invasion, as well as resulted in the loss of mesenchymal and gain of
epithelial markers. In addition, our data showed that TOV112D-shMYB,
SKOV3-ip-shMYB and A2780-Cip-shMYB were more sensitive to
cisplatin-cytotoxicity as compared to their respective controls.
Altogether, our studies provide the first experimental evidence for a
functional role of MYB in altered growth, malignant behavior and
chemoresistance of ovarian cancer.

