Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cas9 protein engineering for cell cycle-specific genome editing to
enhance homology directed repair


The comprehensive and coordinated efforts of The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) identified
the somatic genomic alterations occurring in a broad panel of human
cancers. The challenge ahead is to understand the functions of these
somatically altered genes.Genome editing tools like the CRISPR/Cas9
system represent a transformative technology that allows the precise
engineering of cells harboring specific (point) mutations found in
specific tumor subtypes, enabling the investigation of the role of a
candidate cancer gene in a stringently defined genetic context. Once
recruited to its DNA target sequence in cells, Cas9 induces a DNA double
strand break (DSB), which is either repaired by the non-homologous
end-joining pathway (NHEJ), or by homology-directed repair (HDR). The HDR
pathway allows for a precise site-specific knock-in and thus functional
analysis of cancer-associated sequence variants. However, HDR activity is
restricted to the late S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, while the NHEJ
pathway dominates DNA repair throughout the cell cycle. Thus, the
error-prone NHEJ pathway out-competes the HDR pathway, which reduces the
likelihood for precise insertions, deletions or base substitutions at the
DSB.Here, we devised a strategy to increase HDR by directly synchronizing
the expression of Cas9 with cell cycle progression. Fusion of Cas9 to the
N-terminal region of human Geminin converted this gene-editing protein
into a substrate for the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex APC/Cdh1 resulting
in a cell cycle tailored expression with low levels in G1, but high
expression in S/G2/M. Importantly, Cas9-hGem(1/110) increased the
relative rate of HDR by up to 87% at a single-copy reporter locus, and up
to 42% at the endogenous MALAT1 locus compared to wild-type Cas9.In
summary, our regulatory concept takes advantage of cell-autonomous
pathways to enable fluctuation of Cas9 protein levels coupled to cell
cycle dynamics. This resulted in higher site-specific integration events
without sophisticated manipulation of cells by small molecules or
additional gene targeting reagents. Future methodological developments
may enable high-resolution expression of Cas9 and alternative genome
engineering proteins like Cpf1 by combining cell cycle phase-specific
transcriptional and post-translational regulatory elements. This might
enhance HDR efficiencies even further, and will help to make sense of
cancer genomic data.

