Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of CDK inhibitors in a biochemical assay using a
comprehensive panel of human CDK-cyclin complexes


Members of the family of cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) have been
recognized as pivotal regulators of cell cycle progression for more than
20 years. Concordant to their central role in the control of cell
division they have been in the focus of research of proliferation
associated diseases ever since, most prominently amongst these
cancer.Although initial results obtained from first and second
generation, low specificity CDK inhibitors (e.g. Flavopyridol,
Roscovitine, Dinaciclib, AT7519, R547) have been sobering the recent
approval of the first CDK-inhibitor Palbociclib for the treatment of
certain forms of breast cancer clearly demonstrates the suitability of
cell cycle CDKs as targets in oncology.Furthermore, in addition to cell
cycle CDKs a second group of CDKs have been shown to have important roles
in the regulation of gene transcription, and several of the
transcriptional CDKs have become interesting targets in oncology.Recent
results underline the notion that for being effective in the treatment of
cancer, CDK inhibition requires very high specificity towards the
respective target CDK(s). For example CDK1 knockdown or CDK9 inhibition
have been shown to be synthetically lethal in combination with MYC
overexpression.Selectivity of compounds within the family of CDKs could
so far only be tested using a quite limited number of CDK-Cyclin
complexes expressed in human cells. To date there are 20 CDK genes and at
least 17 different Cyclin genes described, many of which give rise to
different variants, e.g. there are 3 D-type cyclins, two A- and E-type
cyclins etc.. Experimental data indicates that at least 50-60 different,
biologically relevant CDK-Cyclin complexes may exist, but only a limited
number of these are available for biochemical testing of drug candidates
so far.We have recombinantly expressed and purified 28 different
CDK-Cyclin complexes, covering a significant part of the CDK family, and
established in-vitro kinase-activity assays for these recombinant
enzymes.The resulting CDK panel represents the most comprehensive array
for biochemical testing of this enzyme group currently available. We
characterized the specificity of several CDK inhibitors that have been or
are currently in preclinical or clinical development with this CDK
collection. Results will be presented showing the specificity of these
inhibitors not only for CDKs but also for CDKs complexed to different
Cyclins. In several cases we could detect signifcant differences in the
inhibition of the same CDK complexed to different Cyclins, e.g. a 10fold
difference was seen for CDK6 complexes with Cyclin D1-3. A >100 fold
difference was detected for CDK3 complexed to either Cyclin E1 or Cyclin
C.This screening panel allows generating data on compound selectivity
early in development, diminishing the risk of designing a compound with
suboptimal target specificity.

