Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unfolded protein response is required for EMT-driven metastasis by
inducing CREB3L1


Cancer initiates and progresses in the presence of a diversity of
stresses ranging from nutrient deficiency, low oxygen supply to pH
fluctuations. A set of stress response pathways, termed unfolded protein
response (UPR), was evolved to maintain homeostasis of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) from disruption by the above stressors. While it is
broadly acknowledged that the UPR is involved in tumorigenesis, as tumor
cells can employ the UPR as a critical survival strategy to grow and
resist chemotherapy, the role of UPR in metastasis remains largely
elusive. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a cell
transdifferentiation program frequently hijacked by cancer cells to
migrate and invade. Here we showed cancer cells that have undergone an
EMT employ the PERK-ATF4 branch of the UPR to drive metastasis, since
loss of ATF4 abrogates the cell invasion upon an EMT. By conducting gene
expression profiling, we found that the PERK-ATF4 pathway mediates the
expression of a subset of the essential pro-invasion EMT-signature genes.
In particular, CREB3L1, an ER-associated transcription factor (TF), is
highly induced upon EMT in an ATF4-dependent manner. Knockdown of CREB3L1
effectively inhibits the EMT-driven invasion, while overexpression of
CREB3L1 not only promotes invasion but also rescues the decrease of
invasion caused by loss of ATF4. Mechanistically, CREB3L1 facilitates
invasion through an ECM-FAK cascade. In breast cancer patients, the
expression of CREB3L1 is significantly upregulated in breast cancer
metastases compared to primary lesions, and predicts a poor prognosis.
Most importantly, unlike other EMT-TFs, CREB3L1 could be inhibited by
known chemicals, since the activation of CREB3L1 is mediated by the S1P-
and S2P- dependent proteolysis. In an orthotopic breast cancer model, we
found that chemical inhibition of CREB3L1 drastically suppresses lung
metastasis. As a summary, we discovered that an ER stress-associated
transcription factor CREB3L1 is required for cancer metastasis, and the
susceptibility of CREB3L1 to chemical inhibition makes it a valuable
target for drug development.

