Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of human tumor cells to chemotherapy drugs by
antisense downregulation of RAD51: Targeting DNA repair to induce
synthetic lethality


The inherent genomic instability of cancer cells has been exploited as a
tumor-selective drug target to treat tumors that are deficient in
specific mechanisms of DNA repair. Inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) are routinely used clinically against tumors deficient
in BRCA1 or BRCA2, due to the poor capacity of these cells to undergo
homologous recombination repair (HRR). This exploitation of a tumor cell
deficiency to enhance selectivity to a particular drug is synthetic
lethality (Nature 434: 913, 2005). To make use of this phenomenon in
tumors that may not be inherently hypersensitive to a particular
treatment, we have sought to induce synthetic lethality by
down-regulating essential components of DNA repair, in particular BRCA2,
to sensitize cells to chemotherapy drugs [Mol Oncol 8(8): 1429-1440,
2014]. Given that an important function of BRCA2 is to modulate the
action of RAD51 in HRR, we determined whether antisense knockdown of
RAD51 could enhance tumor cell sensitivity to the PARP inhibitor olaparib
and the DNA-crosslinking agent cisplatin. Four different anti-RAD51 siRNA
molecules (Dharmacon), targeting coding sequences, were tested against
cell lines representative of different tumor types in an in vitro assay
of proliferation (non-small cell lung cancer line A549b, colon carcinoma
line HT-29, and prostate carcinoma lines DU145 and LNCaP). The siRNAs, as
single agents, inhibited proliferation in a concentration-dependent
fashion and to varying degrees, and sensitized tumor cells to olaparib. A
sequence that targeted region 1169-1187 of the RAD51 cDNA (NM_002875.4)
was utilized for further studies. At concentrations of anti-RAD51 siRNA
51a that inhibited proliferation of cell lines by less than 50%, 51a
enhanced cytotoxicity of olaparib by over 90% and of cisplatin by 60-90%.
In all cell lines except LNCaP (with mutant BRCA2) the combination of
siRNAs against RAD51 and BRCA2 acted cooperatively to enhance
cytotoxicity of olaparib and cisplatin. Notably, when used together, each
siRNA down-regulated expression of its respective target mRNA, as
demonstrated by quantitative RT-PCR, without interfering with the
activity of the other. RAD51 can be exploited clinically as a target for
inherent or induced synthetic lethality to DNA-damaging agents (e.g.,
cisplatin) or inhibitors of DNA repair (e.g., olaparib). Such treatment
can include tumors with BRCA2-deficiency, either inherent or induced, to
yield at least an additive anticancer effect. MR is a scholar of the CIHR
Strategic Training Program in Cancer Research and Technology Transfer
(CaRTT) and a recipient of the CIHR Banting and Best Canada Graduate
Scholarship.

