Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards a screening blood test for esophageal adenocarcinoma


BACKGROUND: The incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) has been
rapidly increasing globally. The majority of EAC cases are diagnosed at
late stages leading to poor 5-year survival of BACKGROUND: The incidence
of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) has been rapidly increasing globally.
The majority of EAC cases are diagnosed at late stages leading to poor
5-year survival of <20%. Monitoring programs for patients with the
metaplastic condition, Barrett's esophagus (BE) involves endoscopy with
biopsy. However, the cost-effectiveness is limited by the low rate of
progression to cancer and expense of the method. Our research program
aims to improve the cost-effectiveness of screening by developing a blood
test to select patients for endoscopy/biopsy. Using our integrated lectin
magnetic bead array (LeMBA) glycoprotein biomarker pipeline [1, 2] with
Australian cohorts for the discovery and qualification phases, we
identified serum lectin-glycoprotein biomarker candidates which can
distinguish EAC from BE and healthy controls [3]. Here, we report the
performance of these biomarker candidates in an independent patient
cohort from the Ochsner Health System, New Orleans, USA.APPROACH &
METHODOLOGY: Serum samples were collected from consenting patients
undergoing endoscopy (Control - 16, BE - 13, and EAC - 10). The control
group consisted of all patients not classified as BE with or without
dysplasia, or EAC. LeMBA-MRM-MS was performed using 4 different lectins
with different glycan specificities; AAL (Fucose1-2, -3, -6 linked
glycan), EPHA (bisecting GlcNAc), JAC (Gal1-6GalNAc and Gal1-3GalNAc),
NPL (Man1-6Man). Statistical analysis was performed using Shiny MixOmics
as previously described [3].RESULTS & DISCUSSION: Several lectin-protein
candidate biomarkers cross-validated in the USA cohort. Most notably,
differentially glycosylated complement component C9 is highly diagnostic
in both cohorts, achieving area under the receiver operating curve
(AUROC) of 0.74 (AAL-C9) to 0.90 (JAC-C9) as a single marker. Complement
C9 binding to all four monitored lectins were increased 1.4 to 1.8 fold
in EAC, compared to either BE or controls. Another consistent biomarker
is gelsolin, with its binding to EPHA and NPL lectin significantly
decreased in EAC, compared to either BE or controls. Hence, glycosylated
C9 and gelsolin show promise as potential serum biomarkers for EAC
screening, and will be further evaluated in prospective
cohorts.REFERENCES: [1] Loo et al., J Proteome Res 9, 5496-5500 (2010);
[2] Choi et al., Electrophoresis 32, 3564-3575 (2011); [3] Shah et al.,
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 14:3023-39 (2015).

