Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of circulating tumor
cell-derived xenografts in non-small cell lung cancer


Low numbers of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have so far limited the
establishment of CTC-derived xenografts (CDXs) to improve our
understanding of tumor progression, drug resistance mechanisms, and their
biological properties. We report the establishment and the phenotypic and
molecular characterization of one NSCLC CDX.Blood samples (30 ml) were
drawn from 49 NSCLC patients with advanced metastatic disease. CTCs were
enriched by RosetteSep, embedded in matrigel, and implanted in the
interscapular aspect of NSG mouse (Nod/Scid-IL2R-/-). Mice were
followed-up for one year according to ethical regulations. CDX tumours
and CDX derived cell lines were phenotypically and molecularly
characterized by immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, CGHarray,
exome sequencing and transcriptome gene expression.CTCs from one NSCLC
patient with 750 CTCs detected by CellSearch gave rise to a tumor 5
months after initial murine injection. Histological analysis confirmed
the human origin of the tumor and the presence of a poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma consistent with the patient's biopsy. Tumor was positive
for EpCAM, EMA, CK8;18, and Ki67, and negative for vimentin. A fraction
of cells (25%) from freshly dissociated tumors exhibited ALDH activity.
CGH from CDX tumors at passage 1 and 2 shows multiple gene rearrangement,
revealing a high degree of genomic instability. Transcriptome analysis of
ALDH positive and negative cells is ongoing and should help of
identifying a cancer stem cell gene expression signature. Whole-exome
sequencing of CDX tumor is ongoing and will be compared to data obtained
from single CTCs from the patient.A cell line established in vitro from
the CDX model grows in 3D clusters and is tumorigenic in mice.
Interestingly, this cell line is positive for cytokeratins, EpCAM,
E-cadherin, N-cadherin, vimentin, and expresses multiple cancer stem cell
markers including CD166, CD24, CD133 and, ALDH activity. The cell line is
hypotetraploid (about 70 chromosomes) and its CGH profile was similar to
that of the CDX tumour, revealing a high level of genome instability. By
investigating DNA replication process in this cell line, we found that it
exhibits a spontaneous enhanced DNA damage signaling associated to an
accumulation of DNA double strand breaks mainly in S phase strongly
suggesting that the CDX-derived cell line displays hallmarks on
replication stress that could explain, at least partially, the genomic
instability in the cells.We report a low success rate in the
establishment of NSCLC CDX (2%). However one NSCLC CDX model harboring
cancer stem cell properties and deficiency of DNA replication maintenance
was established. Ongoing work to identify a cancer stem cell signature
and characteristics replication stress markers in this CDX model will be
presented. This NSCLC CDX model will be useful to test drugs targeting
these alterations in vivo and improve our knowledge of drug resistance.

