Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent functional inactivation of the MGMT DNA repair protein by
dithiocarbamate compounds increases the efficacy of temozolomide in human
glioblastoma cells


There is an urgent need for the design and discovery of new and potent
inhibitors for the DNA repair protein MGMT
(O6-Methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase) in glioma therapy. MGMT is
highly expressed in brain tumors, and plays a primary role in conferring
resistance to alkylating agents. The psuedosubstrates for MGMT such as
the O6-benzylguanine have not been successful in the clinic due to
prolonged inhibition of DNA repair in the bone marrow stem cells.
Recently, we showed that the anti-alcoholism drug, disulfiram (DSF)
inhibits MGMT activity in the same way as ALDH by conjugating with the
active-site cysteine 145 (Carcinogenesis 35, 692, 2014). DSF, a
symmetrical molecule, is metabolized and split in half to yield
dithiocarbamate residues. Since the dithiocarbamates resulting from DSF
decomposition are the ultimate reactive species that inactivate the
aldehyde dehydrogenase and other signaling targets, we surmised that
dithiocarbamate derivatives by themselves will be active as MGMT
inhibitors and exert anticancer activities. Therefore, we tested various
dithiocarbamates (pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC);
diethyldithiocarbamate (EDTC); dimethyldithiocarbamate (MDTC) and
dibenzyldithiocarbamate (BDTC) on MGMT activity, protein levels, and
other redox-sensitive proteins such as the NF-B and GSTP1. The
cytotoxicity of these dithiocarbamates against the MGMT-proficient SF-188
glioblastoma cells was comparable with that of DSF, with the MDTC being
most effective and the benzyl derivative BDTC least potent. Western blot
analysis in HT29 and SF-188 cells revealed a concentration-dependent
degradation of MGMT by the dithiocarbamates, similar to DSF. All
dithiocarbamates except the BDTC were superior to DSF in degrading MGMT
protein. MDTC was the most potent followed by PDTC and EDTC in depleting
the MGMT protein from tumor cells. Further, MDTC was also effective in
reducing the cellular levels of NF-B protein. We also established that
MDTC binds to the active site cysteine145 in MGMT leading to its
inactivation. Currently, we have developed the pegylated PLGA
nanoparticles loaded with MDTC or zinc-chelated MDTC to target the
glioblastoma and other cancers. The efficacy of these formulations in
intracranial glioma models developed in nude mice is being evaluated. The
lack of cytotoxicity and inability to bind with MGMT by BDTC suggests
that the bulky group attached to the dithiocarbamate may hinder
interaction with target proteins or interfere with their metabolism.
Since MDTC has a good potential to cross the blood brain-barrier, possess
reactive thiol groups that can interact with not only MGMT but also
numerous signaling proteins, our strategy using this repurposed compound
holds promise in glioma treatment (supported by grants from CPRIT
[RP130266] and Carson-Leslie Foundation to KSS).

