Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclopamine tartrate, an anti-cancer agent targeting Hedgehog
signaling, strongly interferes with mitochondrial function and suppresses
aerobic respiration


The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is a major regulator of many fundamental
processes in mammalian embryonic development. These processes include
stem cell maintenance, determination of cell fate, tissue polarity, cell
survival, cell differentiation and proliferation. Although this pathway
is usually silenced in adult tissues, constitutive activation of the Hh
pathway can lead to tumorigenesis. This aberrant characteristic can be
observed in different types of human cancer including basal cell
carcinomas, medulloblastoma, lung cancer, ovarian cancer,
gastrointestinal cancer, breast and prostate cancer. This pathway has
been shown to regulate proliferation of cancer stem cells and increase
tumor invasiveness. Targeted inhibition of Hh signaling pathway is shown
to be effective in cancer treatment and prevention. Therefore, the
discovery of Hh pathway inhibitors can pave the way of finding effective
cancer treatments. The steroidal alkaloid cyclopamine was the first
compound found to inhibit Hh signaling and has been invaluable for
understanding the function of Hh signaling in development and cancer.
Cyclopamine tartrate (CycT) is an improved analogue of cyclopamine with
increased water solubility and bioavailabilty. We performed numerous
experiments to examine the effect of CycT in inhibiting Hh signaling on
an array of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) lines. We discovered that
CycT has a novel activity in disrupting mitochondrial function and
aerobic respiration. Our data show that CycT causes a substantial
decrease in aerobic respiration of NSCLC cells, similar to the effect of
glutamine deprivation. Mitotracker staining showed that CycT causes
mitochondrial fragmentation by increasing mitochondrial fission, which is
indicated by the localization of DRP1 at fission sites. Further
experiments showed that CycT increases ROS generation, which is
presumably a consequence of mitochondrial hyperpolarization.
Concomitantly, CycT causes apoptosis and suppress proliferation of NSCLC
cells.

