Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome analysis of patient-derived bladder cancer
xenografts identifies genes associated with chemoresistance


Background: Bladder cancer is among the ten most common cancers, with
about 380,000 new cases and 150,000 deaths per year worldwide.
Platinum-based combination chemotherapy is commonly used to treat
advanced bladder cancer. It has been shown that only 50% of the patients
with advanced bladder cancer respond to platinum-based therapy.Methods:
We employed a patient-derived bladder cancer xenograft (PDX) platform to
characterize the molecular mechanisms contributing to resistance to
gemcitabine-cisplatin combination therapy in advanced bladder cancer and
to identify novel candidates that can be targeted to treat chemotherapy
resistant bladder cancer. Transcriptome profiling of P0 (passage 0)
bladder cancer xenograft tumors from 4 PDX lines (2 gemcitabine-cisplatin
resistant lines and 2 drug sensitive lines) was performed by RNA-Seq
analysis.Results: PDXs retained the morphology fidelity and shared 92-97%
of genetic alterations of parental cancer cells. The RNA-seq data
suggested the presence of significant differences between the
transcription profiles of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant tumors. We
identified 333 genes >2 fold up or down regulated in the drug resistant
tumors compared to the drug sensitive tumors. Genes down-regulated in
drug resistant tumors include tight junction protein CLDN3 and regulators
of G-protein signaling RGS2 and RGS3. Significantly up-regulated genes
include metabolic enzymes ALDH2, ALDH3A1, ALDH4A1 and ALDH7A1,
transporter proteins ABCA1, SLC1A4, SLC2A5, SLC30A1, SLC39A6, SLC7A5 and
SLC9A3, Notch ligand JAG2, Growth hormone receptor GHR and transmembrane
glycoprotein GPNMB. Consistent with the change of cell surface proteins
such as GHR and GPNMB, the MAPK and the PI3K-AKT pathways were
upregulated when PDXs became resistant to cisplatin treatment.Conclusion:
Chemoresistance to gemcitabine and cisplatin is associated with altered
expression of several cell surface proteins and upregulation of the
downstream signaling pathways. Targeting these cell surface proteins can
possibly be harnessed to overcome chemoresistance. GPNMB, a type I
transmembrane protein highly up-regulated in the drug resistant tumors,
has previously been shown to be over-expressed in various cancers.
Targeting GPNMB with an antibody-drug-conjugate, glembatumumab vedotin,
has shown promising results in treating several cancers including breast
cancer and osteosarcoma. Further studies will elucidate whether targeting
GPNMB is an effective strategy for the treatment of chemotherapy
resistant bladder cancer.

