Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AP-1/Fra-1 as a target for therapy promotes chemoradiosensitivity
of cancer and cancer stem cells


Transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1) super-family is known to
modulate expression of array of genes during development of many cancers.
It is also an indispensable factor for efficient expression of high risk
HPV oncogenes E6/E7. Recent studies demonstrated the role of AP-1 in
promoting stemness/quiescence of cancer stem cells. We have recently
reported that HPVE6 oncogene controls stemness and self-renewal of
cervical cancer stem cells through Hes1/NOTCH-1expression but little is
known about factor(s) responsible for chemo- radioresistance of cancer
stem cells. To understand this we have dissected the role of AP-1and its
family members by using a herbal compound, curcumin and UV irradiation in
cervical cancer. We isolated cervical cancer stem cells and enriched them
by sequential gating from HPV+ve and HPV-ve human cervical cancer cell
lines (SiHa and C33a) using a set of functional and phenotypic markers
(ABCG2, CD49f, CD71, CD133). The isolated cervical cancer stem cells
(SP+veCD49+veCD71veCD133+ve) designated as CaCxSLCs displayed spheroid
forming and self-renewal property with increased expression of HPVE6,
AP-1 transcripts and a higher AP-1 DNA-binding activity compared to
non-stem cancer cells (NSPveCD49veCD71+ve CD133ve) or unsorted parental
cells. Treatment with UV-radiation alone resulted in clonogenic survival
of CaCxSLCs but not non-stem cancer cells with enhanced AP-1 expression
and activation. In contrast, CaCxSLCs treated with UV in combination with
curcumin, resulted in complete loss of AP-1 DNA-binding activity followed
by decrease in sphere formation and percentage of SP cells but an
increased expression of the fos-related antigen-1 (Fra-1) which has been
earlier shown to us have tumor suppressor activity in cervical cancer.Our
study demonstrates a critical role of AP-1/Fra-1 signaling in imparting
radiosensitization of cervical cancer stem cells. Curcumin, which down
regulates almost all signalling pathways, including all members of AP-1
except Fra-1 indicating its role in chemo-radiosensitization of cancer
stem cells. Thus combining curcumin with conventional cancer drugs may
make cancer treatment most effective.

