Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stapled peptide inhibitors of the estrogen receptor/steroid
receptor coactivator interaction


Despite undeniable successes, one of the major unsolved problems in
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer therapy is resistance to
endocrine therapy. One-third of breast cancer patients who are given
tamoxifen will develop recurrent cancer within 15 years. Importantly, the
estrogen receptor is still present and active in 80-85% of these
recurrent cases, but it is no longer sensitive to current therapies, so
new ways of targeting the estrogen receptor are needed. Because selective
estrogen receptor modulators indirectly block estrogen
receptor/coactivator interactions, our hypothesis is that directly
blocking the estrogen receptor/coactivator interaction will provide a
more robust blockade that will antagonize forms of estrogen receptor that
are active in both wild-type and some endocrine-resistant breast
cancers.As our starting point for inhibiting estrogen
receptor/coactivator interactions, we have chosen to use a class of
compounds that mimic -helices: stapled peptides. These non-natural,
synthetic peptides have a key alkene bond that resembles a staple.
Typically, peptides make poor drugs because they are rapidly hydrolyzed
by proteases and are poorly cell-permeable. Because of their non-natural
linkage, stapled peptides are poor substrates for proteases, so they are
metabolically stable. Some stapled peptides are also cell-penetrant. This
effect is highly sequence-specific, but it seems to be aided when
peptides have a relatively high formal positive charge. Stapled peptides
have been used to inhibit a variety of important protein-protein
interactions in cell culture and animal models. In this work, we have
created a library of stapled peptides that inhibit the interaction of the
estrogen receptor with the steroid receptor coactivator in vitro. The
best peptides show nanomolar IC50 values in a time-resolved fluorescence
resonance energy transfer assay. They show high helical content according
to circular dichroism studies. We have solved x-ray crystal structures of
these molecules bound to the estrogen receptor mutant Y537S, which
demonstrate their binding mode, and these studies are in agreement with
molecular dynamics simulations of these molecules bound to the estrogen
receptor ligand binding domain.

