Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of transcriptional and epigenetic signatures of
benign thyroid adenomas: Can we improve preoperative diagnosis of thyroid
nodules


Introduction: It has been estimated that as many as 50,000 patients in
the United States receive unnecessary thyroidectomies due to the
inability to distinguish benign thyroid nodules from malignant ones. Up
to 30% of fine needle aspirates performed for thyroid nodules diagnosis
are indeterminate due to overlapping cytological features between benign
and malignant nodules. At present, commercially-available diagnostic
tests for thyroid nodules are based on the molecular differences observed
between thyroid cancer compared to normal thyroid tissue. However, the
molecular signature of benign thyroid nodules is neither
well-characterized nor included in currently available diagnostic panels.
The objective of this study was to determine whether thyroid adenomas
(TA) are distinct from normal thyroid tissue and papillary thyroid cancer
(PTC).Methods: Whole transcriptome analysis was used to assess
differences in transcriptional activity in 9 TA and 12 PTC tissue pairs
(with matched normal adjacent thyroid tissue from the same patients). In
order to evaluate epigenetic alterations associated with TA development,
we used reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) in 114 thyroid
specimens (40 PTC, 28 TA and 46 matching adjacent thyroid tissues). This
approach provides single base resolution of DNA methylation genome
wide.Results: According to our data, transcriptome activity divided
analyzed specimens into three separate groups: PTC, TA and adjacent
thyroid tissues. TA demonstrated a unique transcriptional pattern,
distinct from both normal adjacent thyroid tissue and PTC. Similar
results were obtained by analysis of epigenetic alterations in these
tissues. According to the clustering analysis of DNA methylation
patterns, the majority (18 of 28) of benign nodules forms a separate
cluster, distinct from adjacent normal thyroid and PTC tissue clusters.
Within this group, 14 of 28 TA demonstrated a distinct DNA methylation
signature associated with TA-specific hypermethylation. In fact, only 4
of 28 TA demonstrated a DNA methylation signature similar to normal
thyroid tissue, suggesting that the majority of TA is not equivalent to
normal thyroid.Conclusion: According to whole transcriptome analysis and
genome wide analysis of DNA methylation, TA is frequently associated with
specific transcriptional and DNA methylation signatures compared to
normal thyroid tissue and PTC. These data indicate that the majority of
thyroid adenomas are associated with a unique molecular pathway that is
distinct from PTC development. Use of the adenoma-specific molecular
signature can be an essential factor in the improvement of PTC diagnostic
panels, helping to reduce unnecessary thyroidectomies.

