Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rhodamine esters as fluorescent tumor painting agents for
glioblastoma


GBM remains one of the most difficult cancers to treat. Despite surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy, tumors invariably recur. There is a strong
correlation between extend of resection and subsequent time to recurrence
and ultimate patient survival. A key challenge for the neurosurgeon is to
minimize removal normal brain tissue whilst being as aggressive as
possible with regards of removal of tumor tissue. Defining tumor boundary
during surgery remains challenging. Fluorescent dyes such as 5-
Aminolevulinic acid, have been studied as aids for tumor delineation but
have failed to gain widespread acceptance in clinical practice. It has
long been known that a substantial number of cancers, including
Glioblastoma, exhibit a hyperpolarization of the plasma and mitochondrial
membrane potential. This hyperpolarization is manifest by increased
retention of lipophilic cationic dyes (Nernstian probes), such as the
SPECT-CT probes 99Tc-Sestamibi and 99Tc-Tetrofosmin in both glioma cells
in culture and primary tumors. We synthesized a series of ester
derivatives of Rhodamine B with high fluorescence quantum yield in the
red spectrum and a very favorable biological safety profile. Utilizing a
series of intracranial xenografted glioblastoma pre-clinical mouse
models, we show that a single I.V. injection of 1 mg/kg
fluoroethylrhodamine ester (RhoFe) results in dramatic selective
fluorescence in tumor but not surrounding normal brain tissue. This was
observed even in tumors with minimal breakdown of the blood brain
barrier, as determined by T1-contrast enhancing agents.
RhoFe-tumor-selective fluorescence can remain visible up to 72 hours
after injection. Similar results were obtained with Tetramethylrhodamine
ester (TMRE) and rhodamine 123 (Rho123), but unlike RhoFe, TMRE proved
highly toxic, while Rho123 fluorescence was both weaker and in the green
spectrum, accompanied by higher endogenous auto-fluorescence. While well
tolerated in vivo, RhoFe shows strong photoxicity in cell culture,
suggesting potential as a photodynamic therapy agent. Taken together,
these data suggest that RhoFe may be a promising tumor painting agent,
with potential utility in fluorescence guided surgery as well as
photodynamic therapy.

