Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of molecular predictors of differential
chemotherapy response using patient-derived xenografts


Background: Clinical oncology trials in humans have major limitations,
not the least of which is the inability to treat a single tumor with
multiple drugs simultaneously to identify the most effective treatment
options. In theory, this and other limitations can be overcome using an
animal clinical trial platform that exploits collections of human cancer
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models.Clinically, breast cancers are
divided into three distinct groups: those that express the estrogen
hormone receptor (ER+) (which typically also express the progesterone
hormone receptor (PR+)), those with amplified or overexpressed ErbB2
(HER2) oncogene (HER2+), and those that express none of these three
markers (triple negative breast cancer TNBC).Unlike ER+ and HER2+ breast
cancers, there are currently no targeted therapies against TNBC.
Treatment of TNBC entails surgery coupled with radio- or chemotherapy, or
both. Chemotherapy options include Taxanes (e.g. Docetaxel, Paclitaxel),
Anthracyclin based therapies (Adriamycin/Doxorubicin plus Cytoxan
(cyclophosphamide) (AC), and more recently, and platinum-based agents
(e.g. Cisplatin, Carboplatin). However, other than BRCA1/2 mutation
status correlating with increased efficacy of platinum-based agents,
there are currently no clinically useful predictors of differential
treatment response among these three commonly used
chemotherapeutics.Hypothesis: We hypothesized that a molecular predictor
of differential chemotherapy response could be developed using human
breast cancer patient-derived xenografts as the discovery
platform.Materials and Methods: We tested this hypothesis in an animal
clinical trial using 20 PDX treated with three chemotherapies vs.
control. Molecular correlates of response were identified in RNAseq and
proteomic data, and are being validated in a separate cohort of
PDX.Results: We show that animal clinical trials are feasible, and can be
conducted efficiently, using minimal staff. Further, we extend our
previous analysis showing that treatment responses observed clinically
are recapitulated in the PDX lines, thereby establishing clinical
relevance of observed responses. Finally, we demonstrate that PDX show
largely non-overlapping sensitivity to only one of the three agents
tested, with corresponding largely non-overlapping molecular signatures
delineating those PDX that respond to a given treatment from those that
do not. Validation studies in newly developed PDX lines are
ongoing.Conclusions: Together, these data suggest that PDX models should
be useful for generating predictors of treatment response. Ultimately, if
robust genetic, epigenetic, or molecular predictors of differential
treatment response can be identified and applied clinically, it may be
possible to avoid ineffective treatments, minimize exposure to cytotoxic
agents, and ultimately increase survivorship.

