Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cervical cancer screening in rural East Africa


Purpose: Cervical cancer screening (CCS) programs in rural east African
communities often go unused by a majority the women residing in these
areas. Most HIV-positive and HIV-negative women don't go for cervical
cancer screening despite referrals at Bagamoyo District Hospital (BDH),
Tanzania. The focus of this study was to understand what the patient
barriers are to attending cervical cancer screening clinics.Methods:
Questionnaires were distributed to 114 female patients over the age of 18
within the BDH's Care and Treatment Center (CTC). A small sample of 15
patients was also approached from within the reproductive health clinic
(RHC). Participants were asked about their age, religion, parity, marital
status, village of birth, village of residence, education, and number of
previous screens, why they decided to go (or not go) to screening, and
how they first heard of cervical cancer as well as cervical cancer
screening. We also gathered data on the number of times each patient had
been previously screened, the date of the most recent screen, as well as
the referral date for the next screen. Using this information, we then
attempted to match the individual's records with that of the CCS clinic's
records.Results: The average age of women varied significantly between
HIV-Positive and HIV-Negative patients (43 and 31, respectively).
HIV-Positive women significantly varied among their education status.
Parity and age varied significantly when comparing the screened women to
those never before screened. When comparing by screen history, 22% of
HIV-positive women had never been screened and all 15 (100%) of
HIV-negative women had never had prior screening. Of the reasons given as
to why women had not attended prior screening HIV-positive women reported
that 36 (31.58%) think they were at risk; 25 (21.93%) had no reason; 20
(17.54%) didn't know when to go; and 19 (16.67%) didn't know where to go.
As for the HIV-negative women, 11 (73.33%) said they didn't know where to
go; 4 (26.67%) reported they didn't know when to go; 6 (40%) didn't think
they were at risk. When analyzing reasons for not attending screening by
whether or not prior screening had occurred, we found that most of the
women who had never been screened reported to not know when or where to
go for screening (36%).Conclusion: There are many potential explanations
that play a role in the low cervical cancer screening attendance rates.
There are issues surrounding education, accessibility, and funding. Due
to the high prevalence of HIV in these areas, it is important to address
these issues in order to minimize the impact of cervical cancer. We found
lack of education and knowledge about the screening program at BDH was
the main explanation for why women did not utilize the screening services.

