Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple myeloma will become a common cancer in the era of modern
therapy


INTRODUCTION: Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common
hematological malignancy in the United States (US), representing 1.4% of
all newly diagnosed cancers. The annual number of new MM patients is
expected to increase primarily because the population is ageing. In
parallel, several new drugs with unprecedented efficacy have been
approved by the FDA. We were motivated to use data from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program and statistical models to
estimate future numbers of MM survivors in the era of modern
therapy.METHODS: We estimated future MM incidence using age-period-cohort
forecasting models. We estimated all-cause mortality rates by
years-since-MM-diagnosis, for cohorts of incident cases defined by
age-at-diagnosis and year-of-diagnosis; here we used a proportional
hazards absolute risk model with age, year, and duration effects
specified using linear splines. We calculated current and future
prevalence rates based on observed and extrapolated SEER incidence and
mortality. We calculated corresponding numbers of MM survivors in the US
by multiplying prevalence rates by official observed and projected
population counts. We projected life year gains among persons with MM
from prevalence forecasts incorporating more and less favorable
assumptions about MM prognosis.RESULTS: We analyzed MM among black and
white men and women using 1992 - 2010 SEER data and forecast to 2022.
Qualitative patterns were similar in each group. As previously reported,
incidence was stable or slightly increasing and highest among black men.
However, survival improved in all groups between 1992 through 2010. For
example, among white men aged 60-69 years at diagnosis, median survival
after MM increased from 2.6 to 5.0 years. If progress continues at the
same rate - a conservative assumption in light of recent advances - the
projected median will increase to 7.6 years circa 2022. Among black and
white men and women ages 40 - 79 years combined, the number of new MM
cases is expected to increase by 28%, from 16,000 to 21,000, primarily
because of population growth. However, the number of persons living with
MM is conservatively expected to increase by 55%, from 76,000 to 119,000,
because of improvements in prognosis as well as population growth. The
cumulative life year gain between 2011 through 2022 is around 50,000 life
years. If recent treatments are as promising as they appear, these
estimates will be conservative.CONCLUSION: Driven by access to modern
therapies with unprecedented efficacy, overall survival for patients with
MM will continue to improve significantly. Consequently, our forecast is
MM will become much more common in the era of modern therapy. The numbers
of patients living with MM are expected to increase more quickly than the
corresponding numbers of new cases.

