Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment and targeting of M2-tumor associated macrophages
(M2-TAMs) in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths of men in the
U.S., and in the past year, over 30,000 men died from this disease. While
localized prostate cancer is highly treatable by surgical resection and
radiation, cancer that has metastasized remains incurable. Alternatively
activated macrophages, also known as M2-macrophages, primarily scavenge
debris and in the process, promote angiogenesis and wound repair.
M2-macrophages are phenotypically similar to M2 tumor-associated
macrophages (M2-TAMs) have been reported to associate with solid tumors
such as prostate cancer to facilitate epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), tumor invasiveness, metastasis, and resistance to
therapy. As an invasive species within the tumor microenvironment, this
makes M2-TAMs an ideal therapeutic target in prostate cancer. The purpose
of this project is to develop novel therapeutics that will directly
target M2-TAMs for destruction and subsequently attenuate prostate tumor
growth, progression and metastasis. The central hypothesis of this study
is to determine if targeting of M2-TAMs using specific surface antigens
will be an effective therapy for lethal prostate cancer and potentially,
other cancers. Our study elucidated M2-Macrophage biology including
creating homogenous populations of both M1 and M2 macrophages using a new
strategy as to allow for identification of novel surface antigen markers.
While using our new method for polarization of human monocyte
polarization into macrophages, we found that M2 macrophages polarization
was stymied in vitro after glutamine deprivation. We then assessed novel
markers of macrophage populations, cytokine and chemokine production,
T-Cell inactivation and we also assessed whether these surface antigens
that are expressed on M2-macrophages are were found in metastatic human
prostate cancers indicative of myeloid infiltration. Validation studies
using metastatic prostate cancer tissues from rapid autopsies and
surgical specimens supplied by the Department of Urology at Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine were also be performed. Complementary
studies will be executed to target these markers for anti-tumor cell
efficacy using these relevant model systems. By identifying and targeting
specific markers on M2-TAMs, we predict that this targeting will provide
a better prognosis for patients who have been diagnosed with lethal
prostate cancer.

