Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymeric mechanical amplifiers of tumor cell receptor-mediated
apoptosis


Introduction: It has become evident that tumor cells are responsive to
mechanical forces in vivo, and prove critical to tumor cell proliferation
and death. Recent work has shown that tumor cells exposed to fluid shear
forces increase receptor-mediated signaling. We hypothesized that
biocompatible, polymeric particles conjugated to the tumor cell surface
act as mechanical amplifiers in presence of fluid shear forces to
increase mechanotransduction, and can be exploited to increase the
efficacy of therapeutic ligands.Methods: Polymeric particles (size:100
nm-1 m) were conjugated to free amines on tumor cells via NHS cross
linker chemistry. Particles bound to tumor cells were assessed using flow
cytometry, brightfield, and confocal fluorescence microscopy. A
cone-and-plate viscometer was used to apply a fluid shear force (2.0
dyn/cm2) to tumor cell suspensions and to amplify the force exerted by
polymeric particles on tumor cells. Tumor cells (COLO 205, PC-3) were
treated with 0.1 g/mL of a TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
to assess amplified mechanotransduction and receptor-mediated apoptosis
in the presence of polymeric particles. An annexin-V apoptosis assay was
used to characterize the mode of cell death. Caspase colorimetric assays
and inhibitors (Z-VAD-FMK) were utilized to assess caspase-dependence in
the mechanotransduction response. Tumor cells were injected into C57/BL6
via tail vein to assess amplification of TRAIL apoptosis in vivo.Results
and Discussion: NHS crosslinker chemistry was successfully used to
conjugate polymeric particles to the tumor cell surface. In the presence
of fluid shear forces, it was found that polymeric particles act to
mechanical amplify tumor cell mechanotransduction, as evidenced by
increased receptor-mediated apoptosis and decreased tumor cell viability
in the presence of the therapeutic ligand TRAIL. Additionally,
amplification of TRAIL-mediated apoptosis was increased with particles of
increasing size, demonstrating that increasing the force exerted on the
cell surface with larger particles amplified the therapeutic response.
Annexin-V apoptosis assays showed the addition of conjugated polymeric
particles to the cell surfaces nearly doubled tumor cell apoptosis in the
presence of TRAIL under shear forces, and inhibition assays revealed the
response to be caspase-dependent apoptosis. Polymeric particles
amplifiedTRAIL-mediated tumor cell killing in mice, and reduced both
circulating tumor cells in blood and overall tumor cell burden in vivo by
over 90%.Conclusions: These data demonstrate that polymeric particles,
both degradable and non-degradable, act as mechanical amplifiers of tumor
mechanotransduction in the presence of shear forces in vitro and in vivo,
and are exploited to increase therapeutic efficacy. Clinically, this
approach shows that increased mechanical force applied to target tumor
cells can increase sensitivity to therapeutic ligands.

