Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A next-generation sequencing-based sample-to-result
pharmacogenomics research solution enables both SNV and CNV detection at
once


Pharmacogenomics (PGx) is the study of genetic variations in terms of
their response to drugs. Variations in gene sequence or copy number may
result in complete loss of function, partial decrease or increase in
enzyme activity, or an altered affinity for substrates, which may in turn
significantly impact a drug's efficacy. PGx studies are increasing in
significance as precision medicine is becoming a reality in standard
practice. Different technologies have been developed to measure the
sequence variation and copy number variation (CNV) in the PGx genes.
Among them, a complete sample-to-result PGx workflow solution using the
QuantStudio 12k Flex Real-Time PCR System is the most notable high
throughput solution and has broad adoption by advanced PGx laboratories.
Both PGx SNP/INDEL genotyping assays on OpenArray plates and copy number
analysis on 384-well plates can be performed on the QuantStudio 12k Flex
System. Integrated analysis software translates genotyping and copy
number assay results into star allele genotypes for ease of
interpretation. Recently we have developed a next generation sequencing
(NGS) based PGx research solution with increased flexibility on the assay
targets and combined detection of SNP/INDEL genotyping and CNV using Ion
AmpliSeq technology for low to medium throughput laboratories. With a
highly multiplexed PGx research panel, we can profile a set of 136
genetic markers in 40 known PGx related genes and CYP2D6 copy number
variation in a single reaction using Ion Torrent semiconductor
sequencing. The number of genetic markers can be customized easily based
on the user need. To systematically compare these two end-to-end PGx
workflows, we collected buccal swab samples from 20 individuals and
performed both QuantStudio based assays and PGM based Ion AmpliSeq PGx
research assay on them. Both systems generated high quality results.
Compared with OpenArray plate genotyping results and 384-plate CYP2D6
copy number assay results from the QuantStudio system, the Ion AmpliSeq
PGx research solution demonstrated >99.9% genotyping concordance, 100%
CYP2D6 gene CNV concordance, >99.7% reproducibility, Pharmacogenomics
(PGx) is the study of genetic variations in terms of their response to
drugs. Variations in gene sequence or copy number may result in complete
loss of function, partial decrease or increase in enzyme activity, or an
altered affinity for substrates, which may in turn significantly impact a
drug's efficacy. PGx studies are increasing in significance as precision
medicine is becoming a reality in standard practice. Different
technologies have been developed to measure the sequence variation and
copy number variation (CNV) in the PGx genes. Among them, a complete
sample-to-result PGx workflow solution using the QuantStudio 12k Flex
Real-Time PCR System is the most notable high throughput solution and has
broad adoption by advanced PGx laboratories. Both PGx SNP/INDEL
genotyping assays on OpenArray plates and copy number analysis on
384-well plates can be performed on the QuantStudio 12k Flex System.
Integrated analysis software translates genotyping and copy number assay
results into star allele genotypes for ease of interpretation. Recently
we have developed a next generation sequencing (NGS) based PGx research
solution with increased flexibility on the assay targets and combined
detection of SNP/INDEL genotyping and CNV using Ion AmpliSeq technology
for low to medium throughput laboratories. With a highly multiplexed PGx
research panel, we can profile a set of 136 genetic markers in 40 known
PGx related genes and CYP2D6 copy number variation in a single reaction
using Ion Torrent semiconductor sequencing. The number of genetic markers
can be customized easily based on the user need. To systematically
compare these two end-to-end PGx workflows, we collected buccal swab
samples from 20 individuals and performed both QuantStudio based assays
and PGM based Ion AmpliSeq PGx research assay on them. Both systems
generated high quality results. Compared with OpenArray plate genotyping
results and 384-plate CYP2D6 copy number assay results from the
QuantStudio system, the Ion AmpliSeq PGx research solution demonstrated
>99.9% genotyping concordance, 100% CYP2D6 gene CNV concordance, >99.7%
reproducibility, <0.2% no-call rate. The Ion AmpliSeq PGx solution
enables flexible and integrated SNV & CNV detection for both standard
genotyping practice and sophisticated exploratory research needs.

