Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC inhibitor panobinostat as a selective agent, synergizes with
chemotherapeutics in medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma


Background: Embryonal tumors of the central nervous system continue to
present therapeutic challenges with high rates of relapse and poor
prognosis at advanced stages. Medulloblastoma (MB) accounts for over 15%
of pediatric brain tumors, with a five-year survival rate of 62%.
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
children, accounting for 15% of pediatric cancer deaths.Among many
pathways that contribute to MB and NB potency, several histone
deacetylases (HDACs) have been shown to prevent cell differentiation. In
cells expressing wt-p53, HDAC inhibitors induce nuclear relocalization of
p53 to the nucleus to induce expression of the cell cycle inhibitor
p21/Waf1/Cip1. As most NB tumors express wt-p53, HDAC inhibitors are
promising candidates for therapy. Panobinostat has been shown to induce
differentiation, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis in NB cells. This
effect is partially due to down-regulation of CHK1, a pathway by which
cancer cells can develop resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs.This study proposes panobinostat coupled with conventional
chemotherapeutics such as doxorubicin, etoposide, and velcade, as an
effective target against the HDAC pathway in MB and NB.Methods:
Established MB and NB cell lines and patient derived cell lines (MB:
DAOY, D283, D341, 384MED, 458MED, 487MED, 556MED, 581MED, 721MED; NB:
BE(2)-C, CHLA-90, SMS-KCNR, SH-SY5Y, MGT8-117-08, BIO-036-08) were used
to quantify panobinostat's effects. Cell viability was measured using
Calcein AM fluorescent assay at doses of 0.39-50 nM. Isobologram analysis
of panobinostat in combination with doxorubicin, etoposide, and velcade
were generated using Calcein AM. Western blot was used to measure HIF1
alpha, CHK1, and acetyl H4, Caspase 3 and PARP levels. ATP level per cell
was measured using CyQuant fluorescent DNA assay with CellTiter-Glo
luminescent cell viability assay.Results: Cell viability assays show
cytotoxicity of panobinostat in MB and NB cell lines, with IC50 values
from 2-10 nM in MB cells, 5-20 nM in established NB cell lines and 23-91
nM in patient derived NB lines. ATP/cell activity was inhibited in MB and
NB cells following treatment with panobinostat alone. Isobologram
experiments suggest synergistic cytotoxicity of panobinostat in
combination with doxorubicin, etoposide, and velcade in NB cell lines
BE(2)-C and SMS-KCNR. Western blot analysis indicates caspase-mediated
apoptosis occurs, with inhibition of overexpressed HDAC proteins among
multiple classes in MB and NB cells.Conclusions: This study indicates
that panobinostat targets the HDAC inhibition pathway of MB and NB cells.
Additionally, panobinostat synergizes with doxorubicin, etoposide, and
velcade in inducing apoptosis in MB and NB cells. This study provides
rationale for initiation of a clinical trial in treating MB and NB
patients with panobinostat in combination with conventional
chemotherapeutics.

