Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GM2 mediates tumor cell migration and induces EMT through
involvement of the integrin signaling machinery and targeting YAP, a
major component of the HIPPO signaling pathway


Background: In the present study we report a novel role of tumor derived
ganglioside, GM2 in mediating tumor cell migration and anchorage
independent growth suggestive of EMT and uncovered its mechanism.Approach
: Specific role of GM2 in cancer cell migration was evaluated by in vitro
transwell migration assay using either GM2-synthase silenced or
GM2-overexpressed cancer cells or by adding exogenous GM2. Mechanistic
details were revealed by studying gene chip profiling and validated by
real time PCR, western blot analysis and immunofluorescence. Interaction
of GM2 with upstream specific molecules were determined by confocal
microscopy, co-IP and surface plasmon resonance (SPR). TALEN mediated
targeted genome editing was used to generate stable GM2-synthase knockout
mouse tumor cells, to study the role of GM2 in EMT.Results : siRNA
mediated knockdown of GM2-synthase in cancer cells resulted in
significant inhibition of tumor cell migration in vitro. Over-expression
of GM2-synthase in low-GM2 expressing SK-RC-45 cells resulted in a
consequent increase in migration. Further, treatment of SK-RC-45 cells
with exogenous GM2 resulted in dramatic increase in migration. TALEN
mediated GM2-synthase knockout in Renca-v cells resulted in significant
reduction in AIG and increased sensitivity to anoikis, suggesting a
plausible role of GM2 in EMT. Gene expression profiling and DNA
microarray analysis of GM2-synthase silenced cells revealed altered
expression of several genes involved in cell migration primarily those
controlling the integrin signaling involving the Erk-MAP kinase pathway,
as well as genes targeted by YAP, a major component of the HIPPO
signaling pathway which is involved in EMT. GM2-synthase knockdown
resulted in decreased phosphorylation of FAK, Src as well as Erk while,
exogenous GM2 treatment caused increased Erk phosphorylation. Again, GM2
mediated invasion and Erk phosphorylation is blocked in integrin
knockdown SK-RC-45 cells, thus confirming that GM2 mediated migration and
phosphorylation of Erk is integrin dependent. Renca-v GM2-synthase
knockout cells exhibited significant downregulation of several YAP target
genes namely, Ctgf, pdgf C, Cyr61 and LOX while induction of these genes
in both Renca as well as 4T1 in response to GM2 treatment suggests that
GM2 mediates EMT in cancer cells possibly by targeting YAP. Finally,
confocal microscopy suggested co-localization while
co-immunoprecipitation and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) confirmed
direct interaction of membrane bound ganglioside, GM2 with the integrin
receptor.Conclusion: Our findings confirm a novel role of GM2 in tumor
cell migration involving the integrin signaling pathway and in triggering
EMT by targeting YAP, a major component of the HIPPO signaling pathway
ultimately leading to enhanced migration and metastasis in tumor cells.

