Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effect of CYP1B1 on antitumor activities induced by
dysregulated CDC20 and DAPK1 in renal cell carcinoma


Introduction and Objective: Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) has been shown
to be up-regulated in many types of cancer including renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). Several reports have shown that CYP1B1 can influence the
regulation of tumor development; however, its role in RCC has not been
well investigated. The aim of the present study was to determine the
functional effects of CYP1B1 gene on tumorigenesis in RCC. Methods:
Expression of CYP1B1 was determined in RCC cell lines, and tissue
microarrays of 96 RCC and 25 normal tissues. To determine the biological
significance of CYP1B1 in RCC progression, we silenced the gene in Caki-1
and 769-P cells by RNA interference and performed various functional
analyses.Results: First, we confirmed that CYP1B1 protein expression was
significantly higher in RCC cell lines compared to normal kidney tissue.
This trend was also observed in RCC samples (pIntroduction and Objective:
Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) has been shown to be up-regulated in many
types of cancer including renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Several reports
have shown that CYP1B1 can influence the regulation of tumor development;
however, its role in RCC has not been well investigated. The aim of the
present study was to determine the functional effects of CYP1B1 gene on
tumorigenesis in RCC. Methods: Expression of CYP1B1 was determined in RCC
cell lines, and tissue microarrays of 96 RCC and 25 normal tissues. To
determine the biological significance of CYP1B1 in RCC progression, we
silenced the gene in Caki-1 and 769-P cells by RNA interference and
performed various functional analyses.Results: First, we confirmed that
CYP1B1 protein expression was significantly higher in RCC cell lines
compared to normal kidney tissue. This trend was also observed in RCC
samples (p<0.01). Interestingly, CYP1B1 expression was associated with
tumor grade and stage. Next, we silenced the gene in Caki-1 and 769-P
cells by RNA interference and performed various functional analyses to
determine the biological significance of CYP1B1 in RCC progression.
Inhibition of CYP1B1 expression resulted in decreased cell proliferation,
migration and invasion of RCC cells. In addition, reduction of CYP1B1
induced cellular apoptosis in Caki-1. We also found that these anti-tumor
effects on RCC cells caused by CYP1B1 depletion may be due to alteration
of CDC20 and DAPK1 expression based on gene microarray and confirmed by
real-time PCR. Interestingly, CYP1B1 expression was associated with CDC20
and DAPK1 expression in clinical samples.Conclusions: CYP1B1 may promote
RCC development by inducing CDC20 expression and inhibiting apoptosis
through the down-regulation of DAPK1. Our results demonstrate that CYP1B1
can be a potential tumor biomarker and a target for anticancer therapy in
RCC.

