Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pigs as a new weapon against cancer: Modeling solid tumors in
porcine


Widely-used genetically modified mice have revolutionized the field of
cancer research by providing reliable in vivo systems with similar, if
not identical, molecular alterations. Furthermore, Cre/Lox technology has
afforded greater tissue specificity, with many of the developing cancer
phenotypes recapitulating those observed in humans. However, despite
these strengths, there are a number of notable limitations when comparing
mice to humans including small sample sizes, dramatic differences in
physiology, and often dissimilar drug responses. Pig models would
alleviate these shortcomings if they were to have a repertoire of gene
signatures observed in human cancer, like those engineered in mice.
Therefore, to achieve this goal, we have engineered a pig model with the
Cre-responsive transgene encoding KRASG12D and TP53R167H. Hence,
tissue-specific targeted Cre would generate simultaneous expression of
mutant KRAS and p53 alleles to induce cellular changes leading to cancer.
Pig pancreases were injected with adenovirus containing a cre expression
vector (adenoCre) in an attempt to generate a model of pancreatic cancer.
Initial injections of adenoCre into the parenchymal body of the pancreas
led to the development of acinar-ductal metaplasia (ADM), though the
clear predominant histotype was leiomyosarcoma immediately adjacent to
the pancreas. Pancreatic ADM was characterized by concomitant
localization of amylase (acinar cell marker) and CK19 (ductal cell
marker) in the same pancreatic acinus, with an occasional few cells
expressing both cell markers. These lesions were further characterized
and exhibited increased proliferation via PCNA staining, as well the
development of surrounding desmoplastic stroma (enhanced trichrome,
vimentin, and aSMA staining; a marker of pancreatic stellate cells) with
a robust inflammatory component (strong CD11b and CAE staining). Based on
the lack of pancreas specificity, the experiment was repeated by
injecting adenoCre into the main pancreatic duct. This 10-month-old pig
appears relatively healthy after, which was expected considering this was
a fully adult pig prior to manipulation. We will fully access this pig in
2 months to determine if strict pancreatic duct injection of adenoCre
induces ADM, neoplastic disease, and/or ductal adenocarcinoma. Based on
these encouraging findings, we anticipate having a robust model of
pancreatic cancer in the pig, and plan to extend this study to generate
models of other solid tumors with high rates of KRAS and p53 mutations.
These porcine models may significantly impact preclinical studies, as
diseases induced in pigs are likely more physiologically relevant to
those in humans, with a potentially similar pharmacokinetic profile
following drug treatment. Indeed, due to the size of the organs and
volume of blood, samples can be more readily shared among multiple groups
of investigators facilitating greater collaboration and expanding future
research.

