Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel potential target for cancer immunotherapy


Suppression of the host's immune system plays a major role in cancer
progression. The tumor microenvironment (TME) not only plays a pivotal
role during cancer progression and metastasis but also has profound
effects on therapeutic efficacy. Immune checkpoint therapy, which targets
regulatory pathways in T cells to enhance antitumor immune responses, has
led to important clinical advances and provided a new weapon against
cancer. This therapy has elicited durable clinical responses and, in a
fraction of patients, long-term remissions. Several immune checkpoint
inhibitors have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
whose therapeutic effect is due to blocking the activity of proteins
expressed in T lymphocytes (CTLA4, PD-1) and the interaction with surface
protein expressed on tumor cells (PD-L1 and PD-L2).In our recent research
activities we have identified 89 tumor-associated proteins by systematic
immunohistochemistry analysis of tissue microarray (TMA) representing
breast, colon, lung ovary and prostate cancer by using a large collection
of polyclonal antibodies (approximately 1600) raised against
membrane-associated and secreted proteins only marginally characterized.
Among them, an interesting protein, which decorated the plasma membrane
of breast cancer cells, was selected. This protein has been described to
interact with the CD270/BTLA/CD160 pathway that regulates T-cell
activation. It has also the capability to interfere with T-cell mediated
allo-responses. Our characterization data showed that the protein is
localized on the surface of several cancer cell lines. Moreover, it has
the ability to stimulate cytokine production and secretion in PBMC from
healthy donors. Several monoclonal antibodies have been generated in our
lab against this protein and selected for the ability to bind the surface
of cancer cells. Moreover, the ability of these monoclonal antibodies to
interfere with the immune cells activity and to interfere with tumor
growth in animal models is under evaluation. Results will be provided
during the meeting.The currently approved therapeutic targets regimens
for triple negative breast cancer and ovarian cancer have limited
efficacy. Therefore, the identification of other tumor-associated
proteins targetable by specific mAbs is essential to improve patient
survival.

