Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maternal obesity increases tamoxifen resistance in female rat
offspring


More than 50% of pregnant women in the USA are overweight or obese, and
over 40% gain more weight than recommended by the Institute of Medicine.
We investigated if maternal obesity before and during pregnancy affects
mammary cancer risk in the offspring, or alters response of the mammary
tumors to antiestrogen therapy in a preclinical rat model of estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer.Female Sprague-Dawley rats were fed
an obesity-inducing high fat (OIHF) or control diet before and during
pregnancy. Their offspring were all switched to a control AIN93G diet
upon birth. Female offspring of control (n = 35) or OIHF (n = 40) diet
fed dams were treated with a carcinogen DMBA on postnatal day 50 to
induce ER+ mammary tumors. When mammary tumors reached a size of 13 mm in
diameter, 337 ppm TAM citrate was added to the offspring's diet,
resulting a daily intake of 15 mg/kg TAM. Responses of the tumors were
categorized as de novo resistant (tumor kept growing), partial (size
decreased but did not disappear), and complete (tumor disappeared). The
animals with complete response were taken off from TAM and monitored for
an additional 20 weeks to determine the risk of local recurrence.The risk
of developing mammary tumors was non-significantly increased in the OIHF
group. Further, the OIHF exposed offspring had significantly more de novo
resistant tumors than the control offspring. Although the percentage of
completely responding tumors was similar in the two groups, local
recurrence in the OIHF offspring was significantly higher than in the
control offspring (90% vs 29%, respectively). To investigate the possible
mechanisms of increased recurrence, we measured the protein levels of the
members of unfolded protein response (UPR), inflammation and tumor immune
pathways. We found that de novo TAM resistant and recurring tumors in the
OIHF offspring exhibited significantly increased levels of Perk and
Beclin-1, indicating activation of UPR. However, Nbr1 and p62 were also
significantly increased in the OIHF offspring, suggestive of inhibition
of autophagy in their mammary tumors. The levels of CD8a, a marker of
cytotoxic T cells, were significantly reduced, whilst ER, erBb2/Her2 and
Vegfr2 were increased. Changes in the expression of these receptors could
indicate increased inflammation.We conclude that maternal obesity
increased TAM resistance and the risk of mammary cancer recurrence in the
female offspring. In addition, it induced changes in the UPR, autophagy
and tumor immune responses in the offspring's mammary tumors.

