Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genetic screen to identify tumor suppressive DDR genes in breast
cancer


To maintain genomic integrity, cells utilize a DNA damage response (DDR)
mechanism that 1) functions to repair damaged DNA efficiently and 2)
commits cells to apoptosis if damage is irreparable. Failure of this
mechanism results in genomic instability and cancer predisposition.
Defects in DDR have been implicated in both sporadic and familial breast
and ovarian cancer predisposition syndromes (e.g. BRCA1, BRCA2, and
PALB2), although the specific pathway components that are disrupted have
not been elucidated. In particular, an impaired DDR may contribute to the
pathophysiology of triple-negative (ER-/PR-/HER2-) breast cancer (TNBC)
due to the extent and complexity of the genomic instability that is
observed. We identified the DNA damage sensing Mre11- Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN)
complex as an essential mediator of the oncogene-induced DDR. Disrupting
the MRN complex in mouse models promotes the development of genomically
unstable, metastatic breast cancer. The clinical relevance of this
pathway is highlighted by the observation that components of the Mre11
complex are perturbed in a significant fraction of human TNBCs, which
correlates with clinical outcomes. However, lack of MRN suppression in a
majority of TNBCs indicates that alternative DDR components may also be
inactivated to promote breast cancer development. Our goal is to identify
additional DDR genes that, when perturbed, promote the development of
genomically unstable breast cancers. In order to accurately distinguish
driver genes from bystander genes we have developed a platform to
identify DDR genes that mediate oncogene-induced senescence in mammary
epithelial cells using both shRNA and CRISPR pooled libraries. Analysis
of newly identified tumor suppressor genes, compared to what is already
known about Mre11 and p53 (positive controls), will enable us to
determine causality of specific DDR mutations in breast cancer
development and importantly, the genomic instability phenotype that is
typical for TNBC. The insights gleaned from this study may ultimately
provide the means to determine the optimal treatment regimen for each
patient with TNBC, and to prevent over-treatment of patients where
certain chemotherapies may not be effective.

