Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying a functional correlation between cancer stem cells and
3D clonogenic growth: testing rational combinations of PI3K pathway
inhibitors in subtype-specific BC


Introduction: Studying clonogenic behavior of tumor cells in the context
of physiologically relevant ECM offers the potential to explore signaling
processes which more closely approximate the in vivo microenvironment.
This approach is valuable for identification and dissection of the key
molecular signaling of cancer cells to test targeted drugs. 3D cell
cultures have been recognized as the method of choice for the
physiologically relevant modeling of many aspects of malignant cell
behavior ex vivo. Kenny et al., 2007 identified that morphologies of
breast cancer cell lines in 3D assays correlate with their gene
expression profiles and protein expression patterns reflecting the
underlying distinct morphologies which were associated with tumor cell
invasiveness and metastases-associated phenotypes. Study of the molecular
characteristics and clinical significance of CSC in the context of
prognostic relevance as well as the understanding the scope of
therapeutically targeting CSC within distinct tumor cell populations have
revealed that CD44+ cell-specific genes represents SC markers and
correlated with decreased patient survival (Fillmore and Kuperwasser,
2008).Hypothesis: Since 3D clonogenic growth of epithelial tumor cells
represents the most appropriate model in vitro, we hypothesized that
there is a functional association between phenotypic 3D clonogenic growth
and cancer stem cells (CSC) proportion.Methods: To study the role of CSCs
in the 3D clonogenic growth of tumor cells we have used BC and ovarian
cell lines.The cells were challenged to form 3D colonies in matrigel and
cells were recovered from the 3D colonies after de-gelling using PBS-EDTA
buffer. Relative distribution of CD24+, CD44+, CD24- and CD44- expression
in cells were determined by flow cytometry (Accuri C6) following recovery
of the cells from the colony and compared to cells grown in 2D. We have
tested the effect of a rational combination of pan-PI3K pathway
inhibitor, GDC-0941 or isoform-specific inhibitors along with AI,
trastuzumab, or HRD inhibitors (PARP) in ER+/PIK3CA mutated, HER2+/PIK3CA
mutated or PTEN-null TNBC cells.Results: CD44/CD24 expression level
changes between 2D and 3D growth was characterized in individual cell
lines. Overall 3D growth led to a reduction in CD44 levels. Rational drug
combinations blocked proliferative signals and enhanced apoptosis
(cleaved caspase3) as demonstrated by WB, AnnexinV staining,
proliferation (Incucyte). The mechanistic details of the effect of this
combination on the CD44H/CD24L stem cell populations are being worked
out, the results of which will be presented in the meeting.Significance:
Our study reports a methodological breakthrough to determine CD24L/CD44H
CSC fraction from live cells following 3D clonogenic transformation.

