Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting multiple nodes in the RTK- PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling
pathway in a p53-/- mouse model of DIPG induces G2/M phase cell cycle
arrest


Introduction: Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is the most common
pediatric brainstem tumor, but its prognosis is dismal, with a median
survival time of less than one year. Prior studies have implicated
amplifications in the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)-PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signaling pathway in DIPG gliomagenesis, and platelet-derived growth
factor receptor (PDGFR) is the most commonly over-expressed RTK. One
treatment strategy is thus to inhibit kinases in this pathway with drugs
such as dasatinib (PDGFR inhibitor), perifosine (AKT inhibitor), and
everolimus (mTOR inhibitor). In this study, we aim to show that
combinatorial therapy with dasatinib, perifosine, and everolimus is more
effective in impeding tumor cell growth than each drug
individually.Methods: Mouse brainstem glioma cells (mBSG) were derived
from a transgenic mouse model of DIPG driven by PDGFB overexpression and
p53 loss. Cells were treated for 72 hours with dasatinib, perifosine, and
everolimus individually and in combination, and cell viability was
assayed with MTS. Western blot with cleaved-caspase 3 antibody was used
to assess apoptosis. Cell cycle analysis was performed by propidium
iodide flow cytometry.Results: GI50 concentrations of each individual
drug were as follows: 50 nM dasatinib, 50 M perifosine, and 10 M
everolimus. With combined dasatinib and perifosine treatment, 31.6% of
cells survived (p = 0.016 vs. dasatinib alone). The addition of
everolimus to dasatinib and perifosine further reduced cell survival to
27.0% (p = 0.011 vs. combinatorial treatment with dasatinib and
perifosine). Cell cycle analysis revealed that dasatinib treatment alone
prominently arrested cells in G0/G1 phase while both 2-drug combinatorial
treatment with dasatinib and perifosine and 3-drug combinatorial
treatment with dasatinib, perifosine, and everolimus caused substantial
cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 and G2/M phases. However, Western blot
analysis found that no drug treatment group effectively induced
apoptosis.Conclusion: Three-drug combinatorial therapy with dasatinib,
perifosine, and everolimus was more effective in reducing DIPG cell
viability than dasatinib alone, primarily through the induction of cell
cycle arrest at G0/G1 and G2/M. This effect and the lack of apoptosis is
consistent with previous observations that inhibition of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway is cytostatic rather than cytotoxic.
Moreover, mutations in p53 are seen in up to 50% of patients with DIPG,
which allow tumor cells to evade apoptosis despite treatment with
chemotherapeutic agents. Taken together, targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway alone appears to be insufficient. Ongoing studies aim to
understand resistance mechanisms to inhibitors of this pathway and to
improve therapeutic efficacy in DIPG by identifying potential synergistic
drug combinations targeting alternate survival pathways.

