Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global transcription factor repression by the coactivator SRC-1
mediates disease progression in endocrine-resistant breast cancer


Despite the clinical utility of endocrine therapies to treat ER positive
breast cancer, 40% of patients eventually develop resistance, leading to
disease progression. Steroid receptor co-activators have been described
as the powerhouses of transcription with a role in mediating hormone
receptor responsiveness. There is now substantial evidence that steroid
receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) is central to the ability of endocrine
tumours to adapt and overcome targeted therapy thereby facilitating
metastatic disease progression. Recent work highlighted the potential
ability of SRC-1 to also act as transcriptional repressor that can
bi-directionally regulate genes that help it promote the resistant
phenotype.This study employed a genome-wide multi-omics sequencing
approach to determine the SRC-1 repression signature in endocrine
resistance and elucidate the mechanism by which SRC-1 mediates this
repression.RNA-sequencing was used to investigate the transcriptional
network affected by SRC-1 in an endocrine resistant cell line model. This
approach identified 1,495 genes significantly downregulated by SRC-1,
with common functional pathways such as differentiation, cell
morphogenesis and extracellular matrix enriched in the gene set. Parallel
global methylation sequencing analysis revealed methylation as a possible
mechanism by which SRC-1 was repressing target genes, which was confirmed
with mechanistic studies utilising 5-AZA-2-deoxycitidine. Through
combined analysis of our global sequencing data we identified a SRC-1
regulated transcriptional hub of differentiation genes, that have
protective roles in normal and treatment- sensitive breast cancer cells
and which associate with poor disease-free survival in breast cancer
patients. Furthermore, our work demonstrated that SRC-1 can re-programme
cells to become poorly differentiated by supressing this normally
protective transcriptional hub, and thereby promote aggressive endocrine
resistant phenotype.Here we report a novel mechanism by which SRC-1 can
drive endocrine resistant tumorigenesis. Our genome-wide discovery
approach revealed an epigenetic re-programming pathway, whereby concerted
differential DNA methylation is potentiated by the activation of SRC-1 in
the endocrine resistant setting. This study suggests that therapeutic
strategies of combined targeted epigenetic therapy with estrogen
deprivation could be successful strategy to prevent acquired resistance
to endocrine therapy.

