Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of soft tissue sarcoma
(STS): a preclinical platform for early drug testing


Background: STS constitutes a rare and very heterogeneous family of
mesenchymal tumors. The limited treatment options available for advanced
STS underline the need for reliable preclinical models to test novel
therapeutic strategies.Methods: A panel of patient-derived xenografts
(PDX) was established by subcutaneous implantation of fresh, surgically
resected tumor specimens in immunodeficient athymic nude NMRI mice. Once
tumor growth was observed, pieces of tumor were re-transplanted to next
generations of mice. At each passage tumor fragments were collected for
histolopathological and molecular characterization. A model was
considered established after observing stable histological and molecular
features for at least two passages. To evaluate the stability of the
genomic profile we performed low-coverage whole-genome sequencing on DNA
isolated from tumors obtained from at least two passages. In addition
RNA-seq was used to better characterize the mutational profile of the
ex-mouse tumors.Results: Until now 139 STS samples from consenting
patients treated at the University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, have been
transplanted. Twenty six well-characterized, stable STS PDX models have
been established, maintaining the histopathological and molecular
features of the original tumor. Seventeen models, analyzed with
low-coverage DNA sequencing, showed a stable genomic profile in at least
two different tumor passages. At this point the panel includes models of
gastrointestinal stromal tumor (6 models), myxofibrosarcoma (5),
dedifferentiated liposarcoma (3), malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
(3), synovial sarcoma (2), leiomyosarcoma (3) epithelioid
haemangioendothelioma (1), mesenchymal chondrosarcoma (1) and
undifferentiated high grade sarcoma (2). Some of these models have
already been successfully used for in vivo testing of novel agents,
including both targeted and cytotoxic (pro-)drugs, and results served as
a rationale for at least four prospective clinical trials. In addition 22
other xenografts are still in early stages of engraftment, not yet
fulfilling our criteria of an established model.Conclusion: Our panel of
mesenchymal PDX models is characterized by stable histological and
molecular features. These clinically well-annotated models can contribute
to reliable preclinical studies for new anticancer treatments for STS.
The availability of unique, rare STS xenografts also allows to study the
biology of these diseases. The platform is made available to
collaborators from academia and industry.

