Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creating a superior, site-specific anti-HER2 antibody-drug
conjugate (NG-HER2 ADC) for treatment of solid tumors


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have emerged as an important class of
cancer therapeutics. The FDA approval of Kadcyla (T-DM1), a single agent
for treatment of HER2-positive advanced metastatic breast cancer, was a
significant milestone in the field of targeted therapy, as the first and
only ADC for treatment of solid tumors. Despite the 3-month improvement
over standard of care in the median survival, almost all the patients
eventually became refractory to T-DM1. We have identified several
possible areas for improvement: 1) The potency of T-DM1 as confirmed by
the Phase III clinical data is restricted to high HER2 tumors which
leaves moderate or low HER2 expressing patients without access to T-DM1
treatment; 2) The 48% overall response rate is indicative of intrinsic
resistance to T-DM1 and all T-DM1 treated patients eventually relapse. 3)
The randomized lysine conjugation in T-DM1 generates heterogeneity of the
product. We have developed a novel, site-specific anti-HER2 ADC (NG-HER2
ADC) and evaluated it in comparative preclinical studies with T-DM1. The
results show that the NG-HER2 ADC is 10 fold more potent than T-DM1 in
HER2 3+ xenograft models of breast and gastric cancers. Our proprietary
cleavable and permeable linker-payload can mediate bystander effect and
this enables potent anti-tumor activity in non-HER2 amplified breast
cancer and heterogeneous low HER2 NSCLC PDX models, where T-DM1 is
ineffective. Our ADC can overcome T-DM1 resistance in in vitro and in
vivo models.. Our site-specific ADC at HNSTD of 9 mg/kg in cynomolgus
monkeys showed high AUC, long half-life and had normal clinical
observations with no marked neutropenia. On the contrary, conventional
conjugates with cleavable linker payloads typically have severe bone
marrow toxicity as DLT above 5 mg/kg. The therapeutic index for NG-HER2
ADC is significantly greater than T-DM1 in all models tested. NG-HER2 ADC
has a projected clinical efficacious dose of 1 mg/kg, compared to 3-5
mg/kg for T-DM1, based on PK/PD modeling. In addition, the activity of
the NG-HER2 ADC shows increased infiltration of CD8 positive effector
cells, an essential component for immuno-oncology (IO) efficacy, in a
syngeneic HER2 overexpressing model. This property potentially allows the
combination of the ADC with IO drugs to improve the long-term, overall
survival. Our data provides preclinical proof of concept for NG-HER2 ADC
with best-in-class potential and is currently being tested in preparation
for clinical trials for treatment of HER2 solid tumors.

