Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of expression of EGFR, cMET and mTOR signaling pathway
proteins with each other and their impact on prognosis in non-small cell
lung cancer patients


NSCLC tumors acquire resistance to EGFR-TKIs, and studies have suggested
that co-localization of c-MET and EGFR may be a modality of acquired
resistance. Upregulation of alternative signaling pathways such as Wnt or
mTOR have been shown to be associated with poor prognosis and are a
potential mechanism of resistance. This study aims at examining these
signaling pathways and EGFR/c-MET co-expression in 100 patients with
stage I-IV NSCLC. We have data on 50 patients, and are working on the
remaining samples. Tumor tissue from biopsies or resections have been
obtained with IRB approval, processed, sectioned, and mounted on
microscope slides. Total and active forms of EGFR, c-MET, mTOR, S6K,
beta-catenin, and Axin2 were detected using singleplex or multiplex IHC
staining procedures, and stains were graded by an independent pathologist
using a validated scoring system. We selected Stage IV NSCLC (n = 32)
patients to correlate EGFR/c-MET expression with overall survival, and
analyzed them for months to mortality based on high or low EGFR
expression. Patients with high EGFR expression (n = 16) showed lower
overall survival compared to those with low EGFR expression (n = 16).
Expression of c-MET is linked to decreased survival in Stage IV NSCLC
patients (n = 4). Patients with EGFR/c-MET co-localization (n = 19)
showed decreased overall survival compared to patients without EGFR/c-MET
co-localization (n = 9). Elevated mTOR and p-mTOR are associated with
worse prognosis in Stage IV NSCLC patients. Patients categorized with
either low mTOR expression (n = 10) or high mTOR expression (n = 19)
showed increased mortality with high mTOR expression (5.9 months)
compared to patients with low mTOR expression (13.5 months). A similar
trend was seen in patients with either low (n = 4, 7.5 months) or high (n
= 24, 15.9 months) p-mTOR expression. Patients with low beta-catenin
expression (n = 4) showed improved survival in comparison to patients
with high beta-catenin expression (n = 18), 9.4 months vs 6.3 months,
respectively. To determine correlations in expression of these proteins
we found that EGFR/c-MET co-expression is inversely correlated with
active beta-catenin and directly correlated with a negative regulator of
beta-catenin, Axin-2 suggesting EGFR/c-MET co-expression is associated
with a downregulation of Wnt activity. In contrast, elevated EGFR/c-MET
co-expression and co-activation is statistically significantly correlated
with elevated mTOR-S6K expression and activation suggesting EGFR/c-MET
co-expression is associated with an upregulation of the mTOR pathway
activity. Elevated mTOR pathway activation at the time of diagnosis is
statistically significantly associated with poor prognosis in patients
with stage IV NSCLC. These preliminary results suggest that mTOR
inhibition therapy in addition to EGFR/c-MET inhibition therapies may be
beneficial in this population.

