Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel metabolism pathway in pancreatic cancer: findings from
targeted metabolomics study


Background: Early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer holds the promise for
improving the prognosis of this disease. We aimed to identify individual
or combination of metabolites in pre-diagnostic blood that can be used as
early diagnostic markers to differentiate pancreatic cancer from normal
controls.Methods: Using targeted approach, we conducted a two-phase
case-control metabolomics study in the Women's Health Initiative Study
using pre-diagnostic fasting blood. Each cancer-free control was
individually matched to each pancreatic cancer case by age ( 1 year),
ethnicity, history of treated type 2 diabetes, body mass index ( 5
kg/m2), study arm, current use of hormone treatment, blood draw time in
year ( 1), blood draw time in hour ( 3). All samples from cases were
collected less than one year before the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer.
We used triple quadrupole mass spectrometer LS/GC-MS to quantitate 480
metabolites in sera of 30 cases and 30 controls. The selected candidate
metabolites were validated in sera of additional 18 cases and 18
controls. Each metabolite was normalized against the standards. We used
the paired t-test to compare the concentrations of each metabolite among
all cases and controls. Unadjusted P value less than 0.25 was used for
selecting candidate metabolites for validation and false discovery rate
(FDR) adjusted Q-value Background: Early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer
holds the promise for improving the prognosis of this disease. We aimed
to identify individual or combination of metabolites in pre-diagnostic
blood that can be used as early diagnostic markers to differentiate
pancreatic cancer from normal controls.Methods: Using targeted approach,
we conducted a two-phase case-control metabolomics study in the Women's
Health Initiative Study using pre-diagnostic fasting blood. Each
cancer-free control was individually matched to each pancreatic cancer
case by age ( 1 year), ethnicity, history of treated type 2 diabetes,
body mass index ( 5 kg/m2), study arm, current use of hormone treatment,
blood draw time in year ( 1), blood draw time in hour ( 3). All samples
from cases were collected less than one year before the diagnosis of
pancreatic cancer. We used triple quadrupole mass spectrometer LS/GC-MS
to quantitate 480 metabolites in sera of 30 cases and 30 controls. The
selected candidate metabolites were validated in sera of additional 18
cases and 18 controls. Each metabolite was normalized against the
standards. We used the paired t-test to compare the concentrations of
each metabolite among all cases and controls. Unadjusted P value less
than 0.25 was used for selecting candidate metabolites for validation and
false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted Q-value < 0.25 was considered
statistical significant in the validation phase. Log fold change (FC) was
used to indicate the magnitude of difference between cases and
controls.Results: Blood samples were collected 241 days (SD: 94 days)
before pancreatic cancer diagnosis on average. A total of 181 metabolites
were detected in the study samples with 28 metabolites found to be
significantly differentially expressed in cases versus controls with
unadjusted P value Background: Early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer holds
the promise for improving the prognosis of this disease. We aimed to
identify individual or combination of metabolites in pre-diagnostic blood
that can be used as early diagnostic markers to differentiate pancreatic
cancer from normal controls.Methods: Using targeted approach, we
conducted a two-phase case-control metabolomics study in the Women's
Health Initiative Study using pre-diagnostic fasting blood. Each
cancer-free control was individually matched to each pancreatic cancer
case by age ( 1 year), ethnicity, history of treated type 2 diabetes,
body mass index ( 5 kg/m2), study arm, current use of hormone treatment,
blood draw time in year ( 1), blood draw time in hour ( 3). All samples
from cases were collected less than one year before the diagnosis of
pancreatic cancer. We used triple quadrupole mass spectrometer LS/GC-MS
to quantitate 480 metabolites in sera of 30 cases and 30 controls. The
selected candidate metabolites were validated in sera of additional 18
cases and 18 controls. Each metabolite was normalized against the
standards. We used the paired t-test to compare the concentrations of
each metabolite among all cases and controls. Unadjusted P value less
than 0.25 was used for selecting candidate metabolites for validation and
false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted Q-value < 0.25 was considered
statistical significant in the validation phase. Log fold change (FC) was
used to indicate the magnitude of difference between cases and
controls.Results: Blood samples were collected 241 days (SD: 94 days)
before pancreatic cancer diagnosis on average. A total of 181 metabolites
were detected in the study samples with 28 metabolites found to be
significantly differentially expressed in cases versus controls with
unadjusted P value < 0.25. Further validation in the pooled 48 cases and
48 controls found the metabolites 1-methyltryptophan was significantly
higher in controls compared to cases with pancreatic cancer (FC: -0.23;
FDR Q-value = 0.01). The levels of acadesine (FC: 0.29), aspartic acid
(FC: 0.44), and nicotinamide (0.34) were higher among cases than controls
and the level of citrulline (FC: -0.22), sn-glycerol 3-phosphate (FC:
-0.25), and ketoglutarate (FC: -0.20) were significantly higher among
controls than cases (FDR Q-value Background: Early diagnosis of
pancreatic cancer holds the promise for improving the prognosis of this
disease. We aimed to identify individual or combination of metabolites in
pre-diagnostic blood that can be used as early diagnostic markers to
differentiate pancreatic cancer from normal controls.Methods: Using
targeted approach, we conducted a two-phase case-control metabolomics
study in the Women's Health Initiative Study using pre-diagnostic fasting
blood. Each cancer-free control was individually matched to each
pancreatic cancer case by age ( 1 year), ethnicity, history of treated
type 2 diabetes, body mass index ( 5 kg/m2), study arm, current use of
hormone treatment, blood draw time in year ( 1), blood draw time in hour
( 3). All samples from cases were collected less than one year before the
diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. We used triple quadrupole mass
spectrometer LS/GC-MS to quantitate 480 metabolites in sera of 30 cases
and 30 controls. The selected candidate metabolites were validated in
sera of additional 18 cases and 18 controls. Each metabolite was
normalized against the standards. We used the paired t-test to compare
the concentrations of each metabolite among all cases and controls.
Unadjusted P value less than 0.25 was used for selecting candidate
metabolites for validation and false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted
Q-value < 0.25 was considered statistical significant in the validation
phase. Log fold change (FC) was used to indicate the magnitude of
difference between cases and controls.Results: Blood samples were
collected 241 days (SD: 94 days) before pancreatic cancer diagnosis on
average. A total of 181 metabolites were detected in the study samples
with 28 metabolites found to be significantly differentially expressed in
cases versus controls with unadjusted P value < 0.25. Further validation
in the pooled 48 cases and 48 controls found the metabolites
1-methyltryptophan was significantly higher in controls compared to cases
with pancreatic cancer (FC: -0.23; FDR Q-value = 0.01). The levels of
acadesine (FC: 0.29), aspartic acid (FC: 0.44), and nicotinamide (0.34)
were higher among cases than controls and the level of citrulline (FC:
-0.22), sn-glycerol 3-phosphate (FC: -0.25), and ketoglutarate (FC:
-0.20) were significantly higher among controls than cases (FDR Q-value <
0.25).Conclusion: Metabolites associated with perturbed amino acid
metabolism were detected by metabolomics approach in pre-diagnostic blood
of postmenopausal women who developed pancreatic cancer. In particular,
depletion of tryptophan along kynurenine pathway has been associated with
immunosuppression in tumor microenvironment in pancreatic cancer. Further
study should determine the use of the metabolites of amino acid
metabolism in early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer, in addition to lipid
and choline metabolites that were identified by previous studies.

