Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrially targeted p53 domains as a stand alone or adjunct
to paclitaxel for the treatment of ovarian cancer


Although the main function of p53 is a nuclear transcription factor that
has important roles in cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, and apoptosis, p53
can directly trigger the intrinsic apoptotic pathway through the
mitochondria. p53 has been known to bind to mitochondrial anti-apoptotic
proteins (Mcl-1, Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL) and pro-apoptotic proteins (Bak and
Bax), which will cause the oligomerization of Bak and Bax. The result is
the formation of permeable pores on the mitochondrial outer membrane,
which in turn cause the release of cytochrome c and activation of
caspase-3. Targeting p53 to the mitochondria is an attractive approach
because it can cause a rapid apoptotic response. We have introduced the
mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS) from Bak or Bax to the C-terminus of
p53 and have shown the superior efficacy of p53-BakMTS and p53-BaxMTS
over wtp53 in many human cancer cell lines. We have identified that the
DNA binding domain (DBD) of p53 may be the minimal domain of p53 required
for apoptosis. Our preliminary data in SKOV-3 ovarian cancer cells also
suggests that DBD-BakMTS may work just as well as full length p53-BakMTS.
In addition to BakMTS and BaxMTS, attaching pro-apoptotic factors such as
Noxa or Bid to p53 has created a chimeric gene construct that show
superior cell death activity than wide type p53. Our goal is to use a
novel version of p53 directed to the mitochondria as a direct apoptogen
to treat ovarian cancer, the most lethal gynecological malignancy with
69% of patients succumbing to this disease. Our next step will be to test
these constructs in vivo using the syngeneic ID8 mouse model. To
determine the activity of these mitochondrially targeted p53 constructs,
TMRE, 7-AAD, and caspase 3/7 assays were performed in many human ovarian
cancer cell lines including SKOV-3, OVCAR-3, Kuramochi, and mouse ovarian
ID8 cells that have been transfected with our constructs. In all of our
cell death and apoptotic assays, p53-Bax-MTS, p53-BakMTS, and p53-Noxa
are always superior to wide type p53, regardless of the p53 status of the
cells. Furthermore, we have also tested the possibility of combining our
p53 constructs with paclitaxel, the current standard of care for ovarian
cancer. Our p53 constructs showed a synergistic effect with paclitaxel
and was able to reduce its IC5, indicating the possibility of
dose-lowering of this highly toxic drug. Our ultimate goal is to use
mitochondrially targeted p53 constructs that directly induce apoptosis
alone or in combination with other chemotherapy drugs for the treatment
of ovarian cancer.Acknowledgements: NIH CA151847

