Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical significance of Nrf2 overexpression in esophageal
cancer


Background: NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a key transcription
regulator for antioxidant and detoxification enzyme and is overexpressed
in various cancer cells. In this study, prognostic significance of Nrf2
expression in esophageal cancer was investigated. In addition, we
examined the relationship between the expression of Nrf2 and cell
proliferation using in vitro assay.Methods: We immunohistochemically
evaluated the protein expression of Nrf2 in the surgically resected
specimens in 83 esophageal cancer patients. And ten esophageal cancer
cell lines were utilized in vitro assay.Results: We examined the protein
expression of Nrf2 in 10 esophageal cancer cell lines. TE-11 cell had the
highest expression of Nrf2, while KYSE30 had the lowest expression of
Nrf2. Importantly, there was no correlation between the protein level and
mRNA level of Nrf2 in these cell lines. The cell proliferation was
inhibited in TE-11 cells, and not inhibited in KYSE30 cells by treatment
with Nrf2-siRNA. Moreover, Flow Cytometry Assay revealed that knockdown
of Nrf2 by siRNA arrested the cell cycle at G1 phase in TE-11 cells. In
immunohistological study, Nrf2 was predominantly identified in the
nucleus of esophageal cancer cells and the expression level of Nrf2 was
higher in the tumor than normal esophageal epithelium (PBackground:
NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a key transcription regulator for
antioxidant and detoxification enzyme and is overexpressed in various
cancer cells. In this study, prognostic significance of Nrf2 expression
in esophageal cancer was investigated. In addition, we examined the
relationship between the expression of Nrf2 and cell proliferation using
in vitro assay.Methods: We immunohistochemically evaluated the protein
expression of Nrf2 in the surgically resected specimens in 83 esophageal
cancer patients. And ten esophageal cancer cell lines were utilized in
vitro assay.Results: We examined the protein expression of Nrf2 in 10
esophageal cancer cell lines. TE-11 cell had the highest expression of
Nrf2, while KYSE30 had the lowest expression of Nrf2. Importantly, there
was no correlation between the protein level and mRNA level of Nrf2 in
these cell lines. The cell proliferation was inhibited in TE-11 cells,
and not inhibited in KYSE30 cells by treatment with Nrf2-siRNA. Moreover,
Flow Cytometry Assay revealed that knockdown of Nrf2 by siRNA arrested
the cell cycle at G1 phase in TE-11 cells. In immunohistological study,
Nrf2 was predominantly identified in the nucleus of esophageal cancer
cells and the expression level of Nrf2 was higher in the tumor than
normal esophageal epithelium (P<0.001). There was no relationship between
Nrf2 protein expression and clinicopathological characteristics. The
overall survival of the high-Nrf2 expression group was significantly
poorer than that of low-Nrf2 expression group (P = 0.004).Conclusions:
The expression of Nrf2 is up-regulated in esophageal cancer cell lines
and resected tumor specimen. Our in vitro assay revealed that Nrf2
appeared to support cancer cell proliferation. Therefore, strategies to
pharmacologically manipulate the level and / or activity of Nrf2 may have
potential to reduce tumor growth and improve the prognosis of esophageal
cancer patients.

