Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bufalin regulates Cbl-b levels in HeLa cells through protein
synthesis inhibition


Cbl-b is a member of ubiquitin ligases (E3s) family. The major function
of CBL family E3s is to negatively regulate signaling through
ubiquitination and degradation of receptor tyrosine kinases and kinase
associated receptors. Cbl-b plays a crucial role in the regulation of the
immune response, as it negatively regulates the costimulatory pathway of
CD8 T cells and also suppresses natural killer cell function. Thus Cbl-b
down-regulation or inhibition may lead to increased adaptive and innate
antitumor immunity and can be used as a treatment strategy for a wide
variety of tumors.Bufalin is a major component of Chan Su, traditional
Chinese medicine derived from the toad venom. Bufalin is a C-24 steroid
with the wide variety of biological activities, including cardiotonic,
anesthetic and antitumor activities. Bufalin has been shown to inhibit
growth and induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of various cancer
cells. Low doses of bufalin can be safely used for prolonged periods of
time without severe side effects, while high doses can cause cardiac
arrhythmia, seizure and coma.The purpose of the current study was to
investigate if bufalin regulates the levels of Cbl-b and establish the
mechanism of Cbl-b regulation. By Western blotting of HeLa cell lysates
we found that bufalin decreases protein levels of Cbl-b in a time- and
dose-dependent manner without affecting the levels of Cbl. The greatest
decrease was observed with 50 nM bufalin after 24 hours treatment. Doses
of bufalin as low as 4 nM were effective in Cbl-b down-regulation.
Real-time PCR analysis showed 2.9-fold increase in the amount of Cbl-b
mRNA upon 50 nM bufalin treatment for 24 hours, suggesting that Cbl-b
regulation by bufalin occurs post-transcriptionally. Proteasomal, but not
lysosomal inhibitors treatment attenuated the negative effect of bufalin
on Cbl-b levels. Co-treatment of HeLa cells with 50 nM bufalin and 50
g/ml cycloheximide, protein synthesis inhibitor, did not result in any
further decrease in Cbl-b levels compared to cycloheximide treatment
alone. By measuring the nascent protein synthesis with Click-It metabolic
labeling reagents, bufalin was shown to block protein synthesis of the
majority of short-lived proteins. These data taken together indicate that
bufalin treatment decreases Cbl-b levels in HeLa cells by blocking
protein synthesis. We found that 50 nM bufalin treatment for up to 8
hours increased the phosphorylation of eIF2, translation initiation
factor, at Ser51. Phosphorylation of eIF2 known to block translation
might explain the effect of bufalin on Cbl-b levels and other short-lived
proteins.To conclude, we found that bufalin increases the phosphorylation
of eIF2, thus leading to the block of translation and decreasing protein
levels of Cbl-b in HeLa cells. Our future goal is to test the hypothesis
that bufalin activates antitumor immunity through down-regulation of
Cbl-b and can thus be used as an antineoplastic agent.

