Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional evaluation of interferon/STAT1 pathway activation in
response to genotoxic treatment


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for approximately 15-25% of
breast cancers at diagnosis, and is one of the most aggressive subtypes,
with around 70% of patients that live free of disease 5 years
post-diagnosis. One of the most reliable predictive markers of patient
outcome is the pathological complete response (pCR), with no tumor cells
detectable at histopathological level after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.As
pCR is observed in only about 20-30% of TNBC, it is mandatory to identify
new therapeutic options to improve pCR rate upon neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. The mechanisms of tumor resistance remain an unmet need in
oncology. In a recent study, we used our breast cancer PDXs collection to
tackle this question, and address the mechanisms of tumor response to
treatment vs tumor recurrence. To do this we analyzed the gene expression
profile of laser-microdissected residual tumor nodules interspersed in
the murine stroma upon very efficient tumor response to
Adriamycin/Cyclophosphamide (AC). When doing so, we identified several
genes of the IFN/STAT1 pathway that were strongly over-expressed when
compared to pre-treatment tumors. In this study, we investigated the
mechanisms leading to IFN/STAT1 pathway activation following chemotherapy
in tumor cells and we evaluated the functional involvement of the
IFN/STAT1 signature as a whole or at single target gene level in residual
tumor cell resistance to chemotherapy after genotoxic treatment.To this
aim, we set up an ex-vivo/in vitro assay to mimic induction of the
IFN/STAT1 signature in tumor cells after genotoxic treatment. We
identified cell lines and primary cultures from a patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) that mimicked the in vivo situation, as only the cell
lines that respond to genotoxic stress in vivo activated IFN/STAT1
pathway in response to genotoxic treatment in vitro. When exposed to
conditioned medium collected from mafosfamide-treated cancer cells, these
cells activated luciferase reporter genes harboring ISRE (interferon
stimulated response elements) and GAS (gamma interferon activated
sequence) response elements, suggesting active ligands of the IFN/STAT1
pathways were secreted. STAT1 or IFNAR1 gene silencing (siRNA) resulted
in markedly attenuated gene signature expression after mafosfamide
treatment. The addition of conditioned medium significantly reduced
mafosfamide-induced cancer cell death suggesting that IFN/STAT1-related
genes over-expression may ultimately have protective effect on cancer
cell viability. Accordingly, the inhibition of several genes of the
IFN/STAT pathway, or DNA sensors acting upstream, increased cell
mortality when combined with genotoxic treatment and delayed colony
formation.Overall, this study supports the functional implication of
IFN/STAT1-related genes in tumor resistance to genotoxic treatment.

