Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of prostate 4 (STEAP4): an
important link between hypoxia, inflammation, nutrition and tumorigenesis
in the intestine


Hypoxia occurred in the inflammatory foci can further increase the
pro-inflammatory response. Moreover, inflammatory hypoxia is critical for
altering tissue metabolism and nutritional response, which can further
sustain the inflammation and drive tumorigenesis. However, the mechanisms
that link hypoxia, nutrition, inflammation and tumorigenesis are not
clear. Through genome-wide expression analysis we identified
six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of prostate 4 (STEAP4) as a gene
highly induced by hypoxia. STEAP4 is an oxidoreductase that regulates
inflammatory stress, fatty acid, glucose and iron metabolism. Here we
demonstrate that the increase in STEAP4 is dependent on epithelial HIF-2
in mouse models of colitis. Luciferase reporter assay and ChIP assay
confirmed that STEAP4 is a HIF-2 target gene. Compared to normal healthy
controls, the gene expression of STEAP4 was highly induced in tissues
from colitis patients. Transgenic mice overexpressing GFP-tagged STEAP4
specifically in intestinal epithelial cells demonstrated that STEAP4 was
expressed primarily on the plasma and mitochondrial membrane.
Interestingly, these mice had no change in serum and tissue minerals
except for a slight increase in intestinal iron, specifically
mitochondrial iron, but no change in systemic iron levels. STEAP4
transgenic mice were highly susceptible to acute experimental colitis
model. Moreover, STEAP4 was increased in human colorectal cancer (CRC)
and predicts poor prognosis. Consistently, tumor numbers in the STEAP4
transgenic overexpression mice were increased compared to wild-type
littermates in a colitis-associated CRC tumor model. Mechanistically,
overexpression of STEAP4 increased oxidative stress and DNA damage in the
intestine. In conclusion, we have identified a novel gene induced in
colitis and CRC that could link hypoxia-induced metabolic changes,
inflammation and cancer.

