Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATM inhibition potentiates death of androgen receptor-inactivated
prostate cancer cells with telomere dysfunction


Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed non-skin cancer, and
second leading cause of cancer deaths, in American men. The androgen
receptor (AR) plays a critical role in the survival of prostate cancer
(PCa) cells. Therefore, treatments that inactivate AR, either by
decreasing the androgen level or by inhibiting AR directly, are used to
treat advanced PCa. However, these treatments are not curative, and
disease progression generates castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC). Our studies point to a novel role of AR in telomere stability
that, in our opinion, can be exploited to enhance the effectiveness of
AR-targeted therapies for CRPC.Telomere stability is essential for cell
proliferation and survival. We previously reported that AR plays a role
in maintaining telomere stability in prostate cancer cells. Since
telomere dysfunction activates the DNA damage response (DDR) signaling
pathway which can activate cell cycle checkpoints, repair damaged DNA,
and promote cell survival, we tested a hypothesis that AR-inactivated
telomere dysfunction activates a DDR signaling pathway protein, called
ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) kinase, and ATM inhibitor potentiates
cell death by averting telomeric DNA repair in AR-inactivated PCa
cells.ATM pathway was assessed by the phosphorylation of ATM and its
downstream target Chk2 through Western blotting, inhibition of telomere
DNA repair was evaluated by counting RPA (DNA replication protein A) foci
at damaged telomeres, and the cell viability was determined by PARP
cleavage and colony formation assays. We observed that telomere
dysfunction by AR-antagonists (Casodex or MDV3100) or AR-siRNA was
associated with a dramatic increase in phosphorylation of ATM and Chk2
and the presence of phosphorylated ATM at telomeres, indicating the
activation of DNA damage response signaling at telomeres. Moreover,
Casodex washout led to the reversal of telomere dysfunction, indicating
repair of damaged telomeres. ATM inhibitor blocked ATM phosphorylation
and induced PARP cleavage, suggesting that ATM inhibitors induce
apoptosis in AR-inactivated cells by blocking the repair of damaged DNA
at telomere. This was further corroborated by a conspicuous localization
of RPA at damaged telomeres; presence of RPA foci is indicative of
unrepaired stretch of single-stranded DNA at telomeres. Finally, colony
formation assay revealed a dramatic decrease in the survival of cells
co-treated with Casodex and ATM inhibitor as compared with those treated
with either Casodex or ATM inhibitor alone.These observations indicate
that inhibitors of DDR signaling pathways may offer a unique opportunity
to enhance the potency of AR-targeted therapies for the treatment of
androgen-sensitive as well as castration- resistant prostate cancer.

