Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Senescence-like phenotype associates with rapid metastasis
promotion following antiangiogenic drug resistance and therapy withdrawal


Few studies have investigated mechanisms of antiangiogenic drug
resistance in mouse models that faithfully recapitulate clinically
relevant spontaneous metastatic disease or evaluate the impact of therapy
cessation on tumor and stromal cell growth. Generation of such models may
be critical to study reported instances of antiangiogenic therapy-induced
metastasis in animals that have often proved challenging to confirm in
patients. Here we describe the derivation of several human and mouse
tumor cell lines obtained from spontaneous metastatic lesions present
after surgical removal of primary tumors and following long-term in vivo
treatment with sunitinib or axitinib. Selected drug-resistant metastatic
(kidney, breast, and melanoma) and non-malignant stromal cell variants
(endothelial and fibroblast) were continuously exposed to drug in vitro
and then evaluated following both short- and long-term treatment removal
(48 hours and 6 months, respectively). Our results show that metastatic
drug-resistant cells receiving sustained treatment were re-sensitized to
therapy upon orthotopic re-implantation into treatment-nave animals,
suggesting a predominant host-mediated role in therapy failure. However,
significant increases in tumor growth and metastatic potential were
observed in all models when cells were re-implanted and therapy stopped,
suggesting a tumor-dependent pro-metastatic mechanism activated by
therapy withdrawal. Whole genome expression analysis for resistant cells
on and off treatment revealed reversible and irreversible gene changes
implicating a senescence-like phenotype capable of influencing metastatic
potential. Senescent-like characteristics included increased cell size,
decreased proliferation, cell cycle check-point protein alteration, and
therapy-induced SA--galactosidase expression, depending on the cell line.
Critically, antiangiogenic therapy could induce a senescence associated
secretory phenotype (SASP) in both tumor and stroma cells which reversed
or persisted following therapy cessation in certain instances.
Importantly, we found that interleukin-6 (IL-6) - a major component of
the SASP - was upregulated in resistant tumor and stroma cells, but only
remained upregulated in stromal cells following therapy withdrawal. These
results suggest that antiangiogenic treatment-induced senescence-like
changes may contribute to treatment failure and contribute to
pro-metastatic growth depending on cell origin (i.e., tumor or stroma)
and whether treatment is sustained or stopped.

