Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient and rapid cellular delivery of bioactive proteins using
EXPLOR: exosomes engineered for protein loading via optically reversible
protein-protein interaction


Despite the long list of therapeutic proteins available for treating
various human diseases, the vast majority of commercial protein-based
drugs, such as cytokines, hormones, and monoclonal antibodies, have been
limited to extracellular mechanisms of action. Many intracellular
proteins with great potential as biopharmaceutical drugs have been
identified; however, many of the challenges associated with intracellular
protein delivery have yet to be solved. Although protein transduction and
lipid nanoparticle-mediated protein delivery methods have been proposed
for direct protein delivery into target cells and tissues, many obstacles
remain before these methods can be successfully employed in vivo,
including low purification efficiency, failure to separate from
nanoparticles in recipient cells, and induction of immune responses
against host immune cells. To address these limitations, we developed an
opto-genetically engineered exosome system, named exosomes for protein
loading via optically reversible protein-protein interaction (EXPLOR)
that can deliver soluble proteins into the cytosol via controlled,
reversible protein-protein interactions (PPI). Among nanoparticles,
cell-derived exosomes have recently been highlighted as new therapeutic
strategies for the in vivo delivery of nucleotides and chemical drugs.
Exosomes are natural cell-derived extracellular vesicles that originate
from internal endocytic compartments and multi-vesicular bodies and
participate in intercellular communication. Recent studies have sought to
use exosomes as a new method for the in vivo delivery of siRNA or miRNA
to specific target tissues by systemic injection. These methods were
based on the passive loading of siRNAs or miRNAs into isolated exosomes
by electrophoresis, a method poorly suited for the intracellular delivery
of cellular proteins. By integrating a reversible PPI module controlled
by blue light with the endogenous process of exosome biogenesis, we were
able to successfully load cargo proteins into newly generated exosomes.
Treatment with protein-loaded EXPLORs was shown to significantly increase
intracellular levels of cargo proteins and their function in recipient
cells in both a time- and dose-dependent manner. In the present study, we
have demonstrated the intracellular delivery of mCherry, Cre enzyme, Bax,
and Super repressor IB proteins as functional proteins in the target
cells and in vivo. These results clearly indicate the potential of
EXPLORs as a mechanism for the efficient intracellular transfer of
protein-based drugs into recipient cells and tissues both in vitro and in
vivo.

