Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic visualization of cancer cell engraftment into immune
compromised zebrafish


Cell transplantation into immune compromised mice has transformed our
understanding of cancer and is now the gold standard for assessing
therapeutic responses in vivo. However, mouse models are expensive and
engraftment is often difficult to visualize directly. To overcome these
challenges, we have developed immune compromised zebrafish (ICZ) in the
transparent casper background using genome editing techniques. We have
successfully targeted genes required for immune cell function and are
well known to cause immune deficiency in human and mice. To date, we have
developed homozygous viable mutants for recombination-activating gene 2
(rag2), DNA-dependent protein kinase (prkdc), janus kinase 3 (jak3),
interleukin 2 receptor gamma (Il2rg), zeta-chain (TCR) associated protein
kinase 70 (zap70), and forkhead box N1 (foxn1/nude). Gene expression
analysis of marrow cells using RNAseq has identified novel transcript
changes correlated with loss of specific cell types, and in conjunction
with large-scale single cell transcriptional profiling, has identified
specific cellular defects associated with T, B, and NK cell loss. For
example, homozygous prkdc (SCID) mutant fish lack mature T and B cells,
but have intact NK cell signaling. By contrast, il2rg-deficient zebrafish
lack T and NK cells. Importantly, these ICZ models accurately
recapitulate known human severe combined immune deficiencies and
established mouse models that are commonly used for cell transplantation.
Thus, it is not unexpected that a subset of zebrafish mutants have
reduced immune cell function, permitting engraftment of normal
hematopoietic and muscle satellite cells from allogeneic donors.
Additionally, we have demonstrated robust and persistent engraftment of
fluorescently labeled leukemia, rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, and
melanoma from a wide range of zebrafish strains. Because mutations have
been created in optically-clear, casper-strain zebrafish and cancers are
fluorescently labeled, we now have unprecedented access to directly
visualize tumor cells at single cell resolution in live animals. To date,
we have optimized our models to visualize neovascularization,
intratumoral cell heterogeneity, clonal evolution and metastisis. The
ability to transplant non-immune matched cell types will likely
revolutionize the types and scale of cell transplantation experiments
performed in the zebrafish and will likely permit engraftment of mouse
and human cells into compound mutant ICZ models in the near future.

