Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3CA mutational status in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and
corresponding circulating tumor DNA in breast cancer patients


AIMS: Molecular characterization of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) and
analysis of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in cancer patients holds
promise as an extremely powerful and reliable non-invasive clinical tool
for the individual molecular profiling of each patient in real time. The
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway is implicated
in human cancers, and somatic mutations in the p110 catalytic subunit of
PI3K, are very frequent and play a crucial role in response to molecular
targeted therapies in breast cancer. In this study, we analyzed PIK3CA
hotspot mutations (1633 G>A, 3140 A>G) in CTCs and corresponding ctDNA of
early and metastatic breast cancer patients. We also examined whether
there is a correlation between the presence of PIK3CA mutations in CTCs
and ctDNA.METHODS: We used our highly sensitive methodology for the
detection of PIK3CA hotspot mutations in exons 9 (1633 G>A) and 20 (3140
A>G), based on a combination of allele-specific PCR, asymmetric rapid PCR
and high resolution melting analysis (HRMA) (Markou et al, CCR 2014). We
analyzed PIK3CA hotspot mutations in the EpCAM-positive CTCs fraction and
the corresponding plasma samples of: i) a group of 19 patients with
operable breast cancer, ii) a group of 40 breast cancer patients with
verified metastasis and iii) 30 healthy female volunteers. All ctDNA
samples (extracted from 2 ml plasma) were examined for their DNA quality;
to verify DNA quality, primers specific for the wild type in exactly the
same PIK3CA gene region for exon 9 were used to assess for hotspots
mutations. The mutation status of PIK3CA gene in ctDNA samples was
detected by the developed methodology exactly as previously described.
All samples were analyzed in triplicate.RESULTS: The assay is highly
sensitive as it can detect 0.05% of mutated dsDNA in the presence of
99.95% wtDNA for both exons (9 and 20) and highly specific (0/30 healthy
donors). PIK3CA hotspot mutations were identified in ctDNA in 12/40 (30%)
of metastasis-verified breast cancer patients and 4/19 (21%) of operable
breast cancer patients. In metastasis-verified breast cancer patients,
the concordance between EpCAM- positive CTCs and ctDNA for 1633 G>A
mutation was 72.5%, whereas the corresponding concordance for the 3140
A>G mutation was 97.5%. In operable breast cancer patients, the
concordance between EpCAM-positive CTCs and ctDNA for the 1633 G>A
mutation was 80%, whereas the corresponding concordance for the 3140 A>G
mutation was 100%.CONCLUSIONS: Detection of PIK3CA hotspot mutations in
EpCAM-positive CTCs and corresponding ctDNA has shown a correlation both
in metastasis-verified and operable breast cancer patients. We will
further evaluate our findings in a large cohort of patients before and
after treatment, to evaluate response to molecular targeted therapies in
breast cancer.

