Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Krupple-like factor 10 enhanced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of pancreatic cancer by modulating glucose metabolism via Sirt
6 and PKM2


Introduction:Pancreatic Cancer is well known for its deregulated TGF
signaling. We have reported that the expression level of Krpple like
factor 10 (Klf10), a TGF early response transcription factor, is
associated with clinical outcomes of pancreatic cancer patients. In this
study, we would like to evaluate the mechanisms of Klf10 in promoting
distant metastasis of pancreatic cancer.Materials and Methods:Klf10
over-expressing- or depleting-human pancreatic cancer cell lines were
established. Western blot was used to evaluate epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) markers and glycolysis related molecules. Cancer cell
migration was measured by trans-well assay. Luciferase-labeled Panc-1
cells with or without Klf10 mRNA silencing were injected via tail veins
of NOD/SCID mice to evaluate their metastatic ability. The glucose
consumption, lactate production and mitochondrial respiration of
pancreatic cancer cells were measured by assay kit or XFe Extracellular
Flux Analyzers.Results:Down-regulating Klf10 in Panc-1 cells was
associated with enhanced migration and invasion ability by in vitro and
in vivo studies. Immunoblots of cell lysates revealed decreased
expression level of E-cadherin and increased Twist, MMP9. Glycolysis
activity was elevated while mitochondrial respiration decreased after
silencing Klf10 mRNA in Panc-1 cells. The phenomenon was in parallel with
decreased Sirt 6 and increased HIF-1 as well as PKM2 expression. We
demonstrated that Klf10 bind to the promoter and transcriptionally
regulated Sirt 6. Modulating Sirt 6 and PKM2 reversed the EMT and
metastatic phenotype of Panc-1 cells with Klf10mRNA
silencing.Discussion:Loss of Klf10 enhanced the migratory ability of
pancreatic cancer cells. Klf10 transcriptionally regulated Sirt 6 which
modulated glycolytic enzymes including PKM2 via HIF-1. Elevated PKM2
promoted EMT phenotype and distant metastasis of pancreatic cancer. Klf10
is a potential prognostic and therapeutic biomarker for pancreatic cancer.

