Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving the efficacy of pretargeted radioimmunotherapy in
preclinical murine models by utilizing bioorthogonal click chemistry


Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are promising vectors for delivering
therapeutic radiation to cancer cells, but the slow pharmacokinetics of
immunoglobulins can lead to high radiation doses to healthy organs, which
has hampered the advent of targeted radiommunotherapy (RIT) in the
clinic. In response, considerable attention has been dedicated to RIT
strategies including pretargeted radioimmunotherapy (PRIT) that reduce
the radiation burden to healthy tissue. PRIT harnesses the
tumor-targeting properties of mAbs while avoiding their drawbacks by
employing process in which we are able to radioactively label mAbs after
they have accumulated at their target site in vivo. Recently, an
innovative approach has emerged based on the extraordinarily selective
and rapid inverse electron demand Diels-Alder cycloaddition between a
tetrazine (Tz) bearing radioligand and transcyclooctene (TCO) modified
mAb. This system has yielded PET images with high contrast while
delivering only a small fraction of the radiation dose produced by
directly labeled mAbs. Given the success of these pretargeted imaging
modalities, the logical next step is to leverage this technology for the
development of a safe and effective approach to PRIT.To accomplish this
goal, we synthesized two novel 177Lu-labeled Tz radioligands in excellent
radiochemical yield (>98%). We compared their uptake in a PRIT system
with TCO-modified 5B1 a human, anti-CA19.9 mAb using preclinical murine
models of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Biodistribution
studies in mice bearing subcutaneous xenografts indicated that
177Lu-DOTA-PEG7-Tzthe best ligand testedhad rapid (4.6 0.8%ID/g at 4h)
and persistent (16.8 3.9%ID/g at 120h) uptake in xenografts while rapidly
clearing from blood and non-target tissues. Single-dose therapy studies
using 5B1-TCO and varying doses of 177Lu-DOTA-PEG7-Tz (400, 800, and
1200Ci) showed that our system elicits a dose-dependent therapeutic
response in mice bearing human xenografts, the higher two doses causing
marked reduction in size or complete elimination of the tumors in vivo.
Moreover, dosimetry calculations indicated that, as expected, the PRIT
approach reduced the effective absorbed dose of radiation relative to
directly labeled 177Lu-5B1 by as much as an order of magnitude at doses
that elicited an equal therapeutic response. This was particularly true
in metabolic organs such as the liver, kidneys, and spleen as well as
tissues such as dose-limiting tissues like blood and red marrow.In the
past, several strategies for PRIT have been limited by intrinsic problems
(i.e. immunogenicity or radionuclide washout due to noncovalent binding)
that prevented clinical translation. We have adapted and optimized a
novel PRIT system without those inherent limitations that matches or
improves upon their efficacy in preclinical studies. Studies to expedite
clinical translation are currently underway.

