Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Costimulatory T-cell engagement by the HER2/CD137 bispecific
PRS-343 leads to strong antitumor effect in humanized mouse model


Background. CD137 (4-1BB) is a key costimulatory immunoreceptor and a
member of the TNF-receptor (TNFR) superfamily. While multiple lines of
evidence show that CD137 is a highly promising therapeutic target in
cancer, current mAb-based approaches are not designed to achieve a
tumor-target driven activation and may display toxicity and a limited
therapeutic window due to peripheral T cell and NK cell activation. To
overcome this limitation, we generated PRS-343, a HER2/CD137 bispecific
that is designed to promote CD137 clustering by bridging CD137-positive T
cells with HER2-positive tumor cells, thereby providing a potent
costimulatory signal to tumor antigen-specific T cells.Methods. Anticalin
proteins are 18 kD protein therapeutics derived from human lipocalins. We
utilized phage display to generate an Anticalin protein binding to CD137
with high affinity and specificity. PRS-343 was obtained by genetic
fusion of the CD137-specific Anticalin protein to a variant of the
HER2-targeting monoclonal antibody trastuzumab with an engineered IgG4
backbone.Results. The bispecific fusion PRS-343 targets CD137 and HER2
with nearly identical affinities compared to the parental building
blocks, and is capable of binding both targets simultaneously. We show ex
vivo that T cells are efficiently activated when incubated with PRS-343
and HER2-positive cells, and that the activation is HER2-dependent. The
in vivo activity of PRS-343 was investigated utilizing a humanized mouse
model with a tumor cell-line-derived, HER2-positive xenograft. When
tumors had reached a predefined size, mice received human PBMC via an
intravenous route and weekly intraperitoneal injections of PRS-343 or
controls for three weeks. We found that PRS-343 led to strong tumor
growth inhibition and a significantly better response compared to either
isotype control or anti-CD137 benchmark mAbs. The data, which include
phenotyping of peripheral and intra-tumoral lymphocytes, support the
envisaged mode of action of tumor-localized costimulatory T cell
activation.Conclusion. We report potent costimulatory T-cell engagement
of the immunoreceptor CD137 in a HER2-dependent manner, utilizing the
HER2/CD137 bispecific PRS-343. Compared to known CD137-targeting
antibodies in clinical development, this approach has the potential to
provide a more localized activation of the immune system with higher
efficacy and reduced peripheral toxicity. The positive functional ex vivo
and in vivo data of PRS-343 as well as the excellent developability
profile support investigation of its anti-cancer activity in clinical
trials.

