Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Checkpoint blockade therapy is improved by altering the immune
suppressive microenvironment with IPI-549, a potent and selective
inhibitor of PI3K-gamma, in preclinical models


The phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) lipid kinases transduce signals in
response to various stimuli in different cell types. PI3K- is
predominantly expressed in leukocytes and not expressed in most
epithelial tumors or sarcomas. Genetic studies highlight an important
role for PI3K- in myeloid-derived cells that constitute a key component
of the immune suppressive tumor microenvironment (Schmid et al. Canc Cell
2011). Targeting PI3K- could therefore alter the immune tumor
microenvironment, enabling the immune system to attack tumor cells more
effectively. We are developing IPI-549, an investigational small molecule
inhibitor of PI3K-, and provide data to support the therapeutic potential
of breaking tumor immune tolerance through PI3K- inhibition.IPI-549 is a
potent and selective inhibitor of PI3K- with favorable pharmacological
properties. In vitro functional assays demonstrated that IPI-549 blocked
bone marrow derived M2 murine macrophage polarization, but did not affect
M1 polarization. Oral administration of IPI-549 to tumor-bearing mice
resulted in significant tumor growth inhibition in multiple syngeneic
solid tumor models at PI3K- selective doses. Analysis of the
tumor-associated immune cells demonstrated that IPI-549 treatment results
in decreased immune suppressive myeloid cells and increased CD8+ T cells,
suggesting enhanced anti-tumor immunity. To address the requirement for
targeting myeloid cells by IPI-549, CD11b+ cells were depleted from a
transplanted whole tumor Lewis Lung Carcinoma model and the effect of
IPI-549 on limiting tumor growth was abrogated. In addition, a
myeloid-infiltrated B16-GMCSF model, but not the isogenic B16 model
without GMCSF, was responsive to IPI-549. Studies in immune-deficient
mice or CD8 T-cell depleted tumor bearing mice demonstrated the T-cell
dependence of IPI-549-mediated tumor growth inhibition. IPI-549 treatment
also led to a significant reduction in lung metastases in the 4T1 and
B16-GMCSF models. Importantly, in vivo studies with IPI-549 in
combination with the immune checkpoint inhibitors anti-PD-1, anti-PDL-1
and anti-CTLA-4 showed increased tumor growth inhibition in multiple
models compared to monotherapies alone. These data can inform
combinations for future clinical trials.Our studies support a role for
PI3K- in immune suppressive myeloid cells in the tumor microenvironment
and provide evidence that targeted inhibition of PI3K- by IPI-549 can
restore antitumor immune responses and inhibit tumor growth in
preclinical models. A Phase 1 study evaluating IPI-549 as an orally
administered therapeutic, as a single agent and in combination with an
anti-PD-1 antibody therapy, in patients with selected solid tumors is
expected to begin in early 2016.

