Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel anti-gastrin nanoparticle inhibits growth of pancreatic
cancer


Background: Receptor-targeted therapies or inhibition of growth factors
have improved cancer survival. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
markedly over-expresses the cholecystokinin-B (CCK-B) receptor and
re-expression gastrin stimulates growth of PDAC by an autocrine mechanism
through the CCK-B receptor. When gastrin mRNA is down regulated by RNAi
techniques, PDAC growth and metastases are inhibited in animal models.
However, anti-gastrin gene therapy cannot be readily used in humans
unless nontoxic gene delivery strategies are implemented. The purpose of
this project was to develop a unique drug delivery nanoparticle (NP) that
selectively binds to the CCK-B receptor and safely delivers siRNA to
down-regulate gastrin expression and inhibit growth of PDAC.Methods: In
order to develop the targeted NP, a thiol functionalized polyethylene
glycol-block-poly(L-lysine) (SH-PEG-PLL) polymer was synthesized. To
render the NP target-specific for the CCK-B receptor we used a maleimide
link to conjugate Gastrin-10 to the PEG via Michael addition reaction.
The resulting Ga-PEG-PLL was extensively purified using a PD-10 column
and by dialysis. The polyplex micelle was prepared by mixing 1mg/mL of
the Ga-PEG-b-PLL with a gastrin siRNA (si286 GUGCUGAGGAUGAGAACUA), which
decreases gastrin mRNA 90%. The PEG protects the siRNA from degradation
in solution or blood and the lysine polymer forms a micelle shielding the
positive charge and eliminating toxicity. The NP was analyzed by dynamic
light scattering (DLS) and zeta potential. Efficacy of the NPs to inhibit
growth was tested on PANC-1 human PDAC cells that have a high number of
CCK-B receptors. Cells were plated into 6-well plates overnight and then
treated for 72h with PBS, 100x NP (10nM siRNA) or 50x NPs (5nM siRNA) in
serum-free DMEM media. Viable cell counts were performed by trypan blue
exclusion.Results: Characterization of the functionalized polyplex NP
confirmed a molecular weight of 9700 Da. Trityl deprotection and
conjugation of Ga-10 to the SH-PEG-PLL polymer were confirmed by NMR
which demonstrated complete removal of the trityl group and greater than
70% conjugation of the peptide to target the receptor. The polyplex NP
complex was confirmed by DLS measurement, which demonstrated size
distributions of 44.3 0.3 and 48.2 0.3 nm for receptor-targeted and
untargeted polyplex respectively. Treatment of PANC-1 cancer cells with
the anti-gastrin NPs significantly inhibited growth by 98% compared to
untreated controls (p = 0.005).Conclusion: A novel NP that targets the
over-expressed CCK-B receptor on PDAC was successfully synthesized and
characterized. The NP can deliver anti-gastrin gene therapy in the form
of siRNA into human pancreatic cancer cells to significantly inhibit cell
growth by downregulation of gastrin expression. This technique may
provide a safe and novel gene therapy delivery method to treat those with
advanced PDAC.Supported by: Otto J Ruesch Center for the Cure of GI
Cancers

