Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of EpCAM in EGFR signaling and tumorigenesis


EpCAM is a transmembrane glycoprotein that functions as a homophilic cell
adhesion molecule. EpCAM is expressed in normal epithelium and at even
higher levels in epithelial cancers, including breast, pancreatic and
lung cancers. Since its discovery in the 1980s, EpCAM has been targeted
in several different epithelial cancers. Even though numerous novel
therapeutic strategies targeting EpCAM have been investigated, the
biological role and functional significance of EpCAM expression in cancer
remains unclear. EpCAM expression appears to be associated with prognosis
in several epithelial cancers -in some cancers it is associated with a
favorable prognosis (renal cell, rectal) and in others it is associated
with a poor prognosis (lung, pancreatic, breast). Thus, the function of
EpCAM appears to be context-dependent in epithelial cancers. To
understand the impact of EpCAM in human cancer, we specifically ablated
EpCAM expression in over 40 cancer cell lines, and assessed the impact on
invasion. We identified the A431 epidermoid cancer cell line as a cell
line that overexpresses EpCAM, but is exquisitely sensitive to
manipulation of EpCAM expression. A431 is known to overexpress EGFR and
serves as a model cell line for EGFR signaling. Specific ablation of
EpCAM significantly enhanced the migration and invasion of the A431 cell
line. Specific ablation of EpCAM was also associated with increased EGFR
activity, as demonstrated by phospho-immunoblot. Immunoprecipitation
studies demonstrate that EpCAM binds directly to EGFR. Using specific
EpCAM mutant constructs, we showed that the N-terminal domain of EpCAM is
required for binding and suppression of EGFR activity. Using a soft agar
colony growth assay, we were able to confirm that N-terminal EpCAM domain
mutants (NTD288) inhibited colony growth in 3T3-transfected cells
relative to the wildtype. In addition, a transformation assay showed that
the same N-terminal mutant was able to inhibit transformation of 3T3
cells. To assess the effects of EpCAM ablation on in vivo tumor growth,
we specifically ablated EpCAM and then performed tumor challenge
experiments using immunocompromised mice. Specific ablation of EpCAM
increased tumor growth relative to control. These data suggest that EpCAM
may modulate EGFR signaling. Further studies are ongoing to define the
mechanisms by which EpCAM inhibits EGFR activity.

