Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-B7-H3 antibody-drug conjugates as potential therapeutics for
solid cancer


Introduction: Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were generated via a
target-unbiased approach based on intact cell immunization with cell
lines, fetal progenitor cells, and cancer stem cells. An
immunohistochemical screen for cancer-specific candidates identified a
panel of anti-B7-H3 (CD276) mAbs with highly differential
tumor-versus-normal tissue binding. B7-H3 expression was observed in
tumor epithelium as well as tumor-associated vasculature and stroma.
Consistent with our findings, B7-H3 has been reported to be overexpressed
in a growing number of solid cancers, including breast, lung, pancreatic,
prostate, kidney, and colon cancer, as well as melanoma and glioblastoma.
Furthermore, overexpression of B7-H3 has been correlated with disease
severity and poor outcome in a number of these cancer types. A humanized
version of an anti-B7-H3 mAb engineered with an enhanced Fc domain
(enoblituzumab or MGA271) and a humanized Dual-Affinity Re-Targeting
(DART) protein that recognizes both B7-H3 and CD3 and redirects T cells
to kill B7-H3-expressing cells (MGD009) are being investigated in Phase 1
clinical studies. In this nonclinical study, we evaluated the therapeutic
potential of anti-B7-H3 antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) toward
B7-H3-expressing solid cancers.Methods: A panel of anti-B7-H3 mAbs was
screened for internalization and a subset of mAbs that were efficiently
internalized by tumor cells was identified. These mAbs were converted to
ADCs via chemical conjugation; in vitro and in vivo activity studies were
then conducted with a range of tumor cell lines representing human cancer
types that overexpress B7-H3.Results: The anti-B7-H3 ADCs exhibited
specific, dose-dependent cytotoxicity toward B7-H3-positive tumor cell
lines in vitro, including breast, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, and prostate
cancer lines, with IC50 values generally in the sub-nM range.
Cytotoxicity was not observed with cell lines lacking B7-H3 expression.
The anti-B7-H3 ADCs exhibited potent antitumor activity in vivo,
resulting in tumor stasis and tumor regression in mice bearing
B7-H3-positive human breast, lung, and ovarian tumor
xenografts.Conclusion: Anti-B7-H3 ADCs exhibited dose-dependent
cytotoxicity in vitro and potent antitumor activity in vivo toward a
range of B7-H3-expressing tumor cell lines representing cancer types that
overexpress B7-H3. Our findings demonstrate that ADCs targeting B7-H3 may
serve as potential therapeutics for B7-H3-expressing solid cancers.

