Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of xenografts and cell lines
trom nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common cancer among ethnic Cantonese
living in Hong Kong and southern China. It is closely associated with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Unfortunately, there are very few
representative xenografts and cell lines established from NPC available
for investigation. Most of the NPC xenografts established have been
passaged in immune deficient animals for over 20 years and may not be
representative of the original NPC in patients. For in vitro NPC cell
lines, there is only one cell line which retains the EBV genomes. Other
NPC cell lines have all lost their EBV episomes. Furthermore, many of
these NPC cell lines are found to be contaminated with genetic components
from HeLa cells (HPV16 genome) which raised issues on their origins and
limited their uses as NPC cells. There is great urgency in establishment
new NPC cell lines both in vivo and in vitro for various research
investigations and for the study of pathogenic role of EBV infection in
NPC. We have carried out continuous efforts since 2010 to attempt
establishment of new NPC xenografts and cell lines from surgical and
biopsies NPC tissues. NPC tissues from resected recurrent NPC and
biopsies from primary NPC were explanted to subrenal capsular sites and
maintained for four months to one year to observe for growth of new NPC
xenografts. Attempts to establish new NPC celles were also carried out.
At present, we have successfully established 3 NPC xenografts (Xeno 23,
Xeno 32, Xeno 47) which could be passages at subcutaneously sites and one
in vitro NPC cells (NPC43) which harbors EBV genomes. The growth
properties and genetic alterations of these newly established NPC cell
lines have been characterized. Novel genetic alterations and growth
signaling pathways were observed in these newly established NPC cell
lines and may represent driver mutations and signaling pathways essential
for progression of NPC. Profiling of EBV gene expression of these newly
established NPC cell lines revealed predominant latent EBV infection and
expression of EBV-encoded mRNA from the BART transcripts which are
characteristic of EBV infection in NPC. The establishment of new NPC
cells will contribute to investigate the pathogenesis of NPC and its
intimate relationship with EBV infection.Funding acknowledgement:
University Grant Council (HK) grants (AoE NPC (AoE/M-06/08); TBRS
(T12-401/13R); GRF); University of Hong Kong (CRCG and SRT cancer)

