Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Branched chain RNA in situ hybridization for the detection of
androgen receptor splice variants within archival prostate cancer tissue


Introduction:Androgen receptor (AR) mRNA splice variants have emerged as
predictive biomarkers for response to AR targeted therapies. There are no
commercially available assays to detect AR splice variants. The branched
chain RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) platform enables the highly
sensitive detection of RNA transcripts in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. In this pilot study, we developed an
RNA ISH assay to detect the constitutively active AR-V7 splice variant,
and we correlated AR-V7 expression with clinical outcomes after
first-line androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) for metastatic prostate
cancer.Methods:We designed a branched chain RNA ISH probe to target the
unique cryptic exon CE3 of AR-V7 using multiple tiling probes
(Affymetrix). Automated ISH assays were performed using ViewRNA eZl
Detection Kit on the BOND RX IHC and ISH Staining System. A
semiquantitative scoring method was used to score the RNA ISH signal in
FFPE tissue.We analyzed AR-V7 and full length AR within two prostate
cancer cohorts that we hypothesized to represent low likelihood and high
likelihood to have detectable AR-V7. Low likelihood men had undergone
prostatectomy for Gleason 6 adenocarcinoma, and high likelihood men had
metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer with tumor tissue
obtained after disease progression despite at least one subsequent line
of hormonal therapy (abiraterone, enzalutamide, or bicalutamide). We then
analyzed two additional cohorts who experienced a sustained response
(>2.5 years; n = 13) or brief response (Introduction:Androgen receptor
(AR) mRNA splice variants have emerged as predictive biomarkers for
response to AR targeted therapies. There are no commercially available
assays to detect AR splice variants. The branched chain RNA in situ
hybridization (ISH) platform enables the highly sensitive detection of
RNA transcripts in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. In
this pilot study, we developed an RNA ISH assay to detect the
constitutively active AR-V7 splice variant, and we correlated AR-V7
expression with clinical outcomes after first-line androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT) for metastatic prostate cancer.Methods:We designed a
branched chain RNA ISH probe to target the unique cryptic exon CE3 of
AR-V7 using multiple tiling probes (Affymetrix). Automated ISH assays
were performed using ViewRNA eZl Detection Kit on the BOND RX IHC and ISH
Staining System. A semiquantitative scoring method was used to score the
RNA ISH signal in FFPE tissue.We analyzed AR-V7 and full length AR within
two prostate cancer cohorts that we hypothesized to represent low
likelihood and high likelihood to have detectable AR-V7. Low likelihood
men had undergone prostatectomy for Gleason 6 adenocarcinoma, and high
likelihood men had metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer with
tumor tissue obtained after disease progression despite at least one
subsequent line of hormonal therapy (abiraterone, enzalutamide, or
bicalutamide). We then analyzed two additional cohorts who experienced a
sustained response (>2.5 years; n = 13) or brief response (<9 months; n =
9) to first-line ADT for metastatic prostate cancer and for whom baseline
tumor tissue was available.Results:High likelihood cohort samples had
detectable AR-V7 with a score of 1+ to 3+ in all samples (n = 12). Low
likelihood cohort samples had no detectable AR-V7 (n = 10). Given the
apparent binary distinction of AR-V7 signal among the above groups, we
analyzed pre-treatment AR-V7 status as a predictive and prognostic
biomarker in men with treatment-naive metastatic disease. Detectable
AR-V7 was more common among brief response samples (6 of 9) than among
sustained response samples (4 of 13) (not significant; P = 0.19).
Patients without detectable AR-V7 RNA had significantly longer overall
survival (OS, logrank P = 0.044), with a non-significant trend toward
superior progression-free survival (PFS, logrank P =
0.055).Conclusions:Within an institutional cohort, the RNA ISH assay
identified AR-V7 in all tested samples of high clinical likelihood for
the splice variant RNA and no tested samples of low clinical likelihood.
AR-V7 RNA was detectable in some pretreatment samples, and its presence
was associated with significantly shorter overall survival. The potential
prognostic and predictive utility of AR-V7 status as determined by RNA
ISH from conventionally prepared FFPE tissue warrants further study in
larger cohorts.

