Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the immunogenicity of gastric cancer by
transcriptomic expression based immune phenotyping


One of the main challenges in immuno-oncology is to quantify different
types of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment, as such data can
greatly facilitate our understanding of the mechanism of action of, and
response to cancer immunotherapies. Traditionally immune profiling is
performed by immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry experiments using
surface markers specific to each immune cell type. However, both
approaches suffer from practical limitations such as reagent availability
and real world specimen conditions. Recently several computational
deconvolution approaches using expression profiles of the bulk tumor
tissue samples have been developed. This alternative approach utilizes
existing database of purified immune cell gene signatures and relies on a
rigorous mathematical framework of signal deconvolution. One of such
algorithms, called CIBERSORT (Newman et al. 2015), has been demonstrated
to perform robustly in deconvoluting the relative fractions of 22 human
leukocyte subsets in solid tumor tissue samples, and benchmarked
favorably against FACS analysis.In this work, we performed immune
phenotyping by the CIBERSORT-based expression deconvolution on a cohort
of 100 gastric cancer (GC) patients. We found that the fractions of
activated CD4 memory T cells, rather than CD8+ T cell, are most
significantly correlated with tumor neo-antigen load, whereas the latter
is most significantly associated with the expression of a Cytolytic
Activity metagene and an interferon gamma signature. There is stronger
pre-existing host immune response against the MSI and EBV subtypes of GCs
mediated by either cytotoxic T cells or Natural Killer cells. Lastly, we
found a high M2/M1 tumor associated Macrophages (TAMs) ratio is strongly
associated with poor GC prognosis, corroborating recent reports on the
role of a TAM and stromal response in gastric cancer angiogenesis.Taken
together, we demonstrated in this work that critical information about
the tumor infiltrating immune cells can be gleaned from the computational
deconvolution of bulk tumor gene expression profiling data. The
comprehensiveness and cost-effectiveness of this approach can complement
other immune profiling techniques in characterizing a wide variety of
tumor specimens under various treatment conditions. We foresee its
application in characterizing pharmacodynamics, understanding
immunological mechanism of action and monitoring treatment response and
disease progression for cancer immunotherapies and their combinations in
both pre-clinical and clinical settings.

