Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myelosuppression in patients treated with the telomerase inhibitor
imetelstat is not mediated through activation of toll-like receptors


Imetelstat is a covalently lipidated 13-mer N3-P5 thio-phosphoramidate
(NPS) oligonucleotide (5-TAGGGTTAGACAA-3) that is complementary to the
RNA template region (hTR; 3-AUCCCAACCUGUU-5) of telomerase. Imetelstat is
believed to act as a direct competitive inhibitor of telomerase enzyme
activity and to not have an antisense mechanism of action (MOA) typical
of other oligonucleotides. The purpose of this study was to assess
whether the thrombocytopenia observed in some patients with
myeloproliferative neoplasm treated with imetelstat can be attributed to
activation of toll-like receptors (TLRs) by imetelstat. Imetelstat and
related control oligonucleotides (Mis-match and Sense) were tested using
7 different HEK-Blue TLR cell lines, each stably coexpressing a human TLR
gene (TLR2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9) and a NF-B-inducible secreted embryonic
alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) reporter gene. After 20 hours incubation, the
cells were measured for absorbance at 650 nm for SEAP activity. Each TLR
experiment was performed twice, with 3 replicates per experiment. The
results showed that the positive control for each individual TLR was
recognized by the corresponding TLR, leading to a strong SEAP activity,
whereas imetelstat at a clinically relevant concentration range (10 M-60
M) and the control oligonucleotides related to imetelstat yielded no
induction of SEAP activity (similar level to untreated). These data
demonstrate that imetelstat has no stimulatory effect on the majority of
the tested TLRs. Imetelstat yielded slightly higher induction on TLR8
than the untreated control, but significantly lower than the positive
control. Although thrombocytopenia has been observed in patients with
myeloproliferative neoplasms treated with imetelstat, these data show
that it cannot result from imetelstat acting as a ligand for TLRs. TLR9,
associated with thrombocytopenia, was not activated by imetelstat and the
slight activity of imetelstat on TLR8 is likely irrelevant as no link
between TLR8 activation and thrombocytopenia has been reported. These
findings are consistent with 13-mer sequence of imetelstat, differing
from oligonucleotides known to stimulate TLR9, which comprise 2 CpG
islands separated by 6-10 nucleotides and are longer than 21 nucleotides.
Ex vivo studies have provided evidence that imetelstat may induce
thrombocytopenia in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms by
blocking the terminal maturation of normal megakaryocyte precursors:
megakaryocytic differentiation requires upregulation of telomerase
activity which is inhibited by imetelstat. Correct understanding of the
MOA of imetelstat is vital to guide its clinical use and strategies to
mitigate thrombocytopenia in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms.

