Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-vitro growth inhibitory effects of diosmetin on human prostate
cancer cells


Characterization of effective chemo-preventive agents for treatment of
prostate cancer is an utmost priority. Diosmetin (5,
7-Trihydroxy-4-methoxyflavone), a natural flavonoid present in citrus
plant, has anti-mutagenic and anti-allergic properties. However, the
anticancer properties of diosmetin have not been explored in prostate
cancer. Present study demonstrates, cell growth inhibition and induction
of apoptosis in human prostate carcinoma LNCaP (androgen-responsive) and
PC-3 (androgen-refractory) cells by diosmetin, however, no significant
growth inhibition observed in normal prostate epithelial cells (RWPE1).
Cell growth is a fundamental biological process, where mTOR (mammalian
target of rapamycin) pathway has its role, regulates cell growth by
coordinating energy and nutrient signals with growth factor. mTOR protein
kinase have two different complexes; complex-I contains major component
raptor; a target of rapamycin and complex II; insensitive to rapamycin,
has major component rictor. Rictor is important as it phosphorylates
Ser-473 of Akt/PKB, which is essential for full Akt/PKB activation. We
observed diosmetin treated prostate cancer cells was able to inhibit
growth factor (IGF-1) and cytokine (IL-6) induced rictor expression.
Furthermore, diosmetin (20M) treatment to prostate cancer cells prevented
rictor nuclear localization and subsequently inhibited phospho-Akt
(Ser-473), which subsequently resulted in increased FOXO3a nuclear
presence. Downstream pathway p70S6 kinase, which has a critical role in
cell cycle, growth and survival, was also inhibited after diosmetin
treatment. These effects were associated with a marked decrease in the
protein expression of cyclin D1 and their activating partner,
cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) 2 and 4 with concomitant upregulation of
KIP1/p27 and INK4a/p16. Additionally diosmetin treatment to these cells
modulated cell survival machinery by down regulating key molecules viz.,
c-Myc, Survivin and XIAP (X-Linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis). Diosmetin
treatment also resulted in alteration in Bax/Bcl2 ratio in favor of
apoptosis, which was associated with an increase in cleaved caspase-3.
Taken together, our studies demonstrate that diosmetin-mediated growth
inhibition and induction of apoptosis in both LNCaP and PC-3 cells were
due to deregulated levels of rictor and Akt signaling cascade and
modulation of cell-cycle machinery. We are documenting these evidences
for the first time that diosmetin acts against potential molecular
targets to alter cellular events to elicit anticancer effects in prostate
cancer cells.

