Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolism studies of SH7139, a small molecule drug targeting
B-cell malignancies overexpressing HLA-DR10, confirm its prodrug function


SH7139 is a small molecule drug developed to target B-cell malignancies
overexpressing HLA-DR10. It contains a DOTA metal chelating ring and
three recognition ligands (Ct, Cb, and Dv) that are linked together using
a scaffold composed of lysines and mini-polyethylene glycols. The amide
bonds within the scaffold have D-configurations to make them resistant to
hydrolysis by native proteolytic enzymes. However, two of the ligands
contain bonds and chemical groups that can be cleaved or modified by
metabolic enzymes to produce known cytotoxic compounds. LCMS was used to
identify the metabolites of SH7139 produced in cryopreserved hepatocytes,
Burkitt's (Raji) lymphoma cells and the liver microsomes of several
mammalian species. Following uptake of SH7139 by human, beagle and rat
hepatocytes, which occurs slowly, the cleavage of an amide bond within
the Ct ligand produced
2-[3-chloro-5-(trifluoromethyl)pyridin-2-yl]oxyaniline (M8) and a large
fragment containing the remainder of SH7139 (M2). Phase II metabolism led
to rapid glucuronidation of M8 to facilitate its excretion. This result
may explain the lack of SH7139 liver toxicity in animals studied to date.
Raji lymphoma cells produce the same two Phase I metabolites, but
glucuronidation of M8 is not observed. Thus, M8 is free to inhibit
multiple activities required for tumor cell survival, including the
processing of misfolded proteins, lipogenesis and sumoylation.
Experiments performed with microsomes isolated from Raji cells and human,
Cynomologus monkey, beagle, rat and mouse livers identified eight
additional metabolites. Removal of a single methyl group from intact
SH7139 produced M7. Hydrolysis of the azo group within the SH7139 ligand
Dv in both M2 and M7 led to the production of small and large fragments
in each case: dimethylphenylenediamine (M9) and M1 and
methylphenylenediamine (M10) and M5, respectively. M9 and the
phenylenediamine that is usually produced by the further metabolism of M9
and M10 have been shown by others to inhibit ATP production in
mitochondria. A final set of demethylation, amide cleavage, oxidation,
reduction and glucuronidation reactions involving M7 and M2 produced the
remaining metabolite M6. While metabolic processing of the Cb ligand did
not produce a biologically reactive metabolite, other experiments have
found that the Cb ligand in intact SH7139 inhibits the hydrolysis of GTP
by MgcRacGAP-Rac1 and the completion of cytokinesis. Collectively, these
results confirm that SH7139 functions similar to both an antibody drug
conjugate (ADC) and a pro-drug. In contrast to an ADC, however, the same
SH7139 ligand that participates in the targeting function is also
involved, either directly or following metabolic processing, in tumor
cell killing. This research was supported by the National Cancer
Institute Phase II SBIR Award R44CA159843.

