Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of histone demethylase KDM5C inactivation as a novel
mechanism for tumors resistant to VEGF RTKi via genome-wide in-vivo RNAi


Acquired tumor resistance to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (RTKi) constitutes a major obstacle
for sustained efficacy of antiangiogenic cancer therapy. We sought to
decipher the molecular landscape of tumor resistance to continuous
VEGF-RTKi sunitinib (SU11248, SU) treatment via serial transplantation of
a syngeneic LLC/C57bl6 model and genome-wide mouse lentiviral shRNA
library (150K complexity). The abundance of each single knock down (kd)
was longitudinally traced via molecular barcodes. After three in-vivo
panning rounds (p3-SU) tumor cells containing the kd of H3K4 histone
demethylase (KDM5C) were 212-fold enriched compared to the in-vivo
passaged library without the SU selection pressure (p3-ctrl).
Interestingly, KDM5C is among the top 5 frequently mutated genes in clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC). SU constitutes a cornerstone in the
therapy of metastatic RCC. We hypothesized that KDM5C mutation status
might be prognostic for therapy refractoriness of RCC. Indeed, whole
exome analysis of the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) RCC collective revealed
a trend towards poor overall survival (OS) for patients with mutated
KDM5C tumors. In LLC and RCC xenograft models, loss of KDM5C (shKDM5C)
was attributed to SU resistance with significantly enhanced hypoxia
tolerance, increased proliferation (Ki67, 13-fold, p = 0.04) and
microvascular density (CD31, 23-fold increase, pAcquired tumor resistance
to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (RTKi) constitutes a major obstacle for sustained efficacy of
antiangiogenic cancer therapy. We sought to decipher the molecular
landscape of tumor resistance to continuous VEGF-RTKi sunitinib (SU11248,
SU) treatment via serial transplantation of a syngeneic LLC/C57bl6 model
and genome-wide mouse lentiviral shRNA library (150K complexity). The
abundance of each single knock down (kd) was longitudinally traced via
molecular barcodes. After three in-vivo panning rounds (p3-SU) tumor
cells containing the kd of H3K4 histone demethylase (KDM5C) were 212-fold
enriched compared to the in-vivo passaged library without the SU
selection pressure (p3-ctrl). Interestingly, KDM5C is among the top 5
frequently mutated genes in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC). SU
constitutes a cornerstone in the therapy of metastatic RCC. We
hypothesized that KDM5C mutation status might be prognostic for therapy
refractoriness of RCC. Indeed, whole exome analysis of the cancer genome
atlas (TCGA) RCC collective revealed a trend towards poor overall
survival (OS) for patients with mutated KDM5C tumors. In LLC and RCC
xenograft models, loss of KDM5C (shKDM5C) was attributed to SU resistance
with significantly enhanced hypoxia tolerance, increased proliferation
(Ki67, 13-fold, p = 0.04) and microvascular density (CD31, 23-fold
increase, p<0.02) compared to SU treated shCtrl. We aimed to identify a
consensus set of genes differentially expressed in tumors with KDM5C
kd/mutation. Applying this KDM5C gene signature to RNAseq data of 533 RCC
patients separated the cohort into a poor-prognosis KDM5Cmut-like (median
OS 4.5 years) vs. good prognosis KDM5Cwt-like group (median OS not
reached, p = 0.0001). Genes regulating cancer cell survival,
redox-balance and angiogenesis were enriched in this signature. Together,
these data indicate a critical role for the epigenetic modulator KDM5C in
development of tumor resistance to VEGF-RTKi. The here-identified KDM5C
dependent gene-signature might be instructive to prognosticate patients
at risk for therapy refractoriness to RTKi.

