Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Answering the challenge of cancer genomic testing


Cancer genomes are a hodgepodge of mutations. Single nucleotide somatic
variants, complex structural rearrangements, whole and partial gene
deletions and amplifications, splice variants and expression changesthese
are the potential mutation types in cancer. Tumor heterogeneity is
common, tumor samples can be solid or liquid biopsies, and they are often
contaminated with adjacent normal tissue. Cancer samples are treated with
formalin for archival purposes causing additional genomic variations. All
of these factors combine to make genomic analysis in cancer far more
complicated than that of normal germline tissue.Recent efforts to define
gold standard human genomes lack many features characteristic of cancer
genomes. A single cancer sample may contain a few distinct variant types,
but typically not enough to confidently assess the accuracy of cancer
variant detection algorithms. The Horizon Quantitative Multiplex, an
engineered FFPE cell line mix with variants at allele frequencies (AFs)
from 1.0 to 41.5%, and the Acrometrix Oncology Hotspot Control with >500
SNVs and small indels in one sample are available standards. In the
Horizon cell line, we detected 18/18 SNVs and 4/4 indels. Meanwhile, we
found that the artificial nature of the Acrometrix sample made it
incompatible with next generation sequencing. While samples of this type
have limited utility, there is a clear need for samples containing the
full spectrum of mutation types and frequences.Since the commercially
available standards are of limited utility, we aimed to create a cancer
standard set that consists of many cancer cell lines in combination with
some real primary cancer samples. We started with a collection of 28
cancer cell lines including 817 known SNVs, 62 small indels, 21
deletions, 23 amplifications, and 14 gene fusions. We simulated tumor
heterogeneity by mixing the cell lines at various ratios, generating
variant allele frequencies down to 1% and emulated reduced purity by
mixing cell lines with paired normal samples at ratios down to 10%. This
gave us our platform accuracy metrics for tumor-only somatic
analysis.These experiments required sequencing over 200 samples and
mixes. Using augmented exome and cancer gene panel (targeting >1,500
cancer genes), we were able to interrogate substantial quantities of
variants. We detected 16136/16146 SNVs at 5% AF, 639/646 indels at 10%
AF, 29/30 CNAs at 20% purity, and 14/14 gene fusions using the panel, for
example. These high variant counts gave us tighter confidence intervals
and accuracy metrics for detection of all major cancer variant
types.After validating our variant calling approaches via this set, we
applied our algorithms to primary tumor samples both formalin treated and
fresh frozen, and also tested them both with and without a paired normal
tissue sample. These gave us the ability to understand the fundamental
effects of formalin fixation, and the benefits of including the paired
normal sample, which will be covered in this presentation.

