Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Smurf2 in regulation of Smad anchor necessary for receptor
activation (SARA) in TGF-receptor signaling


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a major form of lung cancer and is
the leading cause of cancer mortality in the western world. Transforming
growth factor (TGF) deregulation leads to many human diseases: TGF is a
tumor suppressor in normal lung epithelium; however, it switches roles
and promotes lung cancer metastasis in cancer cells. TGF induces cell
proliferation, migration and invasion in NSCLC cells.The canonical
pathway of TGF is initiated through binding of TGF ligand to
transmembrane Ser/Thr kinase receptors, which propagate their signaling
via receptor regulated R-Smads; proteins that function as intracellular
effectors in the TGF pathway. Once activated, R-Smads form a complex with
common (Co)-Smads that translocates into the nucleus to regulate
transcriptional responses. Access of R-Smads to the activated receptor
complex is regulated by an adaptor protein called Smad anchor for
receptor activation (SARA). SARA facilitates the activation of Smads and
allow efficient Smad signalling.In addition to R-Smads and Co-Smads,
inhibitory Smads (I-Smads) regulate TGF signalling. I-Smads block the
signalling by competing against R-Smads for the association with TR
complex or by targeting receptors for ubiquitin-mediate degradation.
I-Smads recruit the E3 ubiquitin ligases, Smad ubiquitination regulatory
factors (Smurfs), to catalyze degradation of the receptor complex. The
overall aim of the project is to characterize SARA in TGF receptor
signalling and study the interaction of SARA with different proteins
involved in the pathway, such as Smurf2 and Smad7.We first examined how
SARA, Smurf2 and Smad7 influence each other by performing a
multi-combination transfection study. We also examined the interaction
between SARA and Smurf2 through co-immunoprecipitation. We observed that
the level of SARA decrease in the presence of Smurf2 and Smad7. In the
presence of Smurf2 ligase inactive mutant and Smad7, the level of SARA is
somewhat recovered. However, SARA does not directly interact with Smurf2.
These data together suggest that SARA and Smurf2 influence each other in
a very close manner. It also suggest that it could be a transient
interaction. Characterizing SARA in TGF receptor signalling will provide
us with possible drug targets for NSCLC.

