Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arginine deiminase loaded in erythrocytes: a promising formulation
for L-arginine deprivation therapy in cancers


Based on the asparaginase paradigm, several arginine-catabolizing enzymes
have been developed for the treatment of arginine-dependent cancers
(Wheatley, 2004). The arginine deiminase (ADI) enzyme catalyzes the
hydrolysis of arginine (Arg) (Sugimura, 1990). ADI purified from
Mycoplasma has a short half-life (4h) in the circulation and was found to
be highly immunogenic (Holstberg, 2002). In order to increase half-life
and to limit immunogenicity, a pegylated form of the enzyme (ADI-PEG-20)
was developed. Phase I/II clinical studies in hepatocarcinoma and in
advanced melanoma concluded on its limited efficacy at the tested doses.
Notably, reduction of the duration of Arg depletion was linked to the
emergence of ADI-PEG-20 antibodies (Ascierto, 2006). Encapsulation of ADI
into red blood cells (RBC) is a promising alternative to improve the
half-life and reduce the immunogenicity of the protein. Argininosuccinate
synthase (ASS1) is the key enzyme in arginine biosynthesis (Haines,
2011). ASS1 expression varies in tumors and ASS1 loss is associated with
poor prognosis in different cancers (Qiu, 2015). All these data
strengthen the importance of selecting ASS1-negative patients for
Arg-depletion based enzymatic therapy.Using a scalable, standardized
production process, we synthesized an ADI enzyme from an optimized M.
arginini coding sequence. ADI was encapsulated into RBC by hypotonic
dialysis (ERY-ADI) and PK-PD parameters were evaluated in CD1 mice, in
comparison with free ADI. Sensitivity to ADI was assessed in vitro by
measuring the cell viability of 3 cancer cell lines with different ASS1
expression levels. ASS1 expression was screened by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) in a large panel of tissue microarrays (TMA) from 16 human cancer
types.Administration of ERY-ADI (5.5IU/mL) reduced mouse plasmatic Arg
level to 30% of control values and led to a maintained depletion for 5
days. The same dose of free ADI strongly depleted Arg (Based on the
asparaginase paradigm, several arginine-catabolizing enzymes have been
developed for the treatment of arginine-dependent cancers (Wheatley,
2004). The arginine deiminase (ADI) enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of
arginine (Arg) (Sugimura, 1990). ADI purified from Mycoplasma has a short
half-life (4h) in the circulation and was found to be highly immunogenic
(Holstberg, 2002). In order to increase half-life and to limit
immunogenicity, a pegylated form of the enzyme (ADI-PEG-20) was
developed. Phase I/II clinical studies in hepatocarcinoma and in advanced
melanoma concluded on its limited efficacy at the tested doses. Notably,
reduction of the duration of Arg depletion was linked to the emergence of
ADI-PEG-20 antibodies (Ascierto, 2006). Encapsulation of ADI into red
blood cells (RBC) is a promising alternative to improve the half-life and
reduce the immunogenicity of the protein. Argininosuccinate synthase
(ASS1) is the key enzyme in arginine biosynthesis (Haines, 2011). ASS1
expression varies in tumors and ASS1 loss is associated with poor
prognosis in different cancers (Qiu, 2015). All these data strengthen the
importance of selecting ASS1-negative patients for Arg-depletion based
enzymatic therapy.Using a scalable, standardized production process, we
synthesized an ADI enzyme from an optimized M. arginini coding sequence.
ADI was encapsulated into RBC by hypotonic dialysis (ERY-ADI) and PK-PD
parameters were evaluated in CD1 mice, in comparison with free ADI.
Sensitivity to ADI was assessed in vitro by measuring the cell viability
of 3 cancer cell lines with different ASS1 expression levels. ASS1
expression was screened by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in a large panel of
tissue microarrays (TMA) from 16 human cancer types.Administration of
ERY-ADI (5.5IU/mL) reduced mouse plasmatic Arg level to 30% of control
values and led to a maintained depletion for 5 days. The same dose of
free ADI strongly depleted Arg (<5M) for 24h but concentration returned
to baseline by 2.5 days. ERY-ADI at higher dose (10.4IU/mL) resulted in
the complete depletion of plasmatic Arg over the 5-day period of the
study. No problem of tolerability were noticed. In cell lines,
sensitivity to ADI was linked to ASS1 expression: AGS cell line
(ASS1-negative) was highly sensitive to ADI treatment (IC50 = 0.4mIU/mL;
100% cell mortality) whereas NCI-N87 (ASS1-high) was strongly resistant
(no mortality at the highest tested dose) and HL-60 (ASS1-low) was
moderately sensitive (IC50 = 0.3mIU/mL; 70% cell mortality). ASS1
screening in TMA revealed several cancers of interest with down-regulated
ASS1 expression.All these results highlight that arginine depletion
through ADI treatment is effective against ASS1-negative cancer cells.
ERY-ADI represents an innovative product with an improved efficacy for
sustained Arg depletion and suitable for the treatment of ASS1 deficient
cancers.

