Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of AEB1102, an engineered human arginase 1 for
patients with solid tumors


Introduction: Tumor dependence on specific amino acids for survival and
proliferation is well recognized and has been exploited effectively with
the use of Asparaginase for the treatment of Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia. Decades of research have led to an understanding of tumor
L-Arginine (L-Arg) dependence, with functional expression of the three
enzymes of the L-Arg biosynthetic pathway: Ornithine Transcarbamylase
(OTC), Argininosuccinate Synthase (ASS1) and Argininosuccinate Lyase
(ASL) being required to convert ornithine to L-Arg. In a variety of tumor
types, silencing of one or more of these enzymes disables endogenous
L-Arg synthesis forcing a reliance on the extracellular pool of L-Arg for
tumor survival and proliferation. This mechanism has been confirmed with
Arginine Deiminase (ADI-PEG) and pegylated wild-type Arginase I
(BCT-100). Aeglea Biotherapeutics Inc. has developed an alternative
approach using a bioengineered human PEGylated Arginase I with enhanced
pharmacological properties. Replacement of manganese, the natural metal
co-factor in wild-type human Arginase I, with cobalt confers improved
catalytic activity and serum stability. The resulting product candidate
(AEB1102) displays highly favorable PK/PD properties, and is expected to
be naturally tolerated by the human immune system as no protein
modifications have been introduced.Experimental Procedures and Results:
Non-clinical dose range finding and GLP toxicology studies were performed
with AEB1102 in monkeys and mice. Bioanalytical assays detecting L-Arg
and AEB1102 enzyme activity were used to monitor PD/PK in the dose range
finding studies with these results subsequently being used to design the
toxicology studies. Subsequent toxicology studies identified an NOAEL in
both species at a dose that is predicted to translate to significant
sustained reduction of L-Arg serum levels with weekly intravenous dosing.
To determine tumor types most likely to respond to AEB1102 expression
profiling of OTC, ASS1 and ASL was performed using in situ hybridization
on multiple tumor histologies. Melanoma was identified as a tumor type
likely to respond to AEB1102 owing to a significant reduction in ASS1
expression. Non-clinical in vivo studies using the A375 melanoma
xenograft as well as melanoma PDx models confirm sensitivity to AEB1102,
weekly dosing resulted in a significant delay in tumor growth and
improved survival.Conclusion: Non-clinical activities required to support
the IND submission of AEB1102 for solid tumors were successfully
executed, enabling the Phase 1 study to be initiated in October 2015.
Translational work profiling the expression of OTC, ASS1 and ASL has
identified melanoma as a relevant tumor type to pursue in future clinical
studies.

