Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of proteomics to analyse whole tumors and identify unique
stroma cell targets for antibody-based therapeutics


Solid tumors comprises of two distinct compartments: cancer cells and the
stroma that the cancer cells induce and are dispersed in. This stroma
contains stromal (Fibroblasts, endothelial and pericyte cells) and
infiltrating immune cells (Lymphocytes, macrophages, granulocytes and
myeloid derived suppressor cells). Recent oncology research has
implicated these stroma cells as promoters of tumor progression and there
is thus a strong need to profile the cell membrane proteins present on
these cells. For tumors which do not contain infiltrating T cells
(non-immunogenic tumors) it has been recognized that it will be necessary
to employ therapeutic agents to disrupt the tumor micro-environment
(TME); allowing the release and processing of tumor antigens by antigen
presenting cells, entry and migration T cells into intrastromal sites and
potent activation of T cell responses to tumor antigens.We have conducted
in-depth proteomic profiling of tumors from 14 different solid cancer
indications with varying degrees of stroma involvement to characterize
their immune and stromal cell composition. The data from this work was
analyzed in OGAP; a unique proteomic database that integrates information
at the tissue, disease and protein isoform level across diseases,
indications, and normal tissues to clarify membrane protein expression
levels and profiles. It is one of the world's largest proprietary
cell-membrane focused proteomic database, with data on over 5000 cancer
membrane proteins. Purified stroma cell populations were also profiled to
facilitate the interpretation of whole tumor proteomic data.Cell membrane
proteins present in tumors from different cancer indications were
analyzed by mass spectrometry. We classified tumors as immunogenic or
non-immunogenic using validated T cell markers (CD3, CD4, CD8 and CD69).
We then profiled the non-immunogenic tumors for fibroblast, macrophage
and B cell type markers to try and identify strong stroma cell expression
patterns not detected in normal tissues. Importantly, most current
antibody therapeutic stroma cell targets (CSF-1R, FAP and VEGF-A) were
re-discovered. Several novel stroma cell therapeutic targets were
identified which if targeted by a therapeutic antibody have the potential
to enhance the T cell immune response in tumors resistant to current
immunotherapy.

