Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of a MEK/MET-specific NGS panel for early phase trial
interrogation


Introduction - MErCuRIC is a Phase Ib/II clinical trial study using a
combined MEK1/2 - cMET inhibition in RAS MT and RAS WT (with aberrant
cMET) colorectal cancer patients. As part of the discovery efforts on the
cases enrolled in Phase I, we aimed to analyze the mutation status of 10
genes that could potentially be associated to the doublet MEK/MET
inhibition. This study compared the MEK/MET-specific panel with the Ion
Torrent 50 gene panel, aiming to compare: long-established, commercially
available panels against this newly developed panel; the Ion Torrent PGM2
platform against Illumina MiSeq v.3 600 bp chemistry; hot-spot-based
against full exomes-designed; and to compare the use of different
bioinformatics reporter systems. The overlapping genes between the panels
were: EGFR (n = 3); BRAF (n = 4); KRAS (n = 8); NRAS (n = 1); MET (n =
8); PIK3CA (n = 6); and ERBB2 (n = 5).Summary of MethodNGS Design - The
Multiplicom - MErCuRIC specific MASTR assay includes PTEN, MAP2K1 (MEK),
EGFR, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, ERBB2, MET and PIK3R1, involving 257
amplicons in 4 plexes covering all coding exons of the 10 genes. Of the
257, 21 are control amplicons to allow for gene deletions/amplifications.
The average length of the amplicons is 198 bp ranging from 124 bp to 255
bp.Validation - From a pool of 120 routine tumour samples characterised
with a 50 gene mutation panel (Ion Torrent PGM2) and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing and/or COBAS (Roche) QPCR, 24 FFPE cases were selected
representing colorectal cancer and 4 other solid tumour types; all
included a variety of DNA quality, and DNA concentration was standardized
prior to library preparation. Pre-analytical handling was in accordance
with established protocols in a laboratory, clinically-accredited in the
UK for tissue-based, anatomical pathology testing.ResultsThe evaluation
of this MEK/MET-specific panel (Illumina MiSeq platform) resulted in 100%
coverage of all targets, a higher than 97% on target reads and higher
than 99% of all amplicons within 20% of mean coverage. The design
minimized the areas of low coverage. A small part of exon 9 of ERBB2 was
covered suboptimally: the low covered region is 30 bp in size located at
the 5 end of exon 9. It is unlikely that this low coverage led to false
negative results since no mutations are reported in the COSMIC database
for this DNA fragment. The results were concordant in relation to
mutations involved in the genes stated above. Importantly, the
percentages of allele frequency between both methods were similar, with
variations ranging from 0.2% to 11.5% with an average variation of 5.2%.
Insertion/deletion (Indel) detection however, required alternative
bioinformatics pathways.ConclusionAfter combining well-established
quality metrics to cover pre-analytical aspects with suitable
technologies such as the MiSeq platform (Illumina) and appropriate
bioinformatics, we recognize that this MEK/MET-specific NGS panel is fit
for purpose.

