Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common DNA methylation patterns in cancer and placental cells
involved in migration and invasion, immune escape, and angiogenesis
induction


Identifying common patterns of regulation in cancer and placental cells
might shed new light on cellular programs allowing aggressive tumor
development. Indeed, as it has been described for the first time more
than a century ago, cancer and placental cells (trophoblasts) share
astonishingly similar phenotypes : migration and invasion, immune escape,
and angiogenesis induction. These common phenotypes, relying on common
genomic sequences and transcriptomic profiles, may result from a shared
epigenomic regulation program. This might be especially true for tumor
cells leading eventually to metastasis and cytotrophoblasts (a
trophoblasts subset) during placental implantation at the beginning of
pregnancy.In order to investigate such common epigenomic patterns, we
carried out comparisons of DNA methylation in cancer and placental cell
genomes. This study involved: cancer samples (primary tumor vs. normal
tissue) across various tissues (including breast, colon, liver, lung,
prostate, thyroid, uterus), on one hand; and placenta samples (early vs.
late term) either heterogeneous (chorionic villi) or homogenous (ex vivo
cytotrophoblasts), on the other hand. Cancer data were data downloaded
from The Cancer Genome Atlas web portal. Placenta data were downloaded
from the Gene Expression Omnibus web portal. In addition, our group
generated original data from ex vivo cytotrophoblasts samples. All data
were generated on the Illumina Infinium 450K array. Data analysis was
carried out thanks to computational methods for epigenomics recently
described.This first direct comparison of cancer and placental cells
epigenomes, leveraging both published data and original data, led to the
identification of large hypomethylated blocks common to cancer and
placental cells. Such common patterns have recently been described as a
universal defining epigenetic alteration in human solid tumors. These
megabase-scale DNA methylation marks differentiate primary tumors from
normal tissues. Likewise, they differentiate early term placentas from
late term placentas. Moreover, genes belonging to genomic regions
displaying common large hypomethylated blocks overlapping in cancers and
placentas are enriched for pathways involved in migration and invasion,
immune escape, and angiogenesis induction.Common DNA methylation patterns
in cancer and placental cells identified in this pilot study might
contribute to the epigenomic regulation of cellular programs allowing
aggressive tumor development. Further analyses of these common patterns,
as well as analyses of differences in cancer and placental cell
epigenomes, could eventually lead to the identification of critical
epigenomic switches that prevent healthy placentas to degenerate into
tumors, while they allow aggressive tumors to develop. Ultimately, such
epigenomic switches could also represent innovative targets in oncology.

