Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of intrinsic resistance to taxanes in gastric
cancer


Gastric cancer (GC) is histologically divided into intestinal (INT) and
diffuse (DIF) clinical subtypes. Even though these two GC groups are
structurally and biologically different, this classification is not used
to inform choice of treatment.Taxanes (paclitaxel, docetaxel (DTX) and
cabazitaxel) are widely used for cancer treatment and for GC specifically
the TAX-325 study revealed therapeutic benefit when DTX was added to the
standard chemotherapy regimen. Despite these improvements, however,
patients often exhibit intrinsic or acquired resistance to DTX adversely
affecting patient survival. Yet, the molecular basis of clinical drug
resistance remains poorly elucidated posing a major barrier for the
effective treatment of GC patients.We performed a post-hoc analysis of
the TAX-325 study to examine the potential influence of GC subtypes in
clinical response to DTX. We classified randomized patients as diffuse or
non-diffuse histology and correlated histology with clinical outcomes
using a Cox proportional hazards model. Non-diffuse GC showed a
significant improvement in overall survival with the addition of DTX
(12.1 v 8.8 mo, p = 0.002), whereas diffuse histology was not associated
with an improvement in survival (8.3 v 8.5 mo, p = 0.66). To investigate
the molecular mechanism of GC DIF subtype resistance to taxanes, we used
a panel of 12 GC cell lines representative of both subtypes (4 intestinal
subtype, 8 diffuse subtype). DTX cytotoxicity assays revealed that
similarly to what we observed clinically, 63% (5/8) of the DIF GC cell
lines were resistant (IC50 > 600 nM) to DTX compared to 25% (1/4) of the
INT GC cell lines. Further functional studies revealed that there was
minimal DTX drug-target engagement in the DIF GC cells, assessed by
confocal microscopy of the microtubule (MT) network and tubulin
polymerization assays. These results suggested that DTX interaction with
its target, MT, was impaired in the DIF GC cell lines. To rule out
multi-drug resistance (MDR) as potential cause of intrinsic DTX
resistance in these cells we performed flow cytometric evaluation of
P-glycoprotein and found that all of the DIF GC cell lines were negative.
Additionally, drug accumulation studies with C-14 radiolabeled DTX
revealed that the drug accumulated intracellularly in all of GC cell
lines in our panel.Next generation sequencing of our panel of untreated
or DTX-treated GC cell lines revealed 84 significantly differentially
expressed genes in drug-sensitive cell lines but no changes in resistant
cells. Our analysis showed a significant enrichment and a transcriptional
co-regulation after treatment of genes encoding for kinesins, motor
proteins associated with MT, in DTX-sensitive cells but not in
DTX-resistant cells.These studies will provide novel insights into
mechanism of drug resistance and sensitivity and will ultimately allow us
to design more effective targeted therapies to overcome chemo-resistance
and eventually prolong patient survival.

