Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing of single circulating tumor cells according
to epithelial-mesenchymal marker expression in metastatic prostate cancer


Molecular characterization of metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer (mCRPC) is limited by tumor tissue availability. The analysis of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) offers an attractive non invasive
surrogate option to analyze molecular alterations. We report whole exome
sequencing (WES) of CTCs at the single cell level in 11 mCRPC patients.
We examined single somatic nucleotide variant (sSNV) shared between
matched metastatic tumor sample and CTCs and sSNV specific to CTCs.Blood
samples were drawn from 11 patients enrolled in the clinical program
MOSCATO (2011-A00841-40). CTC enrichment, detection and single cell
isolation were performed using three methods to obtain pools of 1-10
CTCs. The first method used ISET filtration, immunofluorescent staining
(CD45, pan-cytokeratin, EpCAM, Vimentin and Hoechst 33342) on filters and
laser microdissection of single CTCs; the second combined CellSearch and
the VyCap puncher system; the third used RosetteSep enrichment,
immunofluorescent staining and isolation by cell sorting. Whole Genome
Amplification (WGA) was performed using the Ampli1 kit. WGA quality was
assessed by qPCR of 7 genes located on different regions of the genome.
WES was performed by preparation of a genomic DNA bank, Agilent capture
and sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform. Data were aligned to
the human genome reference hg19. GATK Haplotype Caller enabled
identification of germline polymorphisms from each patient in normal DNA,
metastatic sample and CTCs in order to consider WGA induced bias. The
detection of sSNV in tumor biopsies and CTCs was assessed with Mutect and
IndelGenotyper respectively.189 WGAs of CTC pools were performed. A first
round of WES showed that at least 3 well amplified genes were required to
obtain a coverage of at least 50% at 10X depth sequencing. 34 pools of
phenotypically different CTCs from 7 patients were selected and
sequenced. Mean coverage of 51% was obtained at a sequencing depth of
10X. Allelic drop out was lower for CTC pools containing 5 to 10 cells.
17/34 (50%) CTC samples (4 patients) had shared sSNV with the paired
tumor sample (range 0.35%-68%). Epithelial CTCs had more shared sSNV with
metastatic biopsies than CTCs of other phenotypes but shared sSNV were
also detected in large Cytokeratin-Vimentin- CTC. Shared sSNV in cancer
genes between epithelial CTC pools, but not in the paired biopsy, were
present in 2 patients.We report WES of CTC pools harboring distinct EMT
marker phenotypes is possible with the use of 3 different approaches to
enrich, detect and isolate CTCs. The detection of shared sSNV between CTC
pools and corresponding biopsy could validate the use of CTCs as a liquid
biopsy. The finding of sSNV specific to CTCs could offer additional data
on tumor heterogeneity. Ongoing work examining if sSNV detected in
phenotypically different CTCs converge to similar signaling pathways will
be presented.

