Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of DNA methylation biomarkers for pancreatic cancer
diagnosis


Pancreatic cancer is highly lethal malignancy despite the recent clinical
advancement. Since pancreatic cancer is often difficult to diagnose,
there is an urgent need to develop minimally invasive biomarkers for
detection. Epigenetic alterations have emerged as a common hallmark of
many types of human cancers as well as pancreatic cancer. The presence of
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in blood stream has been known and cfDNA possesses
tumor-related genetic alterations as well as epigenetic alterations.
Therefore, invention of blood-based DNA methylation biomarkers and their
high-sensitive detection system might be a promising diagnostic tool for
pancreatic cancer. In order to establish the diagnostic biomarkers,
first, we performed genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of 38 EUS-FNA
specimens of pancreatic cancer with clinical stage III-IV using Illumina
Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. We further analyzed the DNA
methylation profiles of other types of tumors in the public database,
TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas), and identified five marker genes, which
were specifically methylated in pancreatic cancers. In addition, analysis
of DNA methylation status of pancreas cancers comparing 10 normal tissues
in TCGA data set revealed that 99% of tumors were methylated at least one
of the five markers (sensitivity, 98.9%; specificity, 44%). We validated
these methylation markers in different FNA sample set (n = 19) by
bisulfite pyrosequencing or quantitative methylation specific PCR and
found that 18/19 (95%) cases were methylated in at least one marker (AUC
= 0.95). Finally, we performed methylation analysis in cfDNA from
pancreatic cancer patients. From our preliminary data, we could detect
aberrant DNA methylation in cfDNA from pancreatic cancer patients.We
identified potential DNA methylation biomarkers for the diagnosis of
pancreatic cancers and these markers might be applicable for detecting
cancer in cfDNA.

