Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor vasculature normalization by recoupling nitric oxide
synthase with a tetrahydrobiopterin precursor


The abnormal, irregular nature of tumor vasculature has been well
documented. The aberrant nature of the vasculature results in uneven,
heterogeneous blood flow and leaky, hemorrhagic blood vessels. Due to the
unusual nature of tumor vessels, areas of hypoxia tend to develop that
contribute to radioresistance and inefficiency of therapeutic drug
delivery. Our current studies examine the role of nitric oxide synthase
(NOS) in tumor vasculature. NOS has been demonstrated to be uncoupled in
tumor cells due to reduced levels of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), a
necessary cofactor, resulting in peroxynitrite (ONOO-) formation in lieu
of nitric oxide (NO). NO signaling is critical for vascular function and
thus uncoupling of eNOS in the endothelial cells may partly explain the
poor vasculature structure found within solid tumors. Having previously
demonstrated that NOS can be recoupled and NO production restored through
treatment of tumor cells with Sepiapterin (SP), a BH4 precursor, we
examined whether SP could normalize tumor vasculature, promoting
radiosensitivity and improving drug uptake. Multispectral optoacoustic
tomography analysis of both flank tumor xenografts and a spontaneous
breast tumor model (MMTV) demonstrate that SP given orally significantly
enhances the percent of oxyhemoglobin in the tumor. Immunohistochemical
analysis of tumors treated with SP showed a significant reduction in CD31
staining and a significant increase in smooth muscle actin (SMA), both
hallmarks of vascular normalization. Ex vivo analysis of tumors revealed
that the enhanced tumor oxygenation resulted in over a two-fold increase
in radiation induced cell killing. These preliminary data demonstrate
great potential for SP as an adjuvant in the treatment of cancer,
especially when we take into consideration that SP has been demonstrated
to be cytotoxic to both breast and colon tumors. Future studies will
examine drug uptake in tumors as well as the mechanism behind the
vascular normalization.

