Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of quantitative methods for assessing metastatic
potential of human primary tumors


Background: The inability to effectively treat metastases is the main
reason for the limited progress in reducing the rates of cancer morbidity
and mortality. One major drawback is the lack of quantitative assays for
assessing the size and tissue prevalence of tumors in newly diagnosed
individuals. Current methods for quantifying tumor burden are mainly
qualitative and include measuring the gross weight of the affected organ,
counting tumors on the surface of the organ, or evaluating a small sample
of the organ using histologic sections. These methods are crude measures
of tumor burden and size distribution, and in the case of histology, they
are time consuming, difficult to process an adequate sample size and
non-quantitative.Methods: Animal models of metastasis have been useful in
identifying genes that regulate susceptibility to the development and
progression of metastasis and helped highlight potential novel targets
for drug development. In particular several small animal imaging
technologies including magnetic resonance imaging, high frequency
ultrasound, and optical imaging have been recently applied to this task.
Each of these methods may be useful for specific research projects, based
on their unique combination of resolution, image acquisition time, animal
throughput, and cost-effectiveness, yet none of these modalities
adequately address the need for rapid quantification of tumors across the
entire organism, nor do they assess therapeutic effectiveness in
eradicating cancer in xenograft models. We have developed an Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry (AMS)-based high precision quantitative method for
assessing the metastatic potential of primary tumors isolated from newly
diagnosed patients.Results: Our Accelerator Mass Spectrometry-based
methodology to study metastasis uses xenograft cancer cells labeled with
14C-labeled thymidine that are delivered intravenously into NSG mice and
allowed to develop metastatic cancer over the course of up to 10 weeks.
At the end of the experiment, all vital organs are collected; the DNA is
isolated and is examined by AMS for the presence of 14C-signal. The
labeling was optimized to achieve sufficient signal such that a tumor
derived from a single cell could be detected by AMS, in secondary tumors,
in vivo, independent of histological data.Conclusions: Using this novel
approach we have evaluated the metastatic potential of several prostate
cancer cell lines, characterized stem-cell like sublines derived from
prostate cancer cell lines [PC3] and examined tissue tropism of cancer
sublines derived from kidney and liver metastatic tumors. Further
optimization of these techniques will allow us to explore the metastatic
potential of primary tumors, isolated from biopsies and expanded in
Avatar mice.

