Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of anti-angiogenic therapy on the prevalence of breast
cancer stem cells


Purpose: The objectives of this study are to investigate the effects of
anti-angiogenic therapy on breast cancer stem cell (BCSC) prevalence and
hemodynamic imaging factors associated with these
biomarkers.Introduction: Angiogenic inhibitors in breast cancer patients
have shown to increase progression-free survival but not overall
survival. Targeting the tumor vasculature can be used to alter the
microenvironment (hypoxic)-niche, either enhancing BCSC subpopulations or
causing these cells to differentiate. In this study, mice bearing
triple-negative inflammatory breast tumors were treated with different
dose regimens of VEGFR2 inhibitors and changes in ALDH1, EpCAM, and DLL1
measured.Material and Methods: Four cohorts of athymic nude mice bearing
SUM149 breast tumors were treated with a low-(LD) (10mg/kg),
moderate-(MD) (40mg/kg), and a high-dose (HD) (120mg/kg) of DC101, an
anti-VEGFR2 monoclonal antibody, 3-times every three days. One group was
not treated. All groups were imaged prior to and after treatment using
DCE-CT and PCT-S to assess vascular physiology (perfusion, fractional
plasma volume, permeability) and hemoglobin status (SaO2), after which
the tumors were excised, fixed, sectioned at 4-6 different planes (1-2mm
apart) and stained for ALDH1, EpCAM, and DLL1. Expression was calculated
by determining the percent of the tissue exceeding a threshold determined
from positive controls.Results: A reduction in ALDH1 and DLL1 expression
was observed between untreated and MD group (3.6 to 1.0%, P = 0.03; 18.3
to 1.5%, P = 0.1), with a subsequent increase from MD to HD groups (1.0
to 1.9%, P = 0.08; 1.5 to 3.6%, P = 0.02). Changes in EpCAM were not
observed (P>0.25). In vivo imaging results (DCE-CT and PCT-S) indicate,
on average, favorable changes in tumor hemodynamic parameters may have
occurred within the MD treated group, where perfusion (+26%) and Fp
(-30%) on average resulted in a shorter mean-transit-time and the
fraction of the vasculature with low SaO2 levels decreased (from 23% to
10%) not observed in LD or HD groups (but not reaching
significance).Conclusions: Anti-angiogenic drugs targeting VEGFR2 in
inflammatory TNB cancer has been shown to modulate ALDH1 and DLL1, but
not EpCAM. Preliminary data demonstrate that vascular physiologic
parameters obtained from DCE-CT and PCT-S may provide potential
diagnostic factors. Given the overlap of ALDH1 and DLL1 with Notch and
subsequent VEGF pathways, both a biomechanistic and oxygen
microenvironment influence may be involved in modulating BCSC maintenance.

