Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence chronic inflammation is a risk factor for histiocytic
sarcoma in Bernese mountain dogs - implications for human histiocytic
sarcoma


The purpose of this study was to evaluate exposure variables associated
with development of histiocytic sarcoma (HS), a rare but aggressive
malignancy, using the canine spontaneous tumor model. The domestic dog
has been shown to be an excellent model to investigate risk of occurrence
of complex diseases in humans, especially cancers. This is due in part to
the limited genetic heterogeneity within specific dog breeds. HS, though
rare in most breeds of dogs, is a common malignancy in Bernese mountain
dogs (BMD) with up to 25% of the population of dogs being diagnosed with
HS during their lifetime. The frequency of HS diagnosis in BMDs is
thought to be due to a heritable mutation in a single gene region
analogous to the human chromosome 9p21. For this study, owners of BMDs
registered with a non-profit breed registry, the Berner-Garde Foundation,
were recruited for participation in an internet-based cross-sectional
survey. Data were collected for a total of 216 BMDs. Of the total
population of BMDs enrolled in the study 118 dogs were sibling-sets
representing a case and a non-case that originated from the same litter.
Mixed effects logistic regression (MELR) and conditional logistic
regression (CLR) were used in parallel to examine associations between
potential risk factors and the occurrence of HS. When controlling for
litter of origin (as a marker of relatedness), dogs diagnosed with
orthopedic conditions were found to be more likely to develop HS (MELR,
OR: 2.5, 95% CI: 1.5, 5.2; CLR, OR: 2.81, 95% CI: 1.1, 7.3), while dogs
receiving prescription anti-inflammatory medications were found to be at
a considerably lower risk of developing this disease (MELR, OR: 0.43, 95%
CI: 0.2, 0.8; CLR, OR: 0.32, 95% CI: 0.1, 0.8). These data suggest
inflammation may be a modifiable risk factor for the development of HS.
Therefore, identification and treatment of conditions that promote
inflammatory mechanisms may reduce future risk of developing HS in dogs
and people.
Results of logistic regression models examining risk factors associated
with development of histiocy

