Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes secreted by proinflammatory macrophages modulate breast
cancer


Multiple cell types reside within the tumor microenvironment (TME)
including cancer stem cells, stromal cells, and inflammatory cells.
Cellular crosstalk is initiated between these cells through a variety of
secreted biomolecules such as cytokines, growth factors, and exosomes.
The role of inflammation and numerous secretory factors within the TME
have been implicated in the development and progression of various
cancers including breast. In this study, we wanted to evaluate the effect
of macrophages (a major constituent of inflammation) on breast cancer
development. Our study focused on macrophage secreted exosomes which are
membraneous nanovesicles that contain various miRNA, mRNA, and proteins.
We hypothesized that macrophage secreted exosomes will modulate breast
cancer phenotype. An in vitro cell culture system was used in this study
to examine macrophage exosome treatments on breast cancer cell lines
MCF-7 (ER+) and MDA-MB 231 (ER-, PR-, HER2/neu-). Human monocytic THP-1
monocytes were activated with a common phorbol ester TPA
(12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) and conditioned media (CM) was
collected following 48 h. Exosomes were isolated from THP-1 CM via the
use of an exosome isolation reagent and standard centrifugation. Breast
cancer cells were then treated with THP-1 exosomes and cell morphology,
proliferation, MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways, and cell cycle
were evaluated. MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 exhibited round and spindle-like
morphologies as well as a significant decrease in proliferation at 24 h
treatments. Furthermore, MDA-MB 231 displayed increased p-ERK, while
MCF-7 showed increased p-MEK following Western blot analysis. Both cell
lines exhibited decreased p-AKT and p-S6 kinase expression. Cell cycle
analysis showed that MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 arrested at G2/M at 24 h
exosome treatments. THP-1 exosome treatments led to a significant
increase in MDA-MB 231 senescence as determined by a senescence assay
looking at senescence-associated beta-galactosidase. Increased p21 and
decreased Cdc2/Cyclin B1 was also observed which indicates a G2/M arrest.
We conclude that specific macrophage secreted exosomes may induce breast
cancer cell senescence and affect breast cancer progression.

