Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D structural report of NRAS isoform 5


The protein NRAS is part of the NRAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK signaling cascade.
Recently, 5 NRAS isoforms were discovered by our group, and it was
observed that isoform 5 overexpression in vitro resulted in a more
aggressive cell phenotype. NRAS isoform 5 increases phosphorylation of
downstream targets (AKT, MEK, and ERK). The structural report is
unavailable for NRAS isoform 5. In addition, it was found in the current
study that the NRAS isoform 5 does not have GTPase activity due to lack
the canonical GTP binding region. Given the importance of this pathway in
driving melanoma progression, we studied the structural details of this
novel NRAS isoform 5 by two biophysical techniques, NMR and CD
spectroscopy.The circular dichroism spectra of NRAS isoform 5 that was
C-acetylated and N-amidated was measured using 11%, 14%, 21%, 45%, 56%
and 85% trifluoroethanol (TFE) in a phosphate buffer. The secondary
structural elements were induced at 14-15% TFE. There were no qualitative
differences in the CD spectra between 56% and 85% TFE. Therefore 56%
deuterated TFE was utilized in the NMR structural studies.Two dimensional
(2D) homonuclear and heteronuclear experiments were acquired at 25C with
Bruker Avance III HD 600 and 800 MHz NMR spectrometers (Campus Chemical
Instrument Center NMR facility), each equipped with a triple resonance z
axis gradient TXI cryoprobe for amino acid chemical shift assignments and
structural determination of NRAS isoform 5. The NMR chemical shifts for
the protons were assigned using traditional 2D TOCSY, COSY, and NOESY
experiments. The 2D proton-carbon HSQC was utilized to facilitate the
assignment of the alpha and side chain aliphatic protons. In the absence
of TFE, there were no observable NOEs that could represent ordered
secondary structures. Other than intra residue and short range sequential
NOEs (i-j 2), only a weak medium range NOE was observed from the aromatic
protons of Tyr 4 to the gamma proton of Val 7/8.The secondary structure
of NRAS isoform 5 was determined via the same NMR techniques in 56% TFE.
The secondary structure was defined by 69 sequential NOEs and 39 medium
range NOEs. NOEs characteristic of helical structure were observed in the
NOESY spectra. For example, NOEs were measured from H(alpha, i) to
H(beta, i+3) for residues Tyr 4, Lys 5, and Leu 6. The tertiary fold was
determined by 10 key long-range NOEs. The flexible C terminal is brought
in close proximity to the N-terminal helix by 4 NOEs between Val 8/9 and
Val 14, and 5 NOEs between Tyr 4 and Try 20 to form a helix-turn-coil
structure in presence of TFE. In addition, the proton chemical shifts for
the aromatic proton chemical shifts for the tyrosine aromatic ring became
distinct.NRAS isoform 5 is highly flexible in aqueous solution, but forms
a helix-turn-coil structure in the presence of trifluoroethanol as
determined by NMR and CD spectroscopy. This data may be utilized as a
starting point to understand the biophysical interactions of this novel
NRAS isoform.

