Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative image analysis of androgen receptor (AR) and tubulin
biomarker profiles in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from metastatic
castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) patients


Background: CTCs represent a real-time, liquid biopsy for analyses of a
variety of molecular biomarkers that offer clinically relevant
information. In prostate cancer, the AR pathway controls tumor cell
growth and survival and is an important therapeutic target. AR becomes
biologically active upon translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus
in a microtubule dependent fashion, resulting in the activation of
numerous genes. Real-time analysis of AR and tubulin status in CTCs may
provide insight to therapy response in mCRPC patients.Methods: Androgen
sensitive human prostate cancer cells, LNCaP, were treated with and
without a synthetic androgen (R1881; 10 nM, 1 hr) and docetaxel, spiked
into healthy donor blood, and captured using a prostate specific
microfluidic device (GEDI chip), following the same protocol that we use
with patient samples. Cells were fixed and stained (N-terminal AR, CD45,
CK, DAPI, and tyr-tubulin) directly on the device and imaged using high
resolution multiplex confocal microscopy. AR and tubulin status were
analyzed using a quantitative image analysis algorithm. Nuclear AR
percentage was calculated by integrating fluorescence intensity within
regions defining the entire cell and nucleus. H-Score was calculated by
multiplying the nuclear AR percentage by the normalized total cell AR
intensity. Tubulin status and microtubule bundling were assessed using a
variety of quantitative parameters including measurements of tubulin
fluorescence intensity and distribution within the cell.Results: LNCaP
cells in the presence of synthetic androgen exhibited higher nuclear AR
percentage (p = 0.0004) and H-score (p = 0.003). Docetaxel treatment led
to lower nuclear AR percentage (p = 0.04) and lower H-Score (p = 0.03).
Cells treated with docetaxel exhibited higher tubulin intensity range (p
= 0.008) and standard deviation (p = 0.03), consistent with docetaxel's
mechanism of action. We applied these methods of quantitative image
analyses to CTCs isolated from a small cohort of mCRPC patients. Single
CTC image analysis revealed heterogeneity in AR status. Quantitative
evidence for microtubule bundling was observed in patients receiving
docetaxel chemotherapy.Conclusions: We have developed a high throughput
quantitative image analysis algorithm to interrogate mCRPC specific
biomarkers, such as AR and tubulin status, in single CTCs. These methods
of quantitative image analyses will be prospectively validated with CTCs
from mCRPC patients followed longitudinally over the course of treatment
with AR inhibitors and taxanes, yielding patient specific, clinically
relevant information that can guide physicians strategies for the
clinical management of cancer.

