Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad-spectrum anticancer activities of the biguanides metformin
and buformin in combination with 2-deoxy-glucose or WZB-117 in human lung
cancer cells


Purpose: The biguanides Metformin (MET) and to a lesser extent Buformin
(BUF) have recently been shown to exert anticancer effects. In particular
MET targets cancer stem cells (CSCs) in a variety of cancer types. These
compounds have not been extensively tested for combination
therapy.Objectives: In this study we investigated in vitro the anticancer
activity of MET and BUF alone or in combination with 2-deoxy-D-glucose
(2-DG), or WZB-117 (WZB), which are a glycolysis and a GLUT-1 inhibitor,
respectively, in H460 human lung cancer cells growing under three
different culture conditions with varying degrees of stemness: 1) Routine
Culture Conditions (RCCs), 2) Floating Lung Tumorspheres (LTSs) that are
enriched for stem-like cancer cells and 3) Adherent cells under prolonged
periods (8-12 days) of serum starvation (PPSS): These cells are highly
resistant to conventional anticancer drugs such as Paclitaxel,
Hydroxyurea and Colchicine and display increased level of stemnes
markers.Experimental setup: For cells growing under RCCs and under PPSS,
cell viability was measured by the MTT assay. Viability of LTS was
evaluated by the CCK assay. Clonogenicity was evaluated by the colony
formation assays.Results: As single agents MET, BUF, 2-DG and WZB-117
potently inhibited the viability of cells growing under RCCs. These
results were confirmed by the colony forming assay. Both MET and BUF
showed a strong synergistic effect when used in combination with 2-DG. A
weak potentiation was observed when used with WZB-117. Under RCCs H460
cells were more sensitive to MET and BUF and WZB-117 compared to
non-tumorigenic Beas-2B cells. While LTSs were less sensitive to each
single drug, both MET or BUF in combination with 2-DG showed a strong
synergistic effect and reduced cell viability to similar levels compared
to the parental H460 cells. Adherent cells growing under PPSS were also
less sensitive to each single drug and MET and BUF showed a strong
synergistic effect on cell viability in combination with 2-DG.We are
currently evaluating the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
the signaling pathways involved in the antiproliferative effects of these
agents as single drugs as well as in combination.Conclusions: Overall our
data demonstrates that combination of BGs with either 2-DG or WZB-117
have a Broad - spectrum anticancer activities targeting cells growing
under a variety of cell culture conditions with varying degrees of
stemness. These properties may be useful to overcome the chemoresistance
due to intratumoral heterogeneity found in lung cancer.

