Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and utilization of molecular pathways correlated
with osteosarcoma metastasis to predict targeted therapies


Osteosarcoma (OSA) is the most prevalent primary bone tumor and accounts
for approximately 2% of childhood cancers. Approximately 40% of all OSA
patients succumb to metastatic disease within 5 years. Canine OSA occurs
about 10 times more frequently than human OSA and has been shown to be
very similar to pediatric OSA biologically, histologically, molecularly,
and in treatment. This suggests that canine OSA is an excellent
pre-clinical model to investigate better treatment options for metastatic
OSA. We compared in-vitro markers of metastatic potential with gene
expression data in eight canine OSA cell lines to identify molecular
pathways that will be potential chemotherapeutic targets to treat and
prevent metastatic OSA.The metastatic potential of 8 canine OSA cell
lines was characterized utilizing Incucyte Zoom based migration and
invasion scratch wound assays. Gene expression analysis was performed
using Affymetrix GeneChip Canine Genome 2.0 Arrays. Genes that were
statistically correlated with migratory and invasive phenotypes were used
to enrich molecular pathways described in several databases utilizing
Enrichr software. Altered pathways and associated targeted agents that
would inhibit the pathways enriched by the correlated gene sets were
identified.Chemotherapeutics targeting significantly enriched pathways
were screened for their ability to inhibit metastatic potential.
Dasatinib and Stattic were the only inhibitors screened to date that
inhibit migration of the osteosarcoma cell lines at clinically relevant
doses. The remaining significantly correlated pathways will be targeted
as well as rational combinations of pathways. An orthotopic murine model
is currently being tested to further explore the utility of efficacious
chemotherapeutics in-vivo.
* We were not able to reach an IC50 at clinically relevant dosesPathway
Inhibition and Anti-Migratory Effects

