Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amylase overexpression promotes ovarian cancer invasion


Introduction: Hyperamylasemia is an overexpression of amylase.
Hyperamylasemia is associated with poor clinical outcome in ovarian
cancer and reportedly serves as a prognostic biomarker for ovarian
cancer. However, the function of hyperamylasemia in ovarian cancer is
thus far unknown. Since amylase cleaves 1, 4-glycosidic bonds in
carbohydrates, hyperamylasemia may play an active role in the etiology of
ovarian cancer.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to characterize
amylase expression in ovarian cancer cell lines and establish an active
role for hyperamylasemia in ovarian cancer.Hypothesis: We hypothesized
that secreted amylase enzymes cleave 1, 4-glycosidic bonds found in the
carbohydrate shell which may result in a modified glycocalyx structure
facilitating ovarian cancer cell invasion. Consequently, inhibiting
amylase expression could abrogate ovarian cancer cell
invasion/metastasis.Methods: To characterize amylase isozyme expression,
we assayed amylase expression in normal and cancerous ovarian epithelial
cell lines by western immunoblot, qPCR, amylase assays and computational
analyses. We measured the ability of amylase to promote cellular
proliferation by MTS assays. We assayed invasive capacity of cultured
cells using collagen coated Boyden chambers and abrogated amylase
expression with either amylase siRNA or treatment with the blue-green
algae, Spriulina.Results: It was found that the amylase genes have
identical or similar biochemical and bioinformatics properties: similar
molecular weights, theoretical isoelectric points, disorder and
hydropathy profiles, secondary structure and posttranslational
modifications. In contrast to normal cell lines, ovarian cancer cell
lines overexpress amylase at the messenger and protein levels and secrete
high levels of metabolically active amylase. Amylase isozymes 1 and 2B
were preferentially overexpressed in ovarian cancer cell lines.
Inhibition of amylase abrogated ovarian cancer cell migration/invasion
through collagen coated Boyden chambers which was associated with
amylase-dependent alteration of extracellular carbohydrates. Further, the
blue-green algae, Spirulina, was found to be a novel inhibitor of
amylase.Conclusion: Herein, we describe for the first time an active
function of amylase to promote ovarian cancer cell invasion potentially
mediated by amylase-dependent alteration of extracellular carbohydrates.
Further, transcriptional inhibition of amylase by Spirulina demonstrates
its clinical potential as an adjuvant nutraceutical therapy.

