Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of FFPE treated clinical tissue sections obtained from
human intraocular malignancy, uveal melanoma by mass spectrometry imaging
(MSI)


IntroductionClinical research into human intraocular disease UM FFPE
tissue sections is described. UM remains the most common intraocular
malignancy in adults, with poor prognosis for UM within the choroid
region and distant sites UM metastasis. Two imaging MS techniques Matrix
Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionisation (MALDI) and Desorption Electrospray
Ionisation (DESI) MSI were applied. Molecular profiles were obtained and
analysed by multivariate statistical approaches, providing insight into
the biochemical and biological differences/similarities within the
patient sample cohort (n = 15).MethodsEnucleations were collected over 6
years and subjected to the standard fixation and paraffin embedding
protocols. In preparation for MS, 5 m sections were produced with removal
of the paraffin followed by heat induced antigen retrieval.MALDI MSI
tissue sections were prepared by applying a matrix solution onto the
tissue sections to help ionization of molecules directly from the tissue.
All MSI experiments (MALDI and DESI) were carried out using a SYNAPT mass
spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). Multivariate analyses
were performed using MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, US) and the
Eigenvector PLS_Toolbox.ResultsInitial MALDI MSI images acquired with a
spatial resolution of 100 m x 100 m in positive ion mode showed distinct
spatial distribution of many molecular species throughout the choroid,
cornea, retina, lens and UM tumor regions. Further MALDI MSI experiments
using consecutive tissue sections at 50 m x 50 m spatial resolution show
substantial variation in the spatial distribution of species within the
low molecular mass range. DESI MSI experiments were carried out at 200 m
x 200 m in negative ionization mode. Deprotonated molecular ions were
detected from a variety of lipid related species, localized to specific
regions within the eye including the tumor region.Multivariate analysis
classified UM samples (good vs. poor prognosis). Using unsupervised PCA,
an unbiased representation of the data was generated, with clear sample
grouping and differentiation observed based upon tumor status. Use of the
supervised PLS-DA technique provided even clearer separation between the
selected samples, with tumor profiles displaying dominant discriminatory
peaks. These peaks could be identified as sphingolipids and
Lyso-phosphocholine, a phosphatidylcholine degradation
product.ConclusionsIt was possible to analyze clinical research FFPE
tissue sections by MALDI and DESI MSI, illustrating that specific small
molecular species remained localized to certain tissue types including
the UM tumor. Initial correlation with tumor status was determined from
the statistical analysis of the MALDI MSI datasets.

