Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The immunoregulatory protein B7-H3 regulates reprogramming of
cancer cell glucose metabolism through reactive oxygen species mediated
stabilization of HIF-1


With the recent success of immunotherapy targeting immune checkpoints,
interest in understanding the function of immune checkpoint modulators
such as the B7 family proteins escalated. B7-H3 is a transmembrane
glycoprotein and a member of the B7 family of immunoregulatory proteins.
Extensive studies have shown that B7-H3 is important in regulating the
activity of immune cells. We are among the first groups to show that in
addition to immunoregulatory function, B7-H3 also has non-immunological
functions, which may contribute to its role in tumor progression.
Overexpression of B7-H3 is associated with tumor progression and poor
patient outcome in multiple types of cancers. However, studies on how
B7-H3 regulates cancer growth and metastasis are rare and the mechanisms
underlying the role of B7-H3 in cancer malignancy are almost unknown. We
and others have shown that B7-H3 mediates breast cancer invasion,
metastasis and drug resistance and that silencing B7-H3 delays tumor
growth and sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents in
immune-independent in vitro and in vivo assays, indicating
immunoregulatory B7-H3 also has immune-independent function.In this
study, we investigated the role of B7-H3 in cancer cell metabolic
reprograming in vitro and in two independent xenograft mouse models. We
found that B7-H3 increased glucose uptake and lactate production while it
suppressed oxygen consumption in B7-H3 high-expressing cells, indicating
that B7-H3 promotes Warburg effect. B7-H3 increased the protein levels of
HIF-1 and its downstream targets LDHA and PDK1, which are key enzymes in
glycolytic metabolism. Moreover, B7-H3 promotes HIF-1 stability via
enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS) by suppressing the activity of
transcription factor Nrf2 and mitochondrial Nrf2 target genes, including
antioxidant enzymes SOD1, SOD2 and PRX3. B7-H3 mediated HIF-1 stability
is suppressed by ROS scavenger treatment including N-acetylcysteine and
PEG-catalase. Metabolic imaging of human breast cancer xenograft in mice
further demonstrated that B7-H3 enhances tumor glucose uptake and tumor
growth. Together, our results show that B7-H3 regulates cancer glucose
metabolism via ROS mediated-HIF1 pathway. By exploring novel functions of
B7-H3, our study fills a large knowledge gap in understanding the
mechanisms underlying the role of B7-H3 in tumorigenesis and cancer
progression, especially in understanding the underappreciated
contribution of its non-immunological functions in B7-H3 mediated cancer
pathology. The knowledge gained through carrying out the project will be
paradigm shifting for B7-H3 biology and will be essential for developing
efficient B7-H3 targeted therapy.

