Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An orthotopic xenograft renal cell carcinoma Sunitinib resistant
murine model


Purpose of studyTo develop a reproducible and reliable orthopic xenograft
mouse model for Sunitinib resistant renal cell carcinoma
(RCC).IntroductionClear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most
common malignancy of the kidneys and has been steadily increasing at a
rate of 3% yearly over the last decade. Furthermore, 30% of patients with
ccRCC have de novo metastatic disease. Until the last decade,
immunotherapy was the only option for metastatic ccRCC treatment. Current
first-line systemic therapies for metastatic ccRCC all primarily target
the angiogenesis pathway via tyrosine kinase inhibition (TKI) and have
increased progression free survival dramatically. However, durable
responses are rare, drug resistance invariably arises after short-term
disease stabilization and metastatic ccRCC remains almost uniformly
lethal. There is currently no animal model for TKI resistance in RCC. We
developed a reliable and reproducible orthotopic xenograft mouse model of
Suntinib resistance in RCC.MethodsLuciferin expressing-CAKI-1 human renal
cancer cells were injected under the renal capsule of athymic nude mice
using ultrasound guidance. After initial tumor growth mice were treated
with Sunitinib malate at an initial dose of 40mg/kg which was increased
sequentially (60 and 80 mg/kg) at each tumor passage (Fig.1). Tumors were
monitored twice weekly by ultrasound and bioluminescence (IVIS system).
Tumors exceeding 200mm3 by ultrasound or 1010 photons/sec by IVIS were
considered end points. Before passaging, tumors were harvested and
immediately dissociated with a Dispase/Collagenase mix. 5105 cells were
injected into the following batch of mice, considering all these steps as
one cycle or passage. Tumors were passaged with increasing doses of
Sunitinib 5 times.ResultsTumor take rates were above 95% in each cycle.
Initial treatment of Sunitinib at 40mg/kg resulted in a decrease in tumor
size via ultrasound and IVIS of about 30%. At around 14 days of treatment
tumors started to regrow despite further treatment. In the second cycle
tumors did not show a response to a subsequent treatment of 40mg/kg,
proving resistance. Even after increasing the dose of Suntinib in the
following cycles to 60 and 80 mg/kg respectively, there was no response
observed. The fifth cycle (100mg/kg) had to be terminated due to severe
side effects in the animals (skin coloring, weight loss), however no
decrease in tumor size was observed. We therefore created a Sunitinib
resistance model in the range of the maximal tolerated long-term dose in
vivo.ConclusionsThis study describes the first orthotopic xenograft renal
cell carcinoma Sunitinib resistant mouse model created in situ. The
development of Sunitinib resistance in an angiogenic environment
establishes a more realistic and translational model, which opens the
possibility to study not only the mechanism of Sunitinib resistance but
also to find alternative therapies to overcome Sunitinib resistance.

