Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SMYD3-mediated lysine methylation is critical for the activation
of AKT1 in human cancer


v-Akt Murine Thymoma Viral Oncogene Homolog 1 (AKT1), a
serine/threonine-protein kinase also known as protein kinase B Alpha (PKB
Alpha), is a key mediator of a signaling pathway that governs various
cellular processes regulating cell growth, survival, glucose metabolism,
genome stability and neovascularization. It is known that dysregulation
of AKT1 activity is one of the critical factors for the development
and/or progression of a variety of human cancers. Posttranslational
modifications of AKT1, including phosphorylation, ubiquitination and
glycosylation, are well-analyzed, and it is known that the
phosphorylation status of AKT1 is strongly correlated with its oncogenic
activity. However, biological functions of methylation on AKT1 have never
been analyzed so far. In the present study, we demonstrated that the
protein lysine methyltrasnferase SMYD3 methylates lysine 14 in the PH
domain of AKT1, which is known to play a critical role in the regulation
of AKT1 activity through binding to
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) or
phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4)P2), in vitro and in
vivo. Lysine 14-substituted AKT1 shows significantly lower levels of
phosphorylation at threonine 308, which is the major indicator of AKT1
activity, than wild-type AKT1, and knockdown of SMYD3 as well as
treatment with a SMYD3 inhibitor significantly attenuates this
phosphorylation in cancer cells. Furthermore, substitution of lysine 14
diminishes the plasma membrane accumulation of AKT1, and cancer cells
overexpressing lysine 14-substiuted AKT1 shows lower growth rate than
those overexpressing wild-type AKT1. These results imply that
SMYD3-mediated methylation of AKT1 at lysine 14 plays a central role in
the oncogenic activity of AKT1. Although Phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)-dependent AKT1 phosphorylation by Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Kinase,
Isozyme 1 (PDK1) and mTOR Complex 2 (mTORC2) has long been considered to
be the primary mechanism accounting for AKT1 activation, these members
are not sufficient enough to explain how AKT1 hyperactivation can occur
in tumors with normal levels of PI3K/Phosphatase And Tensin Homolog
(PTEN) activity. Our findings unveiled the novel mechanism of
constitutive hyperphosphorylation on AKT1 in cancer cells, mediated by
SMYD3-mediated methylation. The inhibition of this methylation pathway
appears to be a promising strategy to develop anti-cancer drugs.

