Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering next-generation anti-CD25 immunotoxins with improved
cytotoxic activity and low immunogenicity


Objective: CD25 is expressed on many T cell malignancies, including adult
T cell leukemia, and is a target for cancer therapy. Immunotoxins against
CD25+ cells containing a portion of Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE38) show
extremely high cytotoxic activity. Our lab has previously created a
de-immunized PE immunotoxin in which toxin domain II was removed. Removal
of domain II confers two major advantages: i) the immunogenic sequences
found in domain II are removed, generating a less immunogenic toxin; ii)
the non-specific toxicity of domain II-truncated toxins is much lower,
allowing much higher doses of immunotoxin to be given safely (7-10-fold
higher safe dosage). However, removal of domain II, which does not affect
or enhances the cytotoxic activity of immunotoxins targeting the B cell
marker CD22 or the mesothelioma marker mesothelin, lowers the activity of
anti-CD25 immunotoxins 30-fold. Because lowering toxin immunogenicity and
animal toxicity are critical for the success of immunotoxins in a
clinical setting, we have engineered domain II truncated immunotoxins
with improved activity against CD25+ cells using a novel adaptation of an
established screening system.Methods: Eighteen domain II truncation
mutants were designed based upon the crystal structure of the toxin. To
bypass the resource intensive protein refolding of standard immunotoxins,
these domain II mutants were expressed as fusions with the ZZ protein,
which is a small (13.6kD) derivative of protein A. Fusion to ZZ allowed
easy production of these ZZ-domain II mutant fusion proteins in the E.
coli periplasm and fast purification using IgG coated beads. The purified
ZZ-domain II mutant toxins were then bound to anti-CD25 IgG by mixing
(the ZZ-domain binds human Fc) and tested for cytotoxic activity on the
CD25+ T-cell leukemia HUT-102 cell line. The most active domain II
mutants were made into standard recombinant immunotoxins and
retested.Results: Of the 18 tested ZZ-domain II mutants, 6 were
completely inactive, 8 were active at near parental levels, and 4 were as
active as the parental toxin. The 4 high-activity and 2
structurally-interesting, medium-activity mutants were then produced as
standard recombinant immunotoxins and retested for cytotoxic activity.
Two of the 4 high-activity mutants showed a 2-4-fold increase in activity
compared to parental domain II truncated immunotoxin. While still being
8-fold less active than immunotoxins containing domain II (PE38), these
high-activity mutant immunotoxins will most likely have lower
immunogenicity than toxins with PE38 and much less non-specific toxicity,
allowing higher doses and more treatment cycles to be given. Our
engineered high-activity domain II mutant immunotoxins are improved
candidates for treating CD25+ cancers and for eliminating regulatory
immunosuppressive T cells.

