Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput PPI assay to quantify inhibition of androgen
receptor variant 7 (AR-V7) binding to canonical AR full-length (AR-FL)
binding partners


Background: Prostate Cancer is the most common non-skin cancer in the
United States, affecting 1 in 7 men over their lifetimes [1]. It is the
second most frequent cause of cancer-related deaths for men. Despite
significant advancements in the treatment of Prostate Cancer within the
past several years, numerous resistance mechanisms have been described
for patients administered androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) [2].
Recently, Antonarakis et al. reported that in patients treated with
enzaluatmide or abiraterone acetate plus prednisone, high levels of
Androgen Receptor Variant 7 (AR-V7) mRNA in circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) were strongly correlated with a lack of clinical response to these
drugs [3]. AR-V7 is upregulated following suppression of full-length
Androgen Receptor (AR-FL) in vitro [4] and its expression is sufficient
to induce canonical and distinct AR-FL downstream pathways [4, 5, 6].
Therefore, development of an inhibitor of AR-V7 activity has become a
high-priority in pharmaceutical research. In this abstract, we describe a
high-throughput protein-protein interaction PPI FRET-like assay, based on
Promega's NanoBiT platform, which is amenable to screening potential
inhibitors of AR-V7 binding to AR-FL canonical binding partners.
Additionally, we report compounds that antagonize these
interactions.Methods: We developed a set of AR full-length, truncated
variants, and binding partners (SRC-1, RAP74) to interrogate PPI
interactions. These constructs were tethered to one of two components of
Promega's NanoBiT system, in which the binding interaction and kinetics
are monitored by alterations in the NanoLuciferase (Oplophorus
gracilirostris) signal [7]. This platform was validated using described
agonists (R1881) and antagonists (enzalutamide and bicalutamide) of
N-terminal and C-terminal AR dimerization. Subsequent experiments
evaluated the effectiveness of AR-V7/AR-V7 or AR-V7/SRC1 NanoBiT binding
and potential for disruption by small molecules.Results: We demonstrate
that our system is capable of detecting activation and inhibition of
AR-NTD and AR-CTD dimerization with either R1881 or R1881 in the presence
of enzalutamide or bicaluatmide, respectively. Additionally, we have
evaluated inhibition of AR-V7 binding to canonical AR-FL binding
partners, SRC-1 and RAP74. These results demonstrate the utility of this
platform to screen molecules for their ability to inhibit both AR-FL and
splice variant dimerization and the resulting nuclear translocation and
activation of downstream pathways.[1] Prostate Cancer Foundation
website.[2] Sprenger and Plymate, Horm Cancer 2014.[3] Antonarakis et
al., NEJM, 2014.[4] Hu R, Lu C, Mostaghel EA, et al., Cancer Research,
2014.[5] Hrnberg et al., PLoS ONE, 2011.[6] Zhang et al., PLoS ONE,
2011.[7] Hall et al., ACS Chem Biol., 2012.

