Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of a novel form of regulated necrosis to eliminate
extracellular matrix detached epithelial cells


The overwhelming majority of breast cancer deaths are caused by the
metastasis of cancer cells from the primary tumor to distant sites in the
body. For cancer cells to successfully metastasize, they must: detach
from the primary tumor, move out of the original tissue into the
circulatory or the lymphatic system, travel to a new site followed by
arresting their movement, and then extravasate to begin colonizing a
secondary site. When normal epithelial cells detach from the
extracellular matrix (ECM), they induce caspase-dependent cell death
which is known as anoikis. Anoikis can therefore serve as a critical
barrier to metastasis as cancer cells are exposed to limited and variable
matrix conditions during each step of the metastatic cascade. However,
our previous studies suggest that anoikis evasion is not sufficient to
protect ECM-detached cells from cell death. Using MCF10A mammary
epithelial cells, we have previously shown that ECM-detachment induced
metabolic changes can compromise the survival of detached cells, although
the precise mechanism controlling cell death remains unclear. Here, we
present data suggesting that ECM-detached cells can also be eliminated by
regulated necrosis (RN), a genetically programmed, caspase-independent
form of necrosis that is morphologically indistinguishable from classical
necrosis. In general, the molecular mechanisms involved in RN are poorly
understood. With this in mind, the current most appreciated subtype of
RN, termed necroptosis, is dependent upon TNF, RIP1K, RIP3K, MLKL, and
PGAM5 to execute cell death. Our data in ECM-detached cells suggest that
cells are being eliminated by a mechanism that is dependent on the kinase
activity of RIP1K. Further studies have shown an increase in the
expression of CYLD, a deubiquitinating enzyme that specifically removes
ubiquitin chains from RIP1K, in turn stabilizing both RIP1K expression
and activation. Upon analyzing other dependent executioners of
necroptosis, we have strikingly found that TNF, RIP3K, and MLKL are all
dispensable for RN to occur in ECM-detachment. Furthermore, using a
variety of molecular tools, such as 3D cell culture, we have found that
PGAM5 is necessary for the execution of ECM-detachment induced RN. These
findings uncover a novel and distinct RN pathway and highlight the need
to more thoroughly understand RN as well as the mechanisms employed by
ECM-detached cells to antagonize RN and promote their survival in
detachment.

