Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing intra-tumor heterogeneity and tracking longitudinal and
spatial clonal evolution by next-generation sequencing


Cancer is a disease driven by genetic and epigenetic alterations that
follows Darwinian evolution. Recently, there have been increasing efforts
to sequence the tumor from the same patient at multiple time points
and/or from multiple spatially separated resections. Different snapshots
of the same tumor have proved invaluable for identifying subclonal
populations and inferring the tumor's history.We propose a method,
Canopy, for estimating the clonal history and for longitudinal and
spatial comparison of mutation profiles from one or more samples derived
from a single patient. Canopy accounts for normal cell contamination and
reconstructs subclonal phylogeny utilizing both somatic copy number
alterations (CNAs) and somatic single nucleotide alterations (SNAs).
Canopy provides a general mathematical framework that enumerates all
possible CNA-SNA phases and temporal orderings. Taking as input the
mutant and reference allele frequencies for SNAs, and depth of coverage
for CNAs, Canopy gives confidence assessments of all possible
configurations of the cancer's clonal evolution.Canopy is applied to
three cancer sequencing datasets of varying study design, as well as to
an extensive simulation study. On a whole-exome study of a transplantable
metastasis model derived from human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231,
Canopy successfully deconvolutes the mixed cell sublines, using the
single cell sublines as ground truth, and identifies DNA signatures that
can be prognostic of distant metastasis. On a whole-genome sequencing
dataset of the primary tumor and relapse genome of a leukemia patient,
Canopy predicts phylogenetic histories in concordance with existing
knowledge. On a whole-genome sequencing dataset of the breast cancer
tumor and its subsequent metastatic xenograft, Canopy's inferred clonal
phylogeny is concordant with genomic markers of major clonal genotype and
is confirmed by single-cell sequencing. Finally, through simulations, we
explore the effects of various parameters on deconvolution accuracy, and
evaluate performance with comparison against existing methods.
Collectively, Canopy provides a rigorous foundation for statistical
inference on repeated sequencing experiments from evolving populations
delineated temporally and spatially.

