Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mirnas hsa-miR-214-3p, -378a-3p e -34a-5p as biomarkers for
uterine mesenchymal neoplasms


Background: Uterine mesenchymal tumors have specific mechanisms of
development that are largely unknown. One of the molecular mechanisms
which may be involved in the appearance and progression of these tumors
is the regulation of gene expression by miRNAs. These molecules are small
non-coding RNAs that play important roles in several biological pathways.
The identification of miRNAs that show particular differences in
expression profile can help broaden the diagnostic methods available for
these tumors. Objectives: To evaluate the expression profile of microRNAs
described as sequences related to tumors development in uterine
leiomyosarcomas samples, comparing to leiomyomas and normal myometrium.
Methods: We selected 37 samples of uterine leiomyosarcoma (LMS), 16
unconventional leiomyomas (LMA), 10 conventional leiomyomas (LM) and 2
myometrium (used as reference samples). Samples were obtained from the
Discipline of Gynecology of the Hospital das Clinicas da Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade de So Paulo and Department of Pathology of the A
C Camargo Cancer Center, both in Sao Paulo, Brazil. The total RNA was
obtained and used to perform the synthesis of cDNA.The real time PCR
reactions was performed using the Kit miScript SYBR Green PCR (Qiagen)
for analysis from the 84 miRNAs sequences already described in the
literature as tumor development related sequences. Results: The data
analysis from the 84 sequences of microRNA showed wide variation in the
regulation of these molecules expression. After computational analysis,
we selected only those miRNAs with different expression profile between
LM, LMA and LMS. The goal was to obtain a molecular signature that
differentiate and identify each tumor using normal tissue as a reference.
We found that hsa-mir-214-3p and hsa-miR-378-3p (fold regulation of -2.32
and -2.97; respectively) presented down-regulation in samples from the
uterine LMS. In LMA we found a down regulation of hsa-miR-34a-5p (-3.12
fold regulation). Conclusions: We identified three miRNAs
(hsa-mir-214-3p, and -378-3p and -34a-5p) differentially expressed in LMA
and LMS. Analyzes of target genes of these miRNAs may identify specific
proteins for use in the differential diagnosis, prognosis and patients
management in these tumors.

