Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In depth immune profiling of the response of melanoma to MAPK
inhibition


Melanoma patients with clinically palpable regional lymph node metastases
(AJCC Stage III) carry a risk of relapse and death that approaches 70% at
5 years. The NeoCombi study is a pilot phase II study of neoadjuvant
dabrafenib plus trametinib in patients with resectable Stage IIIB-C
BRAFV600 mutation positive melanoma. Patients receive 12 weeks of
combined drug treatment, followed by surgical resection of all disease.
Patients then continue combination drug treatment for a further 40 weeks.
We aimed to identify host and tumour biomarkers that predict response to
MAPK inhibition.Blood and tumour samples were obtained at baseline, early
during treatment (3-7 days on therapy), at completion resection after 12
weeks on therapy, and, if relevant, on progression. Additional blood
samples were also collected every 2 weeks up to 12 weeks of therapy.
Samples were processed to generate plasma, peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs), fresh frozen tumour and where possible, tumour-dissociates
and cell lines (tumour and immune cells). We have profiled
tumour-specific and peripheral immune responses using a combination of
flow cytometry, mass cytometry and multiplex cytokine/chemokine arrays.
We also profiled circulating tumour-associated DNA (ctDNA) in plasma.To
date, we have accrued 17 patients onto the NeoCombi study. Primary
analysis of the first 12 patients has been completed. Decreases in ctDNA
and tumour viability, in addition to immunophenotype changes, were seen
within 1 week of starting treatment. Changes in immunophenotype continued
throughout the first 12 weeks of treatment with conversion of CD8+ and
CD4+ naive (CD45RA+) cells to effector cells (CD45RA-) in most patients.
We also noted that activation of regulatory T cells
(CD4+CD25+CD127-HLA-DR+) increased over the first 12 weeks of treatment
in patients with partial pathological responses compared to those with
complete pathological responses. Interestingly, the cytokine profile
remained relatively stable across treatment within each patient,
suggesting that factors already present at baseline may determine
response to treatment. A pro-inflammatory cytokine signature has been
identified as a potential biomarker of patients likely to relapse and in
vitro validation studies are currently underway. Additionally, although
ctDNA was only detectable in 42% of patients (compared to over 70% in
patients with stage IV disease), high levels of ctDNA identified patients
at highest risk of relapse and, if detectable, proved a useful marker to
monitor treatment response.In conclusion, we have identified both host
and tumour-specific biomarkers which may be useful to predict (and to
monitor) response to MAPK inhibition in melanoma patients.

