Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stem cells drive paclitaxel-resistance in
erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells via paracrine of NRG-1


Breast cancer remains the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
leading cause of cancer death in women, both worldwide and in less
developed countries. Surgery in conjunction with adjuvant chemotherapy is
the main treatment of choice for patients with locally advanced breast
cancer, leading to reduce cancer-related symptoms and prolong survival.
Paclitaxel as a critical drug in the treatment of breast cancer patients,
intrinsic and acquired resistance to paclitaxel represents a significant
clinical problem. We had previously demonstrated that increased
expression of erbB3 is required for erbB2-mediated paclitaxel resistance
in breast cancer cells via PI-3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway-dependent
upregulation of Survivin. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are emerging as
an important component of tumor microenvironment, which may play an
essential role in regulating cancer cell growth, motility, invasion and
therapeutic resistance. In the present study, we have explored the
possible role of MSCs in regulating the chemo-sensitivity of
erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. We show that both human
umbilical cord and bone marrow-derived MSCs express significantly higher
level of Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1, also Heregulin-1) as compared with
erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells themselves. Coculture or
treatment with conditioned medium of MSCs not only decreases the
anti-proliferation effect of paclitaxel on erbB2-overexpressing breast
cancer cells, but also significantly inhibits paclitaxel-induced
apoptosis. We further demonstrate that this MSCs-drived
paclitaxel-resistance in erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells could
be attributed to paracrine effect of NRG-1/erbB3 signaling, as specific
nutralizaion of NRG-1 or blocking of erbB3 resensitizes
erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells to paclitaxel treatment.
Moreover, overexpression of erbB3 enhances, while knockdown expression of
erbB3 abrogates MSCs-drived paclitaxel-resistance. Taken together, our
current data indicate that paracrine of NRG-1 by MSCs induce resistance
of paclitaxel in erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells through
activation of erbB3 signaling. Our findings suggest that simultaneously
targeting mesenchymal stem cells in tumor microenviroment may be a novel
strategy to overcome chemotherapeutic resistance.

