Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of four novel HPV-16 positive cell lines of invasive
cervical carcinoma of Indian origin and characterization of CD133
positive cancer stem cells


Background and Aim: Cancer of the cervix is the 2nd most common cancer in
Indian women. Cell lines are essential in vitro models in cancer
research. Till date, available cell lines in cervical cancer were highly
passaged, developed from Caucasian, Black or Asian origin; hence,
establishment of a low-passage cervical cancer derived cell line was the
first aim of this study. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are proposed to be
responsible for metastasis and therapy resistance. Previously, we
reported CD133 to be a putative marker for CSC, and they were further
characterized.Materials and Methods: 25 women were recruited after
informed consent and approval from the Institute Ethics committee. A
small portion of the biopsy was collected in DMEM/F12 media and subjected
to primary culture. Successful propagation was possible in 4 cases. Their
morphology, epithelial nature and HPV status were evaluated. Variable
Number Tandem Repeat (VNTR) assay, cell cycle and kinetic studies were
performed. Tissue expression of CD133 and CD49f stem cell markers was
evaluated by direct immunofluorescence on frozen tumor samples. Adherent
cells were sorted into CD133+ vs CD133- tumor bulk from all 4 cell lines
by FACS. These two populations were evaluated for differences in
tumorosphere formation, chemosensitivity to cisplatinum, expression of
stemness (SOX2, OCT4, NANOG) and EMT (SNAIL, SLUG, TWIST, VIMENTIN and
E-CADHERIN) markers at the transcript level.Observations: Four cell lines
designated RSBS-9, RSBS-14, RSBS-23 derived from non-keratinizing
squamous cell carcinoma and RSBS-43 derived from adenocarcinoma cervix
were established and passaged up to 50 times. The epithelial nature of
cell lines was confirmed by cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen
positivity. VNTR assay confirmed derivation of cell lines from respective
parental tissue sample. All 4 cell lines were HPV-16positive. The cell
doubling time was approximately 48 hours. Immunofluorescence on tissue
samples revealed diffuse positivity for CD49f indicating that it may not
represent a CSC marker as previously reported whereas CD133 staining
showed scattered positive cells. No particular location of CD133+ CSC was
observed. Comparison of CD133+ with CD133- bulk population cells revealed
increased tumorosphere formation; however, no significant difference in
the chemosensitivity to cisplatinum was seen. Real time quantitation of
transcripts of stemness and EMT markers revealed CD133+ cells showing
upregulation of EMT markers VIMENTIN, SNAIL, SLUG in the RSBS-23 cell
line and of VIMENTIN and TWIST in RSBS-9 cell line whereas there was no
significant difference in the RSBS-14 and RSBS-43 cell lines for any of
the markers studied.Conclusion: Low passage cell lines are useful model
systems for understanding the biology of cervical cancer. CD133+ Cancer
Stem cells exhibit some EMT markers in 2 of the 4 cell lines established.

