Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting nuclear transport pathways to overcome endocrine
resistance and recurrence


Currently, around 75% of patients with breast tumors test positive for
estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and are treated with endocrine therapies,
such as tamoxifen. One-third of the breast tumors eventually become
refractory, reducing the survival rate for affected patients. A
combination of alternative endocrine therapies and kinase inhibitors is
currently used in such patients. However, after an initial period of
therapy response, these tumors relapse in a more aggressive form.
Further, the alternative therapies are not optimal in terms of
pharmacological properties, are poorly tolerated, and have side-effects
that severely decrease quality of life of the patient. Thus, there is a
critical need for novel, targetable, mechanism-based therapeutic
strategies that 1) re-sensitize ERa (+) tumors to endocrine therapies,
and 2) include diagnostic methods to select patients likely to benefit
from this approach.Our objective in this study is to validate a group of
nuclear transport genes as biomarkers for endocrine resistance, and to
evaluate their inhibition as a novel means to enhance the effectiveness
of endocrine therapies. Our central hypothesis is that high expression of
these genes in ERa (+) tumors serve as a viable biomarker for risk of
endocrine therapy failure. We focused on XPO1, the main nuclear export
protein, which exports ERK5 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and we used
selinexor (KPT-330), the inhibitor of XPO1, which is already used in
clinical trials for solid and hematological cancers (clinicalTrials.gov).
Our experiments show that estradiol induces nuclear localization of ERK5,
which otherwise would contribute to increased invasiveness and metastatic
potential in the cytoplasm. Selinexor increases ERK5 nuclear localization
in tamoxifen resistant breast cancer cell lines. Our hypothesis is that
sequestering ERK5 in the cell nucleus and blocking its recycle into the
nucleus by selinexor is directly associated with the improved
transcriptional response to endocrine therapies. The nuclear export
pathways have not previously been implicated in the development of
endocrine resistance, and given the need for better strategies for
selecting patients to receive endocrine reagents and improving therapy
response of relapsed ERa(+) tumors, our findings show high and
significant promise for uncovering the role of these pathways and
demonstrating their use in reducing cancer recurrences.

