Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor hypoxia promotes Ewing sarcoma metastases in a mouse
xenograft model


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a pediatric tumor induced by EWS-ETS fusion
proteins, most often EWS-FLI1. While the presence of metastases is the
single most powerful adverse prognostic factor for ES patients, the
mechanisms underlying their development remain unclear. Tumor hypoxia is
one of the few factors implicated in ES progression. In ES patients, the
presence of nonperfused areas within tumor tissue was associated with
poor prognosis. In vitro, hypoxia increases invasiveness of ES cells and
triggers expression of pro-metastatic genes via changes in
transcriptional activity of the EWS-FLI1 gene. However, despite this line
of evidence, no direct proof for this hypoxia-induced ES progression and
spread has been provided. Moreover, the mechanisms by which hypoxia could
exert such effects are unknown. To fill this gap, we created an in vivo
model of hypoxia in ES and tested its effect on tumor metastasis. SK-ES1
ES cells were injected into gastrocnemius muscles of SCID/beige mice.
Once the tumors reached a volume of 250mm3, they were either excised
(control) or subjected to femoral artery ligation (FAL) for 72h prior to
excision, inducing ischemia of the lower hindlimb, thus creating tumor
hypoxia. Then, the mice were monitored for metastases. The extent of the
metastatic disease was assessed and compared between experimental groups
based on periodic MRI, necropsy and histopathology findings. FAL resulted
in profound tumor hypoxia, as evidenced by inhibition of primary tumor
growth, severe tissue necrosis and positive staining for a hypoxyprobe,
pimonidazole. However, despite the impaired growth of primary tumors,
xenografts subjected to FAL were more metastatic. The involvement of
hypoxic cells in metastases was evidenced by the accumulation of
pimonidazole-positive cells (hypoxic at the time of FAL) in areas of
tissue invasion and intravasation. Consequently, mice bearing FAL-treated
tumors exhibited a decreased latency of metastases formation and an
increase in their number from an average of 0.9 to 2.3 metastases per
mouse in control and FAL groups, respectively. We also observed a change
in the pattern of metastases, as FAL-treated tumors metastasized more
often to distant organs (average of 0.3 organ metastases per mouse in
control and 1.3 in FAL group). The hypoxia-induced metastases were most
often observed in adrenal gland and spine (50% and 42% of mice in FAL
group, respectively), while no such metastases were observed in the
control group. Moreover, 100% of FAL-treated mice had signs of bone
marrow invasion, while no tumor cells were detectable in bone marrow of
control mice. This data provides the first-ever direct evidence for tumor
hypoxia as a driver of ES metastases. Moreover, our model of tumor
hypoxia in vivo provides an excellent opportunity to identify
hypoxia-induced pathways involved in ES metastatic progression that
subsequently may become novel therapeutic targets for this disease.

