Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted, controlled anticancer drug delivery and release with
magnetoelectric nanoparticles


Most cancer therapy is nonspecific, aimed at all dividing cells,
resulting in untoward side effects. Our study demonstrates the
effectiveness of magnetoelectric nanoparticles (MENs), which have been
developed to address the critical issue of normal cell off-targeting in
cancer treatment, in both in-vitro and in-vivo studies, as well as
characterizes their biodistribution and clearance. Exploiting the
difference in electric properties between normal and cancer cell
membranes, MENs are able to enter cancerous cells carrying a therapeutic
payload and release the payload intracellularly with the application of
an external magnetic field, while not affecting normal cells. SKOV-3
human ovarian carcinoma cells were used as a model to showcase the unique
cancer targeting capabilities of these CoFe2O4@BaTiO3 nanostructures
coated with the mitotic inhibitor Paclitaxel (PTX). The MENs-PTX bond was
characterized in the lysate of treated cells using spectroscopic analysis
and scanning probe microscopy. SKOV-3 xenografted athymic nude mice were
treated via subcutaneous or IV injection on a weekly basis with a MEN,
conventional ferromagnetic nanoparticle (MN), or polymer nanoparticle
(PLGA) formulation. Biodistribution and clearance of MENs is one of the
most important open questions addressed in this study. Our approach is to
investigate the key parameters that affect the therapeutic index, i.e.
the maximum tolerated dose, blood circulation half-life and
biodistribution due organ accumulation. The approach is to study factors
such as the size and shape of MENs, chemical composition, targeting
ligand functionalization, MENs biodegradability, and microenvironment and
other biological barriers. Besides using conventional fluorescent
markers, a novel nanoparticle distribution approach based on
energy-dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) is exploited. In-vitro studies on
the cell lysate of MENs treated SKOV-3 cells determined reliable entry
into the cells by MENs with the application of a small magnetic field
(100 Oe) and reliable payload release with the application of an a.c.
magnetic field (50 Oe, 100 Hz). In-vivo studies demonstrated that the
MENs-PTX formulation in combination with an externally applied magnetic
field reduces tumor growth rate when injected subcutaneously, and fully
cures the cancer when delivered via IV-injection. The MENs formulation
was more successful in treating the tumor than both MN and PLGA
formulations. EDS confirmed the presence of MENs in tumor tissues. MENs
provide a novel mechanism by which cancer cells are targeted (using the
difference in the cancer electric cell membrane properties compared to
normal cells) and a drug payload is released (externally triggered with
the application of an a.c. magnetic field) reliably. The underlying
physics of the electric field interactions involved in the MENs drug
delivery system was demonstrated here using ovarian cancer, but can be
applied to virtually any cancer.

