Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lifestyle determinants of mammographic density in Asian and
Caucasian populations: A comparative analysis


Mammographic density is an independent risk factor for breast cancer and
has been shown to differ among populations with varying risk to breast
cancer. We sought to compare the distribution of known breast cancer risk
factors between an Asian and a Caucasian population, and to determine if
the variations in mammographic density between Asian and Caucasian
populations can be attributed to the differences in the distribution of
these risk factors.2948 women with no personal history of breast cancer
attending an opportunistic screening program in Malaysia (MyMammo) were
included in the analysis. Participants were age and BMI matched to 8837
women of the Karolinska Mammography Project for Risk Reduction of Breast
Cancer (KARMA) study in Sweden. For analyses involving mammographic
density, a subset of Malaysian women with available raw FFDM images (n =
1501) and matched Swedish women (n = 4501) were included for analysis.
Volume-based mammographic density measurements for both cohorts were
measured using an automated method (Volpara). Descriptive statistics were
used to describe the distribution of breast cancer risk factors and
mammographic density measures between the two cohorts. General linear
models and stepwise selection method were used to determine the risk
factors associated with mammographic density within each cohort.Most of
the anthropometric, reproductive and lifestyle risk factors examined were
differentially distributed between the two cohorts. There was a
significantly greater proportion of postmenopausal Swedish women (56%)
compared to Malaysian women (51%). Hormone replacement therapy and oral
contraceptive ever use was substantially higher among Swedish women (24%
and 73%) than Malaysian women (14% and 29%). Mean dense volume was not
significantly different between the two cohorts, but Swedish women had a
significantly higher mean non-dense volume and lower percent volumetric
density compared to Malaysian women. However, pre-menopausal Malaysian
women had statistically significant higher dense volume than Swedish
women (mean dense volume of 73.9cm3 compared to 70.4cm3). Among
post-menopausal women, Malaysian women had significantly lower dense
volume than Swedish women (mean dense volume of 54.7cm3 compared to
57.5cm3). In multivariable analyses, age, BMI and parity were associated
with dense volume in both cohorts, but regular alcohol intake, height,
changes in body shape over time, and menopausal status were only
significantly associated with dense volume for Swedish women.In an age
and BMI matched cohort, pre-menopausal Asian women had significantly
higher dense volume than Caucasian women, whereas, post-menopausal Asian
women had lower dense volume than Caucasian women. Population differences
in height, body shape changes over time, and alcohol intake could
explain, in part, the variation seen in mammographic density, and
potentially breast cancer risk, across populations.

