Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sema3C promotes glioma stem cell survival and radioresistance


Introduction: Different cancer cell compartments often communicate
through soluble factors to facilitate tumor growth. Glioma stem cells
(GSCs) are a subset of tumor cells that resist standard therapy to
contribute to disease progression. How GSCs employ a distinct secretory
program to communicate with and nurture each other over the non-stem
tumor cell (NSTC) population is not well defined.Methods/Materials: GSCs
were enriched from patient specimens and functionally validated. We used
a candidate approach to screen for secreted factors that were
preferentially used by GSCs but not NSTCs. Expression was assessed by
Western blot, and confirmed by immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence in vitro and in human and mouse GBM tissues.
Ligand-receptor interactions were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation.
Rac activity was assessed by Rac-GTP pulldown. Co-culture epistasis
experiments were performed using knockdown and recombinant protein
approaches. Glioma stem cell marker analysis (CD133, Sox2, Olig2), cell
viability (ATP-dependent assays), apoptosis (TUNEL, PI/AnnexinV, cleaved
caspase 3/7), self-renewal (tumorsphere formation and limiting dilution
assay) and invasion (transwell migration assay) were performed. GSCs were
separated in PlexinD1 hi and lo populations by FACS. Radiation (3 Gy) was
delivered by Cs-137 irradiator. GSCs were used to establish orthotopic
xenograft models of glioblastoma and tumor growth and animal survival
were assessed.Results: We have found that GSCs preferentially secrete
Sema3C and coordinately express PlexinA2/D1 receptors to activate
Rac1/NF-B signaling in an autocrine and paracrine loop to promote their
own survival. Importantly, Sema3C is not expressed in neural progenitor
cells (NPCs) or NSTCs. Disruption of Sema3C induced apoptosis of GSCs,
but not NPCs or NSTCs, and suppressed tumor growth in orthotopic models
of glioblastoma. Introduction of activated Rac1 rescued the Sema3C
knockdown phenotype in vivo. Furthermore, GSCs that expressed high levels
of Plexin receptors were more resistant to radiation, and Sema3C and
Plexin receptors were upregulated after irradiation. Together, these data
support that Sema3C signaling contributes to radiation
resistance.Conclusions: Our study supports targeting Sema3C to break this
GSC-specific autocrine/paracrine loop to improve glioblastoma treatment,
potentially with a high therapeutic index.

