Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT positively regulates Rho-GTP by attenuating the GAP activity
of the DLC1 tumor suppressor: a mechanistic study with translational
implications


Many human cancers have high AKT activity and constitutive up-regulation
of Rho-GTP, which is a major factor in the neoplastic process, but AKT is
not known to regulate Rho-GTP. In this study, we show that AKT positively
regulates Rho-GTP by directly phosphorylating tumor suppressor DLC1 and
attenuating the Rho-GAP activity of DLC1, which catalyzes the conversion
of active Rho-GTP to inactive Rho-GDP. Interestingly, AKT was found to
increase Rho-GTP and its downstream activities in DLC1-positive cancer
lines whether the DLC1 was endogenous or transfected, but not in
DLC1-negative lines. Similarly, when epithelial cell lines were
stimulated with EGF, they activated AKT, which increased Rho-GTP in a
DLC1-dependent manner. Three Serines (S298, S329, S567) in DLC1 have AKT
consensus motifs and were phosphorylated by AKT in vitro and in vivo.
Their phosphorylation attenuated the Rho-GAP and tumor suppressor
activities of DLC1 - including decreased cell migration, focal adhesion
turnover, anchorage-independent growth, and tumor growth in mice - as did
the combined phosphomimetic mutant DLC1-3D. By contrast, the combined
Serine to Alanine mutant DLC1-3A was even more active than wild type DLC1
(DLC1-WT). Remarkably, an AKT inhibitor stimulated the tumor suppressor
and Rho-GAP activities of DLC1-WT, but did not influence DLC1-3A or
DLC1-3D. The N-terminal half of DLC1 (amino acids 1-600) bound the DLC1
Rho-GAP domain (amino acids 609-878), as determined by in vivo complex
formation and by microscale thermophoresis, which measures protein
interactions in close-to-native conditions. There was increased binding
and decreased Rho-GAP activity when the three Serines in the N-terminus
were phosphorylated or carried the 3D mutations. Conversely, there was
decreased binding and increased Rho-GAP activity when the Serines were
not phosphorylated or carried the 3A mutations. In a xenograft mouse
model, AKT inhibitor treatment of DLC1-positive palpable tumors reduced
their size, their Rho-GTP level, and their Rho-dependent signaling, but
did not affect these three parameters in isogenic DLC1-negative tumors.
Similarly, in the MMTV-PyMT breast cancer model, which had high AKT
activity, high Rho-GTP, and expressed DLC1, an AKT inhibitor reduced the
size of palpable tumors, and reduced Rho-GTP and its downstream
signaling. AKT inhibition reduced DLC1 phosphorylation in both tumor
models. We conclude: AKT can increase Rho-GTP by phosphorylating three
N-terminal Serines in DLC1, which attenuates its Rho-GAP and tumor
suppressor functions; the N-terminus of DLC1 is an auto-inhibitory domain
that reversibly binds the Rho-GAP domain; AKT attenuates DLC1 functions
by phosphorylating the Serines in the N-terminus, which increases its
binding the Rho-GAP domain; and AKT inhibition has greater anti-tumor
activity in DLC1-positive tumors than in DLC1-negative tumors.

