Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of intracrine VEGF signaling prevents colorectal cancer
cell migration and invasion


Introduction: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key
regulator of angiogenesis and vascular function. The mechanisms of VEGF
signaling in angiogenesis have been extensively studied. However, its
effects on tumor cell function remain to be elucidated. Our studies on
depletion of VEGF by somatic knockout of the VEGF gene or by siRNA in
human colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines have demonstrated that loss of
VEGF expression led to significantly decreased cell growth, increased
apoptosis, and enhanced chemo-sensitivity of CRC cells through an
intracrine signaling mechanism. These intracrine effects were mediated
through VEGF by regulation of the activity of multiple receptor tyrosine
kinases (e.g. EGFR, cMET) and downstream AKT signaling. Similar effects
were observed by depletion of VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1), supporting the
role of a novel intracellular VEGF-VEGFR1 complex in CRC cell survival.
Since VEGF signaling has been shown to effect endothelial and tumor cell
migration, we attempted to determine if inhibition of intracrine VEGF
signaling affected CRC cell motility.Methods: Migration and invasion of
CRC cells, with and without VEGF depletion, were assayed using Boyden
chambers and a serum gradient. Changes in cell morphology and epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers and markers of cell motility were
assessed by microscopy, immunostaining, and western blot
analyses.Results: Depletion of VEGF by siRNAs in multiple CRC cell lines
led to a very strong inhibition of migration and invasion of CRC cells.
Such inhibition was not observed when CRC cells were treated with
bevacizumab to inhibit paracrine or autocrine signaling. Further
examination revealed no significant changes in cell morphology. Other
than Twist, there were no significant differences between specific
markers of EMT indicating that differences in migration and invasion were
not due to classic alterations in EMT. However, significant changes in
activation of mediators of cell motility were observed. VEGF depleted CRC
cells demonstrated significantly lower levels of phosphorylated focal
adhesion kinase (p-FAK) compared to cells with normal VEGF expression.
Analyses of upstream regulators indicated strong reduction in either
p-cMET or p-SRC depending on cell type.Conclusions: Inhibition of
intracrine VEGF signaling strongly inhibits CRC cell migration and
invasion by regulating proteins involved in cell motility.

