Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression pattern of ALDH1A1 and HLTF predicts sensitivity to
lysosomal autophagy inhibitors in cancer cells


Autophagy inhibition with hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)is cytotoxic to only a
subset of cancer cell lines. Clinical trials involving HCQ in cancer
patients are underway, but predictive biomarkers to identify patients
most likely to respond are unavailable. To identify determinants of
sensitivity to HCQ, an mRNA microarray analysis of HCQ-sensitive(S)
compared to HCQ- resistant (R) colon and lung cancer cell lines
identified differentially expressed genes in HCQ-S cells. Immunoblotting
against the 2 most upregulated (Lysozyme (LYZ); aldehyde dehydrogenase 1
(ALDH1A1)) and 2 most down regulated proteins (helicase like
transcription factor (HLTF); p-glycoprotein (ABCB1)) was performed in 35
human cancer cell lines. The IC50 and slope of the HCQ dose response
curve (72 h MTT) were used to create a composite score to categorize cell
lines as -S or -R, and correlated to protein expression of the 4 genes.
Classification and regression tree (CART) analysis determined that high
expression of the stem cell marker ALDH1A1 or low expression of both
ALDH1A1 and HLTF identified 100% of sensitive cell lines. To understand
how ALDH1A1 mechanistically interacts with HCQ, the aldefluor assay
determined that a more potent dimeric CQ (Lys21) did not impair ALDH1A1
enzymatic function, however knockdown or chemical inhibition of ALDH1A1
impaired cellular uptake of fluorescently tagged Lys21 and conferred
resistance to HCQ. Overexpression of ALDH1A1 conferred HCQ sensitivity in
HCQ-R cells. To understand the interaction between HLTF and HCQ, we
determined that HLTF promoter methylation correlated with silenced
expression and sensitivity to HCQ. Forced expression of HLTF or treatment
with a demethylating agent conferred resistance to HCQ-S cells. Knockdown
of HLTF in HCQ-R cells conferred sensitivity. HCQ produced reactive
oxygen species (ROS) irrespective of HLTF status. Cotreatment with a ROS
scavenger mitigated HCQ cytotoxicity in HLTF silenced cells. DNA damage
(p-H2AX) was observed at 100-fold lower HCQ concentrations in HLTF
silenced compared to HLTF expressed cells. Overexpression of HLTF
significantly reduced HCQ associated double strand breaks (Rad52 foci).
Knockdown of DNA polymerase eta, a low fidelity DNA polymerase involved
in translesion synthesis (TLS) completely abrogated HLTF-associated HCQ
resistance. In vivo expression of HLTF mitigated the antitumor activity
of the dimeric CQ Lys05 in a HCQ-S colon cancer xenograft. These results
indicate ALDH1A1 acts as a sink for CQ derivatives to enter the cell,
localize to the lysosome, and produce ROS-mediated DNA damage. The DNA
damage can be counteracted by intact HLTF/Pol eta-dependent TLS. Analysis
of the TCGA found that the ALDH1A1 high and HLTF low phenotype is
prevalent across 10 human cancers. In conclusion this study identifies a
2 gene signature that can be translated into an IHC-based assay to
identify patients most likely to respond to lysosomal autophagy
inhibitors.

