Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of CCK2R-targeted SMDCs and
identification of GIST as a potential therapeutic indication


Cholecystokinin B receptor (CCKBR/CCK2R) is a GPCR of the cholecystokinin
receptor family that is primarily expressed in the CNS and the
gastrointestinal tract where it binds the ligands cholecystokinin and
gastrin, respectively, and mediates their downstream actions. Since it
has been reported that CCK2R is overexpressed in certain cancer types, we
have explored the potential of utilizing CCK2R as a receptor system to
deliver potent therapeutic warheads. To this end, we designed a series of
CCK2R-targeted small-molecule drug conjugates (SMDCs) containing either a
non-peptidic antagonist (Z-360) or a peptidic agonist (CCK8) as their
ligand moiety and explored their activity in in vitro and in vivo models.
While EC1812 (Z-360-tubulysin B) failed to elicit either competable
cytotoxicity in vitro or robust therapeutic response in vivo (n = 5; 1
PR) when tested against a HEK293-CCK2R overexpressing cell line, the
addition of a PEG36 linker to generate EC1977 greatly improved
therapeutic efficacy in vivo (n = 5; 1 CR, 4 cures) despite having no
activity in vitro. In contrast, while EC1868 (CCK8-tubulysin B)
demonstrated potent, competable cytotoxicity in vitro it had only modest
activity in vivo (n = 5; 5 CRs). To explore the clinical relevance of a
CCK2R-targeted SMDC, we performed mRNA profiling of a human cancer array
to identify indications that have high CCK2R mRNA expression. Of all the
indications present on the array, those representing gastrointestinal
stromal tumor (GIST) were identified as expressing the highest level of
CCK2R mRNA. To further elucidate the clinical relevance of this finding,
we procured human clinical samples from GIST patients and determined
CCK2R-specific radioligand binding and mRNA levels. These data revealed
that 50% of GIST samples express high levels of CCK2R mRNA and exhibit
functional ligand binding. Interestingly, although 50% of normal stomach
samples had similar mRNA levels as the high-expressing GIST samples, they
failed to exhibit detectable radioligand binding. In contrast, HCC, colon
cancer, and pancreatic cancer samples were all negative for both mRNA
expression and ligand binding. Subsequent screening of a series of GIST
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models for functional binding and mRNA
levels failed to identify an appropriate model for further in vivo
testing. In conclusion, we have developed and characterized a series of
CCK2R-targeted SMDCs and tested their activity in vitro and in vivo.
Given the expression and functional binding of CCK2R in GIST we propose
that GIST may represent an indication for CCK2R-targeted therapies.

