Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mangostin-encapsulated PLGA nanoparticles inhibit pancreatic
cancer stem cell characteristics by suppressing sonic hedgehog pathway


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
US, with a 5-year survival rate of approximately 6%. Patients develop
resistance to currently used anticancer drugs which are mainly toxic and
also demonstrate severe side effects. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) / tumor
initiating cells (TICs) have been proposed for tumor initiation,
promotion, metastasis, and chemotherapy failure. Thus, there is an urgent
need to develop novel strategies for the management of pancreatic cancer.
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway has been implicated in pancreatic
carcinogenesis and is constitutively active in CSCs. The -Mangostin is
derived from the plant mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana) which is a
tropical evergreen tree. Mangosteen contains Mangnoids, such as
-Mangostin, and other phytochemicals. The main objective of the study was
to demonstrate the biological activities of -Mangostin-encapsulated PLGA
nanoparticles (Mang-NPs) in human pancreatic CSCs and cells lines. We
have also performed docking of -Mangostin on to the DNA binding sites of
Gli to assess whether -Mangostin disrupts Gli-DNA binding and acts as a
Gli inhibitor. Mang-NPs inhibited cell proliferation, colony formation,
and induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer AsPC-1, PANC-1 and Mia-Paca-2
cell lines, and CSCs. However, Mang-NPs had no effect on human pancreatic
normal ductal epithelial cells. In addition, Mang-NPs inhibited
epithelial to mesenchymal transition. -Mangostin disrupted Gli-DNA
binding activity. Western blot analysis has demonstrated that Mang-NPs
inhibited pluripotency maintaining factors Nanog and c-Myc. Furthermore,
Mang-NPs inhibited the expression of Gli1, Gli2, Patched1 and Patched2,
and Gli transcriptional activity in pancreatic CSCs. Our data demonstrate
that Mang-NPs can inhibit pancreatic CSC characteristics by disrupting
Gli-DNA binding activity and may act as a Gli transcription inhibitor.

