Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR signaling complex can be targeted using Torin2 in colorectal
cancer to induce efficient apoptosis


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in the world and
the 4th most common cause of cancer related death. Despite the
considerable advances in awareness, diagnosis and modern therapeutic
strategies, the incidence of CRC is increasing in the Middle Eastern
population. In order to explore the molecular cause of increasing
incidence of CRC in this region, we sought to evaluate the role of
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) survival pathway in CRC of this
region. mTOR; a component of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
cell survival pathway, is known to play an important role in the
regulation of many cellular activities leading to cell growth and
proliferation through the formation of its two complexes mTORC1 and
mTORC2. We therefore examined the expression of mTOR in 700 Saudi CRC
cases by immunohistochemistry in a tissue microarray format and found
that mTORC1 and mTORC2 were activated in 43.4% (294/677) and 46.2%
(313/677) of cases respectively. mTORC1 activation was found to be
significantly associated with Ki67 and mTORC2. In addition, mTORC2
activation was also found to be directly associated with their downstream
target; p-AKT. In vitro, we found that treatment with a second generation
mTOR inhibitor, Torin2 led to inhibition of cell viability and induction
of apoptosis via inactivation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 in majority of CRC
cell lines. Inactivation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 following Torin2 treatment
also led to dephosphorylation of mTOR downstream targets; P70S6, 4E-BP1,
AKT and BAD. Interestingly, one CRC cell line; HT29 that had
over-activation of mTORC2 was found to be resistant to Torin2 treatment
suggesting that increased activation of mTORC2 confers resistance to
Torin2 treatment. As our clinical data demonstrated a significant
association between mTORC2 over-expression and activation of AKT in
clinical CRC samples, we synergistically targeted HT29 cells with
combination of sub-optimal doses of PI3-kinase/AKT inhibitor; LY294002 in
combination with Torin2. Our data showed that combination of Torin2 and
LY294002 synergistically induced apoptosis in HT29 cells via inactivation
of mTORC2 and AKT. These data highlight the utility of targeting mTOR
signaling complex using second generation mTOR inhibitors such as Torin2
alone or in combination with other inhibitors such as LY294002 or
chemotherapeutic agents to effectively treat these aggressive subgroups
of CRC with over-activation of mTOR and AKT simultaneously.

