Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NGS-based CNV detection sensitivity is dependent upon nucleic acid
input quality


Copy number variations (CNV) impact more of the cancer genome than all
other mutation types combined. Recent advances in next-generation
sequencing (NGS) have enabled simultaneous detection of CNVs and other
somatic mutations from FFPE-derived samples, but NGS-based detection of
low level CNVs (ie 2-3x) remains challenging. Nucleic acid from FFPE is a
common starting material for NGS-based cancer genotyping; however, this
material is often of low complexity due to a variety of factors including
limited mass amount, excessive fragmentation, or chemical crosslinking.
Current practices often measure input mass, or the nanograms of DNA that
are added to a reaction, yet it is input complexity, or the amount of
nucleic acid available for NGS library generation, that truly dictates
the amount of information that can be recovered from a given
sample.Archer VariantPlex assays are targeted NGS panels that permit
simultaneous detection of SNVs, in/dels, and CNVs using Anchored
Multiplex PCR (AMP). Molecular barcoded adapters are ligated to each
input molecule prior to any amplification. This permits the unique
identification of individual input molecules thus facilitating precise
copy number measurements. In addition, AMP enables amplification of
highly fragmented FFPE inputs as short fragments are captured between the
ligated adapter and the enrichment probe. To determine the effect of
input quality on sensitivity of CNV calling we characterized over 150
tumor sample input qualities and their resulting library metrics. In
addition we modeled the effect of low tumor cellularity on CNV
sensitivity by carrying out dilution experiments of CNV-positive samples
into samples of normal copy number.Using Archer VariantPlex assays in
conjunction with Archer Analysis, we have successfully detected CNVs as
small as 2X in both FFPE and cell line DNA. We found that input nucleic
acid quality, as measured by a qPCR-based assay called Archer PreSeq DNA
QC, strongly impacted the sensitivity of CNV calling. Assessment of input
complexity using the PreSeq DNA QC Assay is predictive of limit of
detection for CNVs and identifies an input quantity that will result in
high quality NGS libraries. Our dilution experiments confirmed the
expected relationship between actual and measured copy number in our
population-averaging assay.Nucleic acid damage typical of FFPE samples
reduces CNV calling sensitivity; however, this loss of sensitivity can be
partially mitigated by increasing the input quantity. This corroborates
the notion that input complexity is the major driver of
information-capture from NGS based assays. Finally, tumor cellularity
displays a predictable effect on the measured CNV value.

