Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monocytic and granulocytic MDSCs display distinct molecular
properties and coordinate the dynamic switches between EMT-MET in breast
cancer model


It is widely accepted that the epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity of
malignant cells is required during cancer metastatic cascade. The complex
phenotypic changes highly depend on the collaboration of various
molecular signaling and extracellular cues originating from wide range of
stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment. However, the specific
mechanisms of how EMT plasticity spatiotemporally regulates metastasis
are poorly defined. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have been
identified in most cancer patients and animal models due to their immune
suppressive functions, but recent studies implicate their direct role in
promoting metastasis by activating tumor-angiogenesis. To determine the
roles of MDSCs in breast cancer metastasis, we utilized murine breast
cancer cells, non-metastatic EMT6 and metastatic 4T1 cells. We showed
that the metastatic 4T1 murine breast tumors induced early systemic
expansion and mobilization of MDSCs in distant sites as well as in the
primary tumor. We investigated the direct functions of MDSCs in tumor
progression by isolating monocytic and granulocytic MDSCs from primary
tumor, lung and bone marrow of tumor-bearing mice and then they were
co-cultured with non-metastatic EMT6 cells. We found that tumor
infiltrating m-MDSCs from 4T1 tumor-bearing mice increased the expression
of Vimentin, Twist1, TGF- and IL-6 in EMT6 tumor cells. In contrast, flow
cytometry sorted lung infiltrating MDSCs from 4T1 tumor-bearing mice
enhanced the EpCAM expression and proliferation in EMT6 cells. Cell
invasion assay showed that invasive ability of EMT6 cells were
significantly increased when they were co-cultured with m-MDSCs while
g-MDSCs slightly decreased the number of invaded cells, compared to
control group. We utilized immunofluorescence staining and confirmed the
increased expression of Vimentin, CK14 (cytokeratin 14) in EMT6 cells
co-cultured with m-MDSCs. In contrast, g-MDSCs induced down-regulation of
these markers while they increased cell proliferation as assessed by Ki67
staining. Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis showed the increased
CD24+CD29+ population, a marker of murine cancer stem cell (CSC)
phenotype, in EMT6 cells when co-cultured with m-MDSCs from 4T1
tumor-bearing mice. Tumor sphere assay confirmed that m-MDSCs enhanced
sphere forming ability of tumor cells. Taken together, these data suggest
that m-MDSCs derived from metastatic 4T1 tumor-bearing mice are able to
confer EMT/CSC phenotype on tumor cells while g-MDSCs are more potent in
inducing epithelial phenotype and proliferation in tumor cells.

