Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer exosomes and their effects on macrophage
engulfment and polarization


The purpose of this study is to explore the effects of prostate
cancer-derived exosomes on macrophage engulfment and polarization.
Exosomes are small vesicles secreted by virtually all cells, which
contain nucleic acids, lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates. Exosomes can
be abundantly found in cancer patient secretions (serum, urine, etc.) and
contain a high amount of RNA molecules, some of them being miRNA, and
parts of the DNA of the cell of origin. One of the functions of exosomes
is to mediate cellular communication. This occurs as they are secreted
from one cell and then distribute their contents into other cells. Some
exosomes specifically target immune cells. The miRNA the exosomes carry
can silence genes involved in the activation of these immune cells,
leading to immune suppression and tumor growth. Macrophages are often
found surrounding the tumor microenvironment, as they are recruited by
tumor signals to promote angiogenesis and metastasis. These macrophages,
which are often called tumor associated macrophages (TAMs), are exposed
to various signals derived from the tumor microenvironment, including
exosomes. Previous data generated in our lab suggests that the co-culture
of macrophages with PC3 and DU145 cell lines results in a decrease in
macrophage phagocytosis and an M2-like polarization state. For this
study, we exposed U937 cells to phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for
24 hours to allow for differentiation. Then, we co-cultured these
macrophages with isolated exosomes from spent media from both PC3 and
DU145 cell lines at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, and 24 hours. We then allowed
the macrophages to phagocytose fluorescent microbeads for 1 hour. Flow
cytometry analysis of these macrophages revealed that the total bead
phagocytosis starts decreasing at 3 hours of exosome co-culture compared
to control. Interestingly, total bead phagocytosis resumes to normal at
12 and 24 hours of exosome co-culture. Gene expression analysis of these
macrophages suggests an M2 phenotype from hours 2-24. These results
suggest that prostate cancer-derived exosomes can target macrophages and
affect their phagocytosis. Further research is required to elucidate the
specific genes these exosomes target.

