Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid in vivo testing of tumor suppressors in ILC by CRISPR-Cas9
mediated somatic gene editing of the mammary gland


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is the second most common breast cancer
subtype, accounting for 5% to 15% of breast tumors.The majority of ILCs
are characterized by the complete loss of the cell adhesion protein
E-cadherin encoded by the CDH1 gene. However, WAPcre;Cdh1F/F mice with
mammary gland-specific E-cadherin loss do not develop ILC, unless coupled
with the additional disruption of a tumor suppressor gene, like Pten or
Trp53. Compound mutant mice develop lesions that closely resemble the
human disease in terms of histology and invasivity. However, genome-wide
sequencing projects and forward genetic screens identified a number of
additional putative ILC-initiating loci. Hence, there is now an urgent
need for validation and characterization of these candidate cancer genes.
We sought to determine if it was possible to deploy CRISPR/Cas9
technology to somatically inactivate candidate tumor suppressor genes in
mammary gland tissue of adult mice. For this purpose we performed in
Cdh1F/F mice intraductal injections of high-titer lentiviral vectors
carrying different combinations of Cre, Cas9 and sgRNAs targeting several
candidate genes, including Pten, Tgfbr2, Myh9, Nf1 and Fbxw7. We found
that Cas9-bearing vectors elicited strong immune responses against
transduced cells, which resulted in small ILC lesions surrounded by
immune cells. However, when Cas9 was expressed endogenously in the
mammary tissue from a knock-in allele, intraductal injection of
lentiviral vectors encoding the sgRNA moiety of the CRISPR system was
sufficient to induce penetrant and multifocal ILC formation in
WAPcre;Cdh1F/F;Cas9 female mice. Sequencing revealed specific mutations
clustered in the CRISPR targeted gene, and positive selection for
loss-of-function indels. Indeed, immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence analysis confirmed that tumors were largely deficient
for E-cadherin and the targeted gene. In sum, we have successfully
established a new platform for in vivo CRISPR-Cas9 mediated somatic gene
editing in the mouse mammary gland. This rapid and versatile platform can
be used to identify novel tumor drivers (e.g.by employing forward genetic
screens) and validate candidate cancer genes in ILC and other breast
cancer types.

