Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p90 Ribosomal S6 kinase mediates acquired resistance to ganetespib
in KRAS mutant NSCLC


Approximately 25% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients have
KRAS mutations and no current therapies targeting this key oncogenic
driver exist. There is a critical need for novel agents targeting KRAS
mutant NSCLC. Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is an ATP-dependent molecular
chaperone required for the stability of its client oncoproteins, which
include a number of KRAS downstream effectors. Therefore, targeting Hsp90
could be a promising therapeutic intervention against undruggable KRAS
driven tumors. Although single agent activity has been demonstrated with
the HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib in vitro, only transient responses have
been observed in the clinic in KRAS mutant patients. Our goal is to
characterize the mechanisms of acquired resistance to ganetespib and
develop rational combinations to overcome ganetespib resistance.We have
generated ganetespib resistant (GR) KRAS mutant NSCLC cells and
demonstrated that bypass of G2/M arrest and hyper-activation of
RAF/MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT/MTOR pathways contribute to resistance. We
observed increased dependence on these pathways as the GR cells were more
sensitive to ERK1/2 or dual PI3K/MTOR inhibition. Moreover, the
combination of ganetespib with ERK1/2 or PI3K/MTOR inhibitors was more
effective than either single agent alone. Furthermore, several key
mediators of G2/M progression were significantly increased in the GR
cells compared to sensitive parental cell lines. Most notably, the
serine/threonine kinase p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (p90-RSK), an important
regulator of G2/M progression and the PI3K/AKT/MTOR pathway and a key
target of ERK1/2 and PDK1 phosphorylation, were significantly upregulated
both in expression and activity. Downstream p90-RSK targets and critical
G2/M regulators - cdc25A, cdc25B, and cdc25C were also significantly
elevated in GR cells. The p90-RSK family consists of four closely related
isoforms (1-4), that are widely expressed in cancer and demonstrated to
increase cell survival and proliferation. We observed that
isoform-specific genetic silencing and pharmacological inhibition of
p90-RSK re-sensitized GR cells to ganetespib. Conversely, overexpression
of distinct p90-RSK isoforms in sensitive parental cell lines induced
ganetespib resistance as well as led to bypass of ganetespib-induced G2/M
arrest. The combination of ganetespib with p90-RSK inhibitor(s) enhanced
cytotoxicity compared with either agent alone. These data suggest that
combination of ganetespib with ERK1/2 or dual PI3K/mTOR or p90-RSK
inhibitors may prevent ganetespib resistance and/or overcome acquired
resistance after single agent treatment. These findings provide
preclinical rationale for a potential future clinical study with an HSP90
inhibitor and a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor or RSK inhibitor in KRAS mutant
NSCLC patients.

