Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel gastric cancer cell lines established from diffuse type
gastric cancer patients for potential subgroup-specific therapy


In vitro culture system is a long-standing useful tool in the study of
cell biology for developing new therapeutic modalities and discovering
new anti-cancer drugs. Therefore establishment and characterization of
cell lines are very important in vitro study. However, establishment of
GC patients derived cell lines are very challenging, especially with
diffuse type which has different biology and worse prognosis from
intestinal type.Yonsei Cancer Center (YCC) has been consistently worked
to build human cancer cell lines, and resulting in over 30 novel cancer
cell lines from metastatic gastric cancer patients. Most of YCC GC cell
lines were established by primary culture of peritoneal fluid from
metastatic gastric cancer patients. Interestingly, YCC-16 cells were
isolated from the peripheral blood of gastric cancer patients. 20 cells
were established from diffuse type GC, and 21 cells were from signet ring
cell type.In this study, we evaluated 29 YCC GC cell lines and 23 GC cell
lines from other sources (ATCC, KCLB, and JCRB). For molecular
characterization of 52 GC cell lines, we analyzed copy number variant
(CNV), single number variant (SNV) and gene expression using whole-exome
sequencing (WES) and RNA sequencing. The 7 cell lines (YCC-17, 18, 19,
20, 29, 34, 36) were compared with their germline variants of paired
PBMC. Also, these cell lines were investigated expression of proteins
related to cancer progression and the sensitivity of chemotherapies and
diverse molecular targeted drugs/antibodies. We evaluated the
tumorigenesis with soft-agar assay and invasiveness by transwell assay.In
addition to previous novel EBV infected cell line (YCCEL1/YCC-10, J Gen
Virol. 2013), we observed amplification and overexpression of receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) including HER2 (YCC-19, 32, 33, 38, 42), EGFR
(YCC-11, 21), Met (YCC-31, 42), and FGFR2 (YCC-28, 30); confirming that
protein was overexpression by Western blot in 20/52 (38.5%).
Interestingly, amplification of RTKs was detected mutually exclusive
pattern with other RTK amplification. Furthermore, RTK amplified cell
lines were shown to be sensitive to target specific small molecules such
as BGJ398. Also, we identified cell line specific genetic variations
including ARID1A which might be the potential new targets in diffuse type
GC cell lines. Then we could subgroup the cell lines based on 4 subtypes
of TCGA.In conclusion, our GC cell line bank with genomic and biological
characteristics based on the clinical information, would be useful in
subgroup specific target selection, drug screening and mechanism
evaluation for improving GC treatment.

