Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retrospective evaluation of a system model of the BCL2 family of
proteins as a predictive and prognostic biomarker for the clinical
outcome of stage II-IV colorectal cancer patients


With 1.4 million new cases every year, colorectal cancer (CRC) is the
fourth most common cancer worldwide [Globocan 2012, WHO]. Despite
therapeutic advances and improvements in overall care, TNM staging
remains the best prognostic indicator for CRC patients clinical outcomes
and is pivotal for deciding on use of adjuvant chemotherapy after
resection of the tumour. Adjuvant chemotherapy is not recommended for
many stage II patients and mostly high-risk patients receive
chemotherapy. However, there is a lack of robust biomarkers for
identifying patient response to chemotherapy, recurrence and mortality
risk.We developed a system model of the BCL2 family of proteins (DR_MOMP)
to assess the sensitivity of cells to genotoxic stress and to induce
apoptosis triggered by chemotherapy. It calculates the stress dose
required to induce mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP)
based on absolute protein levels and the interaction of pro- and
anti-apoptotic BCL2 family proteins. Cells predicted to require a high
stress dose showed decreased cell death rates after being exposed to 5FU
and Oxaliplatin. Profiles of BAK, BAX, BCL2, BCL(X)L and MCL1 were
determined by Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) technology in FFPE
primary tumours collected from two distinct cohorts: stage III CRC
patients who underwent adjuvant 5FU-based chemotherapy (n = 128), and
stage II CRC patients from a completed clinical trial with patients
randomised to adjuvant 5FU-based chemotherapy or observation only (n =
138). Protein profiles were inputted into DR_MOMP to determine
chemotherapy sensitivity and to classify patients into high- or low risk
categories. Findings were validated on the TCGA COAD cohort using both
protein (RPPA) and mRNA (SeqV2 RSEM) expression data.Stage II patients
classified as high-risk by DR_MOMP and randomised to observation only had
approximately 2-fold increased risk of death from CRC compared to those
classified as low-risk or received chemotherapy (HR 2.4; 95% CI 1.2-4.8;
p-value = 0.0199). Among stage III patients treated with FOLFOX, those
classified as high- versus low-risk had a more than 10-fold increased
risk of death from CRC (HR 10.6; 95% CI 2.4-46.3; p-value With 1.4
million new cases every year, colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth most
common cancer worldwide [Globocan 2012, WHO]. Despite therapeutic
advances and improvements in overall care, TNM staging remains the best
prognostic indicator for CRC patients clinical outcomes and is pivotal
for deciding on use of adjuvant chemotherapy after resection of the
tumour. Adjuvant chemotherapy is not recommended for many stage II
patients and mostly high-risk patients receive chemotherapy. However,
there is a lack of robust biomarkers for identifying patient response to
chemotherapy, recurrence and mortality risk.We developed a system model
of the BCL2 family of proteins (DR_MOMP) to assess the sensitivity of
cells to genotoxic stress and to induce apoptosis triggered by
chemotherapy. It calculates the stress dose required to induce
mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) based on absolute
protein levels and the interaction of pro- and anti-apoptotic BCL2 family
proteins. Cells predicted to require a high stress dose showed decreased
cell death rates after being exposed to 5FU and Oxaliplatin. Profiles of
BAK, BAX, BCL2, BCL(X)L and MCL1 were determined by Reverse Phase Protein
Array (RPPA) technology in FFPE primary tumours collected from two
distinct cohorts: stage III CRC patients who underwent adjuvant 5FU-based
chemotherapy (n = 128), and stage II CRC patients from a completed
clinical trial with patients randomised to adjuvant 5FU-based
chemotherapy or observation only (n = 138). Protein profiles were
inputted into DR_MOMP to determine chemotherapy sensitivity and to
classify patients into high- or low risk categories. Findings were
validated on the TCGA COAD cohort using both protein (RPPA) and mRNA
(SeqV2 RSEM) expression data.Stage II patients classified as high-risk by
DR_MOMP and randomised to observation only had approximately 2-fold
increased risk of death from CRC compared to those classified as low-risk
or received chemotherapy (HR 2.4; 95% CI 1.2-4.8; p-value = 0.0199).
Among stage III patients treated with FOLFOX, those classified as high-
versus low-risk had a more than 10-fold increased risk of death from CRC
(HR 10.6; 95% CI 2.4-46.3; p-value < 0.0001). We validated this finding
in 261 stage II-IV patients of the TCGA COAD cohort (HR 10.6; 95% CI
1.2-12.5; p-value = 0.0125). DR_MOMP predicted mortality risk independent
of TNM staging and KRAS mutation status.Our system delivers a novel
predictive and prognostic biomarker that could be combined with TNM
staging when assessing initial risk and subsequent clinical management of
CRC patients.

