Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allogeneic TCR-deficient CAR T-cells targeting CD123 effectively
eliminate myeloid leukemia cells in vitro and in vivo PDX mice


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is incurable in the majority of patients.
While allogeneic stem cell transplantation remains the most effective
therapy for AML to date, other types of cellular therapy have not yet
been successful in this disease. The success of autologous T-cells
expressing chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) in patients with advanced B
cell leukemia and lymphomas has encouraged the investigation of CAR
technology for the treatment of AML by targeting distinct tumor-specific
antigens. We have developed an allogeneic CAR-T cell platform using
T-cells from third-party healthy donors to generate T-cells targeting
CD123, the transmembrane alpha chain of the interleukin-3 receptor, which
is expressed on blasts, leukemic progenitor and leukemic stem cells from
the majority of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML).Transcription
Activator-Like Effector Nuclease (TALEN) gene-editing technology was used
to inactivate the TCR constant (TRAC) gene, eliminating the potential for
engineered T-cells to cause graft versus host disease (GvHD). Using
leukemia cell lines in both in vitro and in vivo models, we confirmed
that TCR-deficient T-cells expressing an anti-CD123 CAR display
significant antitumor activity.We next evaluated the in vitro cytotoxic
activity of TCR KO CD123-CAR T-cells (UCART123) in primary AML (n = 6)
samples and normal cells (normal bone and umbilical cord blood; n = 3)
using T-cell:AML cell ratios of 5:1, 2:1 and 0.5:1; and T-cell:normal
cell ratio of 10:1 and 1:1. Degranulation and IFN release assays revealed
potent activation of UCART123 cells when exposed to CD123 leukemia cells
but not to normal hematopoietic cells. Cytotoxicity of UCART123 cells was
observed as early as 4 hours upon initiation of the co-cultures. However,
at 24 hours, more than 80% of leukemic cells (blasts, progenitors and
stem cells) were eliminated at all ratios tested, whereas only
approximately 20% CAR-independent cell death was observed with the
TCR-deficient T-cells. Normal hematopoietic cells showed an average of
30% cell death when exposed to either UCART123 or TCR-deficient T-cells,
demonstrating the selectivity of CD123 CAR-T cells toward leukemic
cells.Finally, we evaluated the in vivo activity of the CAR-T cells
against established patient derived xenografts (PDX) using AML and normal
CB CD34+ cells. We found no significant difference between PBS,
TCR-deficient (10e6/mouse) and CAR T-cell treatments (10 e6/mouse) in PDX
mice transplanted with normal CD34+ CB. Strikingly, 14 days of treatment
eliminated most of the leukemic cells from the AML-PDX mice. T-cells were
still detected at day 14 after treatment with UCART123 cells (mean 52%
CD123 CAR and mean 1.5% TCR-), without evidence of GVHD. Efforts are
underway to develop allogeneic CD123 CAR-T cells for clinical trials in
AML.

