Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vaccination enhances anti-tumor immunity in ovarian cancer
following repolarization of the tumor microenvironment with CCR2 blockade


Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) expresses the tumor associated antigen
mesothelin and contains a relative abundance of T-cells. However, ovarian
cancer is also infiltrated by immunosuppressive tumor associated
macrophages (TAM) that dominate the tumor microenvironment (TME). The
CCL2/CCR2 chemokine axis is co-opted by various human malignancies to
facilitate the recruitment of bone marrow (BM) derived inflammatory
monocytes (IM) to the TME where they become immunosuppressive TAMs.
Herein, we explore the rationale for combination of a CCR2 inhibitor
(CCR2i) with a mesothelin peptide vaccine.Methods: Monocyte counts were
obtained from preoperative CBCs under IRB approval. Mice were vaccinated
with a dual eight-mer peptide (50 nM/vaccination) on days 0 and 7 with an
irradiated peptide pulsed dendritic cell boost on day 14. Mice were
challenged with 4 million syngeneic OC cells (ID8) on day 15. CCR2
inhibitor (Tocris) and CCR2 KO mice were used.Results: Preoperative
monocyte counts of human ovarian cancer patients were stratified into low
(>1 SD below mean), mid (within 1 SD of mean), and high (>1 SD above the
mean) groups. Patients with a high monocyte count (n = 15) had a
significantly decreased median survival of 1.2 years compared to 4.8
years in the low monocyte group (n = 15). The mid group (n = 69) had a
median survival of 3.5 years (p 0.001). The hazard ratio between the low
and high groups was 0.24 (0.05-0.39). Flow cytometry of peripheral blood
from these patients demonstrated that the majority of these monocytes
were CCR2+ inflammatory monocytes. Human OC overexpresses CCL2 compared
to normal ovarian tissue and analysis of the TME from resected human OC
patients revealed an abundance of CCR2+ TAM, which greatly outnumbered
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). In a murine ID8 tumor model, which
recapitulates features of human OC, CCR2i prevented IM egress from the
bone marrow with a resultant decrease in TAM at the primary tumor site.
Furthermore, there was an increase in TIL infiltrate following CCR2
blockade. Addition of vaccine to CCR2i caused an improvement of effector
to suppressor ratio and prolonged survival compared to vaccine (p = 0.02)
or CCR2i alone (p = 0.02) and control (pIntroduction: Ovarian cancer (OC)
expresses the tumor associated antigen mesothelin and contains a relative
abundance of T-cells. However, ovarian cancer is also infiltrated by
immunosuppressive tumor associated macrophages (TAM) that dominate the
tumor microenvironment (TME). The CCL2/CCR2 chemokine axis is co-opted by
various human malignancies to facilitate the recruitment of bone marrow
(BM) derived inflammatory monocytes (IM) to the TME where they become
immunosuppressive TAMs. Herein, we explore the rationale for combination
of a CCR2 inhibitor (CCR2i) with a mesothelin peptide vaccine.Methods:
Monocyte counts were obtained from preoperative CBCs under IRB approval.
Mice were vaccinated with a dual eight-mer peptide (50 nM/vaccination) on
days 0 and 7 with an irradiated peptide pulsed dendritic cell boost on
day 14. Mice were challenged with 4 million syngeneic OC cells (ID8) on
day 15. CCR2 inhibitor (Tocris) and CCR2 KO mice were used.Results:
Preoperative monocyte counts of human ovarian cancer patients were
stratified into low (>1 SD below mean), mid (within 1 SD of mean), and
high (>1 SD above the mean) groups. Patients with a high monocyte count
(n = 15) had a significantly decreased median survival of 1.2 years
compared to 4.8 years in the low monocyte group (n = 15). The mid group
(n = 69) had a median survival of 3.5 years (p 0.001). The hazard ratio
between the low and high groups was 0.24 (0.05-0.39). Flow cytometry of
peripheral blood from these patients demonstrated that the majority of
these monocytes were CCR2+ inflammatory monocytes. Human OC overexpresses
CCL2 compared to normal ovarian tissue and analysis of the TME from
resected human OC patients revealed an abundance of CCR2+ TAM, which
greatly outnumbered tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). In a murine ID8
tumor model, which recapitulates features of human OC, CCR2i prevented IM
egress from the bone marrow with a resultant decrease in TAM at the
primary tumor site. Furthermore, there was an increase in TIL infiltrate
following CCR2 blockade. Addition of vaccine to CCR2i caused an
improvement of effector to suppressor ratio and prolonged survival
compared to vaccine (p = 0.02) or CCR2i alone (p = 0.02) and control
(p<0.0001).Conclusion: Thus far vaccination has not provided durable
patient responses in OC. Therapies targeting the immunosuppressive TME
are an attractive treatment modality to enhance vaccination and
facilitate anti-tumor immunity in OC.

