Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid-based nanoparticulate hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) formulations
for use in combination with autophagy inducing drugs for treatment of
breast cancer


Many targeted and broad spectrum anticancer drugs used to treat breast
cancer trigger survival responses exemplified by the induction of
cytoprotective macroautophagy (autophagy). Previously, we and others have
shown that the anti-malarial agent hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) can improve
the effects of anticancer drugs by inhibiting autophagy when used in high
concentrations (1-20 M). These levels are difficult to attain in vivo,
thus, we developed novel liposomal formulations of HCQ (L-HCQ) designed
to maintain therapeutic concentrations in plasma and tumor sites over
extended periods of time.Liposomes
(1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) and cholesterol (CHOL)
(55:45 molar ratio)) were prepared by extrusion to exhibit a mean
particle size of 100 20 nm. Copper HCQ complexation or ammnonium sulphate
methods were used for loading HCQ into liposomes achieving >99%
encapsulation efficiency (HCQ to lipid ratio: 0.22 0.02 (mol:mol)). In
vitro stability studies indicated that more than 80% of the liposomal
associated HCQ was retained in the formulation for at least 24 h at 37 C.
In vivo pharmacokinetic studies, demonstrated that free HCQ was
eliminated from the plasma compartment within 30 minutes following i.v.
injection while the L-HCQ formulations maintained significantly higher
plasma HCQ levels (>100 M) over 24 h regardless of the loading method.
Tolerability studies in non-tumor bearing CD1 mice showed no signs of
toxicity following single and multiple doses (3 x week, i.v., 75 mg/kg).
Inhibition of autophagy in vivo was examined in liver, heart and pancreas
tissues of C57B1/6 mice 6 h after dosing with L-HCQ or free HCQ in
combination with the autophagy inducing drug rapamycin. The results show
that L-HCQ inhibited rapamycin-induced autophagy more effectively than
free HCQ, as evident by a significant increase in LC3-II levels in all
the examined tissue. Finally, the efficacy of L-HCQ alone (3 x week,
i.v., 60 mg/kg) or in combination with the autophagy promoting drug
gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (5 x week, oral gavage, 100
mg/kg), was tested in the JIMT-1 breast cancer xenograft model (s.c.)
established in Rag2M mice. After four weeks of treatment, there were no
significant differences in tumor volume between untreated and L-HCQ or
gefitinib alone treated animals (p>0.05). In contrast, the gefitinib and
L-HCQ combination engendered a significant inhibition of tumor growth
compared to untreated controls (pMany targeted and broad spectrum
anticancer drugs used to treat breast cancer trigger survival responses
exemplified by the induction of cytoprotective macroautophagy
(autophagy). Previously, we and others have shown that the anti-malarial
agent hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) can improve the effects of anticancer
drugs by inhibiting autophagy when used in high concentrations (1-20 M).
These levels are difficult to attain in vivo, thus, we developed novel
liposomal formulations of HCQ (L-HCQ) designed to maintain therapeutic
concentrations in plasma and tumor sites over extended periods of
time.Liposomes (1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) and
cholesterol (CHOL) (55:45 molar ratio)) were prepared by extrusion to
exhibit a mean particle size of 100 20 nm. Copper HCQ complexation or
ammnonium sulphate methods were used for loading HCQ into liposomes
achieving >99% encapsulation efficiency (HCQ to lipid ratio: 0.22 0.02
(mol:mol)). In vitro stability studies indicated that more than 80% of
the liposomal associated HCQ was retained in the formulation for at least
24 h at 37 C. In vivo pharmacokinetic studies, demonstrated that free HCQ
was eliminated from the plasma compartment within 30 minutes following
i.v. injection while the L-HCQ formulations maintained significantly
higher plasma HCQ levels (>100 M) over 24 h regardless of the loading
method. Tolerability studies in non-tumor bearing CD1 mice showed no
signs of toxicity following single and multiple doses (3 x week, i.v., 75
mg/kg). Inhibition of autophagy in vivo was examined in liver, heart and
pancreas tissues of C57B1/6 mice 6 h after dosing with L-HCQ or free HCQ
in combination with the autophagy inducing drug rapamycin. The results
show that L-HCQ inhibited rapamycin-induced autophagy more effectively
than free HCQ, as evident by a significant increase in LC3-II levels in
all the examined tissue. Finally, the efficacy of L-HCQ alone (3 x week,
i.v., 60 mg/kg) or in combination with the autophagy promoting drug
gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (5 x week, oral gavage, 100
mg/kg), was tested in the JIMT-1 breast cancer xenograft model (s.c.)
established in Rag2M mice. After four weeks of treatment, there were no
significant differences in tumor volume between untreated and L-HCQ or
gefitinib alone treated animals (p>0.05). In contrast, the gefitinib and
L-HCQ combination engendered a significant inhibition of tumor growth
compared to untreated controls (p<0.05). Moreover, molecular analysis
confirmed inhibition of gefitinib-induced autophagy in vivo by L-HCQ, as
judged by increased LC3-II and p62 protein levels in tumor tissue.In
summary, this study established that L-HCQ was able to inhibit autophagy
and improved sensitivity in an in vivo model of breast cancer treated
with gefitinib.

