Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sumoylation of the retinoic acid receptor alpha protein represses
transcriptional activity and contributes to retinoic acid resistance in
glioma stem cells


Introduction: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most deadly form of brain cancer.
Despite treatment with tumor resection followed by radiation and
chemotherapy, the median survival rate is less than 15 months. Glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs) are thought to be treatment resistant and drive
tumor growth. Retinoids have been successfully used to terminally
differentiate the cancer stem cell population in some leukemias, but show
only modest success in GBM despite the presence of RARA in tumor cells.
Resistance to retinoic acid (RA) can develop due to mutations in the
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) protein that prevent its
phosphorylation. This study evaluated the retinoic acid receptors to
determine if receptor dysfunction is the underlying cause of resistance
in GBM. Methods: Several GSCs derived from both primary (GSC923) and
recurrent (GSC827, GSC604) GBM tumors and normal mouse neural stem cells
(MNSC) were analyzed for RARA protein expression by Western blots using
an RARA specific antibody. 2D Westerns were used to measure RARA
phosphorylation in response to RA treatment. MNSC were treated with RA in
the presence or absence of MG132, a proteasomal inhibitor, to determine
if MNSC RARA protein was sensitive to proteasomal degradation. RARA
transcriptional activity was measured using a promoter luciferase
construct containing a specific retinoic acid response element (RARE).
Immunoprecipitations using either Sumo1, Sumo 2/3 or RARA identified the
type of sumo peptide covalently attached to the endogenous GSC RARA
protein. Results: MNSCs express the predicted 51 kDa RARA protein;
however, GSC827 and GSC923 both express two high molecular weight forms
that were approximately 62 and 73 kDa. In response to RA, the MNSC RARA
became phosphorylated, but the GSC827 RARA remained hypophosphorylated.
Treatment with RA induced the proteasomal degradation of MNSC RARA as
expected. In contrast, both forms of the GSC RARA proteins were resistant
to ligand-induced proteasomal degradation. In response to RA, the RARA
protein in three glioma stem cell lines showed a 40-60% decrease (p =
0.008) in transcriptional activity compared to MNSC. Immunoprecipitation
showed that the Sumo1 peptide is covalently attached to the GSC RARA
protein, occurring before the treatment with retinoic acid. Conclusions:
We demonstrated that aberrant posttranslational modification of the RARA
protein contributes to retinoic acid resistance in glioma stem cells.
Covalent attachment of the Sumo1 peptide likely prevents RARA
phosphorylation and ligand-induced proteasomal degradation. The Sumo1
peptide serves as a scaffold to bind nuclear corepressor proteins. Future
exploration of the role of the Sumo1 modification may uncover underlying
mechanisms of inherent retinoic acid resistance in GSCs potentially
leading to successful differentiation therapy in GBM.

