Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting both canonical and non-canonical NF-kB pathways by the
IAP antagonist birinapant potentiates bortezomib anti-myeloma activity


Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs e.g., XIAP, cIAP1, cIAP2) inhibit
apoptosis through diverse mechanisms. Recent attention has focused on
novel functions of cIAP1/2, including activation of the canonical and
non-canonical NF-B pathways and inhibition of the extrinsic apoptotic
pathway through the ripoptosome. These considerations have stimulated the
development of IAP antagonists such as the bivalent IAP inhibitor
birinapant (TL-32711). Proteasome inhibitors such as bortezomib are
highly active in multiple myeloma (MM), and act, at least in part, by
inhibiting NF-B, raising the possibility of cooperative interactions with
IAP antagonists. Synergistic induction of apoptosis was observed in human
MM cell lines, including drug-nave U266 cells, their bortezomib-resistant
counterparts (PS-R), and multiple other human MM lines. Birinapant (500
nM) sharply down-regulated cIAP1/2 in MM cells, accompanied by reduced
expression of TRAF2, RIP1, and p-IKK, as well as robust TRAF3
up-regulation, in association with down-regulation of NIK, p-IKK, and
p52, consistent with canonical and non-canonical NF-B pathway
inactivation, respectively. Notably, U266 cells overexpressing TRAF2 or
in which TRAF3 was knocked down by shRNA displayed significant resistance
to the birinapant/bortezomib regimen, indicating that disruption of both
canonical and non-canonical NF-B signaling contributes functionally to
anti-myeloma activity. Moreover, Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL overexpression and
dominant-negative FADD markedly blocked apoptosis, suggesting the
involvement of both intrinsic and or extrinsic apoptotic pathways. 3D
co-culture studies with HS-5 stromal cells revealed no protection of MM
cells from the birinapant/bortezomib regimen, indicating circumvention of
micro-environmental forms of drug-resistance. Markedly enhanced cell
killing by the combination was also observed in primary CD138+ MM cells
and primitive CD138-/19+/20+/27+ progenitors, but not normal CD34+ cells.
HS-5 cells also failed to protect primary CD138+ MM cells from this
regimen. Finally, co-administration of birinapant and bortezomib
significantly reduced tumor burden and enhanced animal survival compared
to single-agent treatment with minimal toxicity in NSG mice inoculated
with U266 cells. Together, these findings indicate that targeting cIAP1/2
by birinapant significantly increases bortezomib anti-MM activity in MM
cells, including bortezomib-resistant and primary MM cells, circumvents
microenvironment-related resistance, and mechanstically involves
concommitant inhibition of the canonical and non-canonical NF-B pathways
as well as activation of the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways.
Finally, the regimen is well tolerated and active in in vivo animal
models. Collectively, these findings support exploring an IAP/proteasome
inhibitor strategy in MM.

