Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salmonella protein AvrA activates the STAT3 signaling pathway in
colon cancer


Salmonella infection in humans can become chronic which leads to low
grade persistent inflammation. These chronic infections increase the risk
of several gastrointestinal diseases, including cancer. A recent study
has shown that antibody against Salmonella flagellin was higher in
colorectal cancer and pre-cancer cases than controls in two distinct
populations in US and the Netherlands and that dietary intake is the one
of the mediating factors, suggesting a potential link of Salmonella to
colorectal cancer. Salmonella AvrA is a multifunctional protein that
influences eukaryotic cell pathways by regulating ubiquitination and
acetylation. In an animal model, we have demonstrated that infection with
AvrA expressing Salmonella induces beta-catenin signals and enhances
colonic tumorigenesis. Beta-catenin signaling is a key player in
intestinal proliferation and tumorigenesis. The relative contributions of
AvrA-induced proliferation and inflammation on tumorigenesis, however,
are unknown. STAT3 is activated in chronically inflamed intestines in
human inflammatory bowel diseases and in colitis-associated colon cancer.
In the current study, mice were colonized with Salmonella AvrA-sufficient
or AvrA-deficient bacterial strains. Then, inflammation-associated colon
cancer was induced through the use of azoxymethane/dextran sulfate
sodium. We determined that AvrA expressing bacteria activated the STAT3
pathway, which is predicted to increase inflammation, enhance
proliferation, and promote tumorigenesis. Transcriptional activity of
STAT3 and its target genes were up-regulated by Salmonella expressing
AvrA, thus promoting proliferation and intestinal tumorigenesis. Our
current findings provide new insights regarding a STAT3-dependent
mechanism by which the specific bacterial product AvrA enhances the
development of infection-associated colon cancer. Our observations also
raise a note of caution regarding the use of mutant Salmonella organisms
as vectors for ant-cancer therapy. Finally, these studies could suggest
biomarkers (such as AvrA level in gut) to assess cancer risk in
susceptible individuals and infection-related dysregulation of
STAT/-catenin signaling in colon cancer.

