Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway-directed high throughput drug screen identifies PI3K
inhibitors that synergistically potentiate anti-tumor activity of HDAC
inhibitors in mycosis fungoides and Szary syndrome


Introduction and Purposes: Mycosis fungoides and Szary syndrome (MF/SS)
represent a group of heterogeneous diseases. Recent studies demonstrated
dysregulation of several signaling pathways in MF/SS, including PI3K/AKT,
JAK/STAT, RAS and NFB pathways. We performed a high throughput drug
screen to determine the potential of novel agents targeting these
pathways for the treatment of MF/SS.Experimental Procedures: We compiled
a library of 94 compounds targeting pathways known to be relevant in
cancer biology. These included kinases involved in growth factor receptor
signaling, HDACs, proteasome, DNA repair and regulators of apoptosis. The
compounds were screened for anti-proliferative activity against four
MF/SS cell lines in high throughput proliferation assays. Selected hits
were further studied in xenograft models of MF/SS and in primary T cell
lymphomas. Promising candidates from different classes were also tested
in combination therapy assays using a matrix block method across dose
gradients of each compound designed to detect synergistic
activities.Results: From the high throughput screen, we identified 14
compounds with anti-proliferative activity in MF/SS, including multiple
inhibitors of the PI3K pathway. PI3K inhibitors emerged as preliminary
hits in this screen and secondary validation assays confirmed the class
effect of PI3K inhibitors. From this class, the PI3K inhibitor BKM120 was
selected for in vivo studies. In a xenograft model of MF, BKM120
exhibited striking anti-tumor activity measured by a marked suppression
of tumor growth and prolonged survival of tumor-bearing mice compared
with vehicle control. In a search for even more effective combination
therapies, we identified that BKM120 and the HDAC inhibitor class of
compounds exhibit synergistic anti-proliferative effects in MF/SS tumor
cells. Each of three HDAC inhibitors including LBH, Romidepsin and
Vorinostat showed synergistic activity with BKM120, most evident at the
GI50 concentrations of each drug, and apparent in both growth inhibition
and apoptotic assays.Conclusion: BKM120 is highly active in preclinical
models of MF/SS. Furthermore, it synergistically potentiates the effect
of HDAC inhibitors against MF/SS tumor cells. These are highly promising
approaches for the treatment of MF/SS and warrant clinical investigation.

