Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alterations of TP53 mediate resistance to abiraterone in
castration-resistant prostate cancer


Prostate cancer remains the second-leading cause of cancer death in men.
The first line treatment for advanced prostate cancer is hormone
deprivation therapy (ADT), which although it is initially effective,
usually leads to progression to more aggressive and often lethal
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Nonetheless, CRPC remains
dependent on androgen receptor (AR) signaling through various mechanisms.
Therefore, drugs that target androgen synthesis or AR signaling, such as
abiraterone acetate and enzalutamide, have been employed as second line
therapy. Despite the fact that both drugs improve the overall survival
for CRPC patients, neither of them is curative, suggesting intrinsic or
acquired resistance. Here we have focused on elucidating resistance
mechanisms for abiraterone acetate, an inhibitor of androgen
biosynthesis, using preclinical analyses of relevant genetically
engineered mouse models (GEMMs).Given the high frequency of co-alteration
in PTEN and p53 in mCRPC, we generated conditional GEMMs based on
deletion of either PTEN alone or PTEN plus p53 to obtain the NP and NPp53
GEMMs, respectively. Both NP and NPp53 mice develop CRPC, and
cross-species gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) suggests that they have
molecular programs that are well-conserved with human CRPC. In
preclinical studies, we find that the NP mice are highly responsive to
tumor inhibition by abiraterone, whereas the NPp53 mice do not respond.
In fact, the NPp53 mice display a marked acceleration of tumor
progression following abiraterone treatment. The disparate phenotypic
responses of the NP and NPp53 mice to abiraterone are evident by analyses
of their tumor histology, immunohistochemical staining, as well as the
change in tumor volume by MRI imaging. We further validated the results
in a genetically modified human prostate cancer cell line. In particular,
a xenograft model based on 22RV1 cells that are depleted for both PTEN
and p53 also displayed an acceleration of the tumor phenotype following
abiraterone treatment. Notably, expression profiling of the abiraterone-
or vehicle-treated responder NP tumors versus non-responder NPp53 tumors
identified a unique set of cancer driver genes that are enriched for
genes found in human neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC). These
findings were confirmed by immunohistochemistry, which demonstrated a
significant increase in synaptophysin-expressing cells in CRPC in the
NPp53 mice but not the NP mice.Our findings suggest that loss of p53 in
the context of PTEN deletion promotes resistance to abiraterone while
CRPC in the NPp53 mice partially resemble human NEPC. Given the high
prevalence of co-alteration of PTEN and p53 in advanced human mCRPC, and
observed occurrence of treatment induced NEPC-like phenotypes observed
following treatment with AR targeting agents in patients, our finding
suggest that abiraterone may not be suitable for patients with
alterations in both PTEN and p53.

