Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant growth suppressive effects of TOPK and MELK inhibitors
in kidney cancer


Kidney cancer is the seventh most common cancer and the tenth most common
cause of cancer death for men, and it is the tenth most common cause of
cancer for women. The 5-year disease-specific survival has improved from
about 50% in 1975-1977 to 65% in 2000-2005, although that of patients at
an advanced stage still remains poor with less than 10%; 30% of patients
who underwent surgery of localized kidney cancer develop distant
metastasis and have limited therapeutic options such as tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors. In
addition, the clinical effects of these drugs are limited and patients
often discontinue these drugs due to severe side effects including
hand-foot syndrome, liver dysfunction and interstitial pneumonia.
Therefore, development of more effective therapy for kidney cancer is
eagerly expected. T-lymphokine-activated killer cell-originated protein
kinase (TOPK) and maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) are
promising molecular targets that play critical roles in cancer cell
proliferation and maintenance of their stemness. In this study, we
investigated growth promotive effect of TOPK and MELK in kidney cancer
and found a complex feedback mechanism of these two molecules. Blockade
of either of these two kinases effectively caused downregulation of
forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) activity which is known as an oncogenic
transcriptional factor in various types of cancer cell. On the other
hand, knockdown and overexpression of FOXM1 caused downregulation and
upregulation of both TOPK and MELK mRNA levels, respectively, suggesting
that FOXM1 is a critical transcriptional factor for these two molecular
targets. Small molecular compound inhibitors against TOPK (OTS514) and
MELK (OTS167) effectively suppressed the kidney cancer cell growth and
the combination of these two compounds additively induced the very strong
growth suppressive effect on kidney cancer cells. Collectively, our
results suggest that both TOPK and MELK are promising molecular targets
for kidney cancer treatment and that dual blockade of OTS514 and OTS167
should produce synergistic anti-tumor effects with low risk of side
effects.

