Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of mammary carcinoma in tetracycline-inducible
cMET(T1010I) transgenic mice


Gene amplification and mutations of cMET have been reported in a wide
variety of tumors, including colorectal, lung, renal, liver, thyroid, and
breast cancer. cMET(T1010I) mutation occurred in 5.2% out of 148 sibling
pairs diagnosed with colorectal cancer in one study. This germline
mutation occurs in about 1% of breast cancer patients, but its frequency
increases to 2% in metastatic breast cancer. Furthermore, 16% of breast
cancer cases with PI3KCA mutations have co-mutations of the cMET
oncogene. To determine the functional consequences of this germline
mutation and elucidate the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis induced
by its oncogenic mutant protein, we developed a transgenic mouse model
expressing human cMET(T1010I) under the control of a Tet-responsive
promoter. MMTV promoter - directed expression of reverse
tetracycline-controlled transactivator (rtTA) turns on the expression of
the cMET(T1010I) transgene in murine mammary glands upon tetracycline
administration. Thirty percent of these mice developed early onset
mammary carcinoma within 5 months of transgene induction. This contrasts
with previous reports of mammary tumor development in MMTV-cMET
transgenic mice after more than a year. This strong phenotype is not the
result of a random insertional effect of the transgene as no mammary
tumors developed in the 29 transgene positive mice without
mammary-specific expression of rtTA over a year in our study. Molecular
characterization of these tumors is currently underway and the results
may reveal mechanisms of tumorigenesis and novel therapeutic targets for
patients harboring this mutation. In conclusion, we showed for the first
time that the cMET(T1010I) mutation can trigger rapid breast
tumorigenicity. By using organ-specific expression of rtTA to direct the
expression of cMET(T1010I) in the organ of interest, our transgenic model
may be used to understand the impact of cMET(T1010I) on many other cancer
types such as colorectal, lung, renal, thyroid, and liver cancer.

