Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine and paracrine IL-4 maintains breast cancer stem cells
traits via RAS/MAPK/DUSP pathway


Background:Despite the advent of successful treatment of localized
malignancies, metastatic cancer still lacks efficacious therapeutic
approaches, including breast cancer. It is now well established that
within malignant tumors Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs) constitute a unique cell
subset that fuel and succeed at tumor growth and metastases formation.
Tumor microenvironment sustains CSCs characteristics, making the
molecular mechanisms driving tumor progression and recurrence more
complex and difficult to elucidate. Furthermore, the interaction that
occurs between CSCs and the nearby stroma has proven to enhance the
aggressive behavior of several carcinomas through the secretion of
microenvironmental cytokines. In this context, IL-4 has already been
described to promote survival of cancer cells through the up-regulation
of several anti-apoptotic factors. However, still little is known about
its role in promoting breast cancer progression.Results:Here we show for
the first time that autocrine and paracrine production of IL-4 regulates
breast CSCs (BCSCs) features, including cell proliferation, motility and
cytoskeletal organization via RAS/MAPK pathway. Interestingly, relief
from IL-4 impaired BCSCs proliferation, colony forming efficiency and in
vivo tumor formation, while it fostered the expression of the dual
specificity phosphatase-4 (DUSP4) in triple-negative basal-like BCSCs,
leading to the decrease of CD44+/CD24- population. DUSP4 is commonly
deficient in the most aggressive breast cancers, such as the basal-like
subtype. Likewise, we observed that the enforced expression of DUSP4
increases the CD24+ compartment in basal-like BCSCs, determining also a
dramatic decrease of their proliferation, colony forming efficiency,
invasiveness and metastases formation. Contrarily, in luminal-like BCSCs,
DUSP4 suppression favors BCSCs cell traits, including their tumorigenic
and metastagenic properties.Methods:Patient-derived BCSCs were obtained
by digestion of breast cancer tissues and plated in serum-free media with
bFGF and EGF. DUSP4 were inserted into the p-Lenti expression vector.
Stable DUSP4 knockdown was produced by lentiviral transduction of the
pGFP-C vector. IL-4 function was impaired by using a high affinity IL-4R
antagonist. To assess tumorigenicity and metastases formation, BCSCs were
suspended in matrigel and injected either orthotopically or intra caudal
in NOD/SCID mice.Conclusions:These findings will shed light on the
molecular basis of cancer progression and on the complex crosstalk
occurring between tumor and its microenvironment. The identification of
tumor-related molecular events, such as the IL-4 activated signaling,
might be clinically exploited as therapeutic targets in the adjuvant
setting and synergize the effect of conventional chemotherapy in patients
affected by breast cancers with limited therapeutic options, such as
triple-negative breast cancers.

