Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recombinant stapled proteins for the treatment of chronic myeloid
leukemia


The oncoprotein Bcr-Abl is the cause of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Current therapies target the tyrosine kinase domain of Bcr-Abl, but due
to their non-curative nature, resistance to these drugs is common.
Therefore, new treatments are needed for those patients refractive to
available therapies. Bcr-Abl homo-oligomerization via its N-terminal
coiled coil (CC) domain is required for tyrosine kinase activity. Our
previous work has shown that it is possible to inhibit Bcr-Abl activity
by targeting the CC domain with a peptidomemetic known as CCmut,
delivered as a protein using a cell-penetrating peptide (CPP-CCmut).
CPP-CCmut selectively enters leukemic cells and inhibits Bcr-Abl, as seen
by Western blot, 7AAD, Annexin V, cell proliferation, and colony forming
assays.This leukemia cell-permeable CPP-CCmut protein domain is our lead
compound for CML therapy, but to be translatable to the clinic it must be
modified to improve proteolytic stability. For this reason, we created
stapled versions of this CPP-CCmut. Stapled peptides are resistant to
proteolysis, and are emerging as a viable strategy for disrupting
protein-protein interactions in diseases including HIV and cancer. Until
recently, peptide stapling required incorporation of unnatural amino
acids; therefore these peptides were created via solid-state synthesis.
However, the synthesis of the 81 amino acid CPP-CCmut is no trivial
matter. The ability to staple a longer sequence such as our protein
domain is now possible using thiol-ene coupling. This exciting new
chemistry allows for the stapling of recombinant proteins at substituted
cysteine residues (instead of stapling substituted unnatural amino acids
incorporated into synthetically made peptides). Thiol-ene coupling is
used here to staple recombinant CPP-CCmut, and provides a path for
translation of our lead compound to the clinic.Molecular modeling has
identified optimal locations for staples on CPP-CCmut, which include
29/36, 36/43, 50/57, 57/64, as well as double staples 29/36-50/57 and
36/43-50/57. These staple locations still allow for dimerization of
CPP-CCmut with Bcr-Abl, as indicated by free energy calculations and
helicity. The staple locations have also been optimized for maximal
coverage from proteolytic degradation.This work acts as a
proof-of-concept that proteins (not just peptides) can be stapled, thus
greatly expanding the variety and complexity of stapled proteins for use
in the exciting field of targeting protein-protein interfaces to treat
disease.

