Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol inhibits NO-mediated oxidative stress in murine
prostate cancer cells


Background: Nitric oxide (NO) is an important signaling molecule in the
immune, nervous and cardiovascular systems. NO involves in the regulation
of cellular behavior as well as cytotoxic events. Studies demonstrated
that resveratrol (RES) (a polyphenolic compound in the skin of red
fruits) at high concentration (50M) induces NO production in endothelial
F-2 cells and in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. However, the
impact of RES on the biological functions of NO are still poorly
understood. Therefore, the goal of this study was to investigate the
impact of RES on NO-mediated oxidative stress at mitochondria level in
mouse prostate cancer (PCa) cells.Experimental Procedures: The transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) cells (mirrors the
pathogenesis of human prostate cancer) were cultured in Dulbecco's
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS), penicillin 100 IU/ml, streptomycin 100 g/ml, 0.005mg/ml bovine
insulin, and 10nM Dehydroisoandrosterone in 5% CO2 at 370C. Cells were
harvested by trypsinization after 80% confluency (at 4-5 pass), counted
(105/ml), and incubated with RES (50uM), RES (50uM) + Deta-NONOate
(750uM), Deta-NONOate (750uM), RES (50uM) +L-NMMA (750uM), and L-NMMA
(750uM). Deta-NONOate was used as nitric oxide donor while L-NMMA was
used as nitric oxide inhibitor. Thereafter, cell viability, NO-estimation
in culture supernatant, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), total
ROS-production in mitochondria and cytoplasm, and apoptotic assay
(Annexin-V and caspase-3/7) were carried out.Results and Conclusion: PCa
cells incubated with RES showed decreased cell viability, decreased NO
production in culture supernatant, decreased MMP, and decreased level of
ROS in mitochondria. However, PS-externalization, and total ROS in
cytoplasm were found high after normalization with control cells.
Further, treatment with Deta-NONOate results in decreased cell viability,
decreased total ROS in the cytoplasm, and decreased MMP, while
mitochondrial ROS and NO production in culture supernatant were observed
highly significant as compared control cells. Furthermore, cells were
also exposed to the combination of RES and NO which suggest that RES
reduced NO-mediated cell killing and reactive oxygen species generation
in TRAMP cells. However, no significant changes were observed after
L-NMMA exposure to TRAMP cells. The result demonstrates that RES protect
cells from NO-mediated cell killing and induced NO-independent apoptosis
in PCa cells. This suggests that role of RES as a potential therapeutic
agent to control cancer. However, further investigation is needed to
explore potential mechanism of action of RES in controlling cancer
proliferation.

