Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Management of chemotherapy induced alopecia using a topical
botanical lotion via a proposed triple-action on apoptosis, inflammation
and collagen


Background: Chemotherapy induced alopecia (CIA) is the most visible and
emotionally distressing side effect of cancer therapies. No approved
pharmacologic treatment is yet available for CIA. Hair follicular cells
are damaged by chemoagents and prematurely undergo unwanted apoptosis,
consequently resulting in massive hair loss. Such apoptosis-driven chemo
toxicities generally cause dystrophic anagen and dystrophic catagen.
Dystrophic anagen hair follicles recover much more slowly than dystrophic
catagen hair. As anagen hair proportion represents >80%, hair recovery
following chemotherapy may become a long term issue. Besides, shortened
anagen will impede collagen production causing unhealthy scalp and hair.
A previous study demonstrated that p53 knock-out mice did not undergo
CIA, indicating the importance to modulate apoptosis pathways in CIA
management. Secondary necrosis stimulates production of pro-inflammatory
mediators, triggering or sustaining inflammatory conditions in the scalp.
Unwanted apoptosis of more hair follicular cells will occur due to
exacerbated inflammation. This vicious circle further contributes to
excessive follicular cell death, consequently resulting in hair loss and
delay of hair regrowth. Therefore, normalizing apoptosis process,
dampening scalp inflammation, as well as improving scalp health by
increasing collagen content and remodeling are essential to counteract
the negative impact on hair by chemotherapies.Objective: To test a novel
topical botanical lotion for CIA managementMethods: Bcl-2 level in scalp
biopsy of androgenetic alopecia (AGA) subjects was analyzed via
immunohistochemistry before, after 3 months application of the topical
botanical lotion (n = 20), and compared with Bcl-2 level in healthy
volunteers (n = 25). Expressions of E-selectin, ICAM-1 and il-8 were
measured using HUVEC, +/- Product & TNF a. Type I collagen was analyzed
using scalp biopsies from 11 AGA subjects before and after 4 months
product application. Product's efficacy and tolerance were assessed on
female cancer patients suffering from CIA (n = 30), Pictures were taken
for comparison.Results: Product restored Bcl-2 from 1.7 to 3.2, near
normal level (4.73). Collagen content was increased by 79.93% after 4
months product application. Biopsy analysis revealed collagen remodeling.
Product inhibited TNF-induced expressions of E-selectin, ICAM-1 & il-8.
For patients undergoing chemotherapy, the product allowed faster hair
recovery in CIA patients (5-16 weeks quicker than historical control).
For long-term CIA patients, first improvement was observed in 33%, 52%
and 76% of subjects after 1, 2 and 3 months, respectively. No side effect
was reported.Conclusion: We developed a novel topical product for CIA
through local actions on apoptosis, inflammation and collagen.

