Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient thermoregulation of heat-induced enzyme-prodrug therapy
using recombinant E. coli containing a modified pR promoter


Introduction: The pR-cI857 transcriptional promoter cassette drives
heat-induced protein expression in recombinant E. coli by inhibiting
transcription below 37 C (1). We have earlier reported on the development
of magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia (MNP) induced enzyme-prodrug
therapy based on recombinant E. coli cells. The E. coli are designed to
express cytosine deaminase (CD) under the transcriptional control of the
pR-cI857 promoter (2). CD converts non-toxic 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to
the toxic 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). E. coli cells were co-encapsulated with
MNP in immunoisolative alginate microcapsules and heated to 43 C using an
external alternating magnetic field (AMF). Using in vitro MTT assays, we
demonstrated that the cytotoxicity of the heat activated E. coli in the
presence of 5-FC, against 9L, MCF-7 and PC-3 tumor cells, was comparable
to direct 5-FU treatment (2). However, we observed significant
cytotoxicity at 37 C resulting from basal CD expression. We now report on
an improved strain of E. coli cells using a modified pR promoter to
minimize CD expression at 37 C.Methods: A single base mutation was
introduced in the pR promoter during PCR amplification (1) from the
pLDR20 vector. The modified promoter was ligated to the linearized
pNEB206A vector and transformed into NEB- cells using the USER cloning
protocol (www.neb.com). NM522 cells containing the modified pR-cI857
cassette and the CD gene were constructed and characterized following
procedures established in our laboratory (2). The E. coli were then
encapsulated in alginate microcapsules and heated at 43 C to trigger CD
expression. Cytotoxicity against CT26 colon cancer cells was evaluated
using a MTT assay following the incubation of the cancer cells with the
heated microcapsules and 5-FC (0.1 mM, 72 h, 37 C).Results summary: We
observed thermoselective CD expression and catalytic activity in E. coli
heated at 43 C. MTT cell viability assay shows that the cytotoxicity of
the encapsulated, heat-activated E. coli cells against CT26 colon cancer
cells was comparable to direct treatment with 5-FU. Importantly, the
basal cytotoxicity at 37 C was significantly lower than the E. coli cells
activated at 43 C. We are extending our work to express CD
periplasmically in endotoxin free hosts for improved catalytic efficiency
and to eliminate cytotoxicity arising from bacterial lipopolysaccharides.
We expect that the improved E. coli cells should facilitate de novo
synthesis of 5-FU, on-demand and locally in the tumor, thereby reducing
systemic toxicity and increasing therapeutic gain.Acknowledgement: This
work is supported by a pilot grant from the Hitchcock
Foundation.References:(1) Jechlinger et al, FEMS Microbiol Lett.
1999;173(2):347-52(2) Nemani et al, J Biotechnol. 2015, 203:32-40.

