Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDSC depletion delays primary tumor growth in syngeneic models of
oral cavity cancer


Carcinogen-associated oral cavity cancers are a heterogeneous group of
aggressive cancers with a high recurrence rate after definitive treatment
and a poor 5-year survival. The genetic alteration rate of these cancers
tends to be high, and many oral cancers express immune checkpoint
molecules in the tumor microenvironment with potential to respond to
checkpoint blocking immunotherapy. Local immunosuppression mediated by
both the tumor cells and other infiltrating immune cells are likely a
major mechanism of resistance to immunotherapy. Here, we investigated the
role of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in a highly aggressive
but poorly immunogenic syngeneic model of carcinogen-induced oral cavity
cancer (MOC2). Performing a time course analysis of immune infiltrates,
MOC2 tumors demonstrated robust recruitment of CXCR2+CSFR1+CCR2 MDSCs
that peaked at 15 days following tumor transplantation. This intratumoral
accumulation of MDSCs preceded draining lymph node and splenic MDSC
accumulation by 6 and 9 days respectively. The accumulation of MDSCs
corresponded to a sharp decrease in the presence of tumor infiltrating
CD8+ T-lymphocytes (TIL), CD4+ TIL, FoxP3+CD4+ Tregs and CD3NK1.1+ NK
cells. As CD8+ TIL numbers decreased, cell surface expression of the
lymphocyte activation markers CD69, CD44 and ICOS decreased with the
checkpoint molecule CTLA-4 increased. Phenotypically, the great majority
of tumor-infiltrating MDSCs were granulocytic MDSCs (Ly6GhiLy6Cint),
while few were monocytic MDSCs (Ly6GloLy6Chi). In a CFSE-based functional
T-lymphocyte suppression assay, sorted peripheral and tumor-infiltrating
MDSCs strongly suppressed T-lymphocyte proliferation at MDSC:T-lymphocyte
ratios as low as 1:32. Hypothesizing that decreased tumor MDSCs would
impact primary tumor growth, MOC2 tumors were allowed to engraft to
100mm3 and depletion of granulocytic MDSCs was performed with a rat
anti-mouse Ly6G depleting antibody (clone RB6-8C5). This depletion
resulted in a statistically significant delay in MOC2 primary tumor
growth. Flow cytometric analysis of tumor tissues revealed that MDSC
depletion was transient with rapid rebound of MDSC tumor infiltration
within days of depleting antibody administration. This data highlights
the critical role that MDSCs play in local immunosuppression and suggest
that the syngeneic MOC model represents a powerful tool to study MDSC
pathobiology. Functional inhibition or elimination of MDSCs from the
tumor microenvironment represents an exciting adjuvant therapy that may
enhance the response to checkpoint inhibition in patients with oral
cavity cancer.

