Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIAH2 E3 ligase targets LIM-domain proteins for degradation to
modulate focal adhesion and cell motility


Introduction: The RAS signaling pathway is an important growth-promoting
pathway that controls cell proliferation and survival in multicellular
organisms. During oncogenesis, activation of EGFR/HER2/K-RAS signaling
pathway reduces focal adhesion, increases cell motility, promote
tumorigenesis and accelerate tumor invasion and metastasis. SIAH2, which
is the human homologue of a highly conserved family of RING-domain E3
ubiquitin ligase, is a key downstream signaling component which is
essential for RAS signal transduction. We noticed that SIAH2 can regulate
cell migration, tumorigenesis and metastasis by unknown
mechanisms.Methods: Using HIV-based lentiviral system, we introduced an
anti-SIAH molecule, the proteolysis-deficient mutant form of SIAH2
(SIAH2PD), into multiple types of human cancer cell lines. The changes of
cell morphology, focal adhesion and adherens junction were examined by
immunofluorescence (IF) staining. Images were captured on day 3 post
infection experiments to show the changes in cell focal
adhesion/junction. Using lentiviral system, we introduced exogenous
LIM-domain proteins into human cancer cell lines which already expressed
SIAH2PD, and then check the cell focal adhesion rescue by
immunofluorescence staining.Results: We identified and validated three
proteins that interact with SIAH2, contain LIM domains, and regulate
focal adhesion and cell attachment. Through in vitro and in vivo
experiments, we show that SIAH2 binds, ubiquitinates and degrades thyroid
receptor-interacting protein 6 (TRIP6), Four-and-a-half LIM domain
protein 2 (FHL2) and Leupaxin (LPXN), indicating that these
evolutionarily conserved LIM-domain proteins are bona fide SIAH2
substrates and their double zinc finger motif might serve as a degron
signal for SIAH2 E3 ligase. Our staining results showed that
SIAH-deficiency would disrupt Trip6/FHL2/LPXN localization at the focal
adhesion site, and inhibit cell motility. By introducing exogenous
Trip6/FHL2/LPXN proteins into cancer cells, the focal adhesion deficiency
and cell death caused by SIAHPD can be rescued, and the ability of cell
migration and tumor initiation can be restored.Conclusions: We show that
in cancer cells, SIAH2 antagonizes TRIP6, FHL2 and LPXN in modulating
focal adhesions and cell motility. This interaction could be important in
cell dissemination, invasion and metastasis. The suppression of cell
motility and tumorigenesis in response to SIAH-deficiency could provide a
new molecular mechanism to reveal the importance of RAS/SIAH signaling
pathway in cancer cells. By circumventing this essential cell growth
signaling pathway in cancer, we hope to develop novel anti-SIAH-based
therapeutic drugs, which may help to inhibit cancer cell dissemination,
invasion and metastasis.

