Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene-expression characterization of bioluminescent PDX in
orthotopic and ectopic models of pancreatic cancer and metastatic
triple-negative breast cancer


Background: Patient derived xenografts (PDX) are regarded as the
gold-standard for translational preclinical cancer research due to their
preservation of tumor heterogeneity and propagation in vivo. Similarly,
grafting human tumor cells of a particular tissue origin into the
corresponding orthotopic context enhances translational accuracy; with
recapitulation of tumor::microenvironment biology, as well as more
accurate tumor progression kinetics and metastasis, a s well as for
systemic delivery of therapies as compared to traditional subcutaneous
xenografts. Bioluminescent luciferase-reporters into traditional cancer
cell lines has allowed for in-life imaging of tumor growth kinetics in
real-time, within obfuscated internal organs, improving experimental
precision. We have reported on the development and validation of
bioluminescent pancreatic cancer and breast cancer PDX in clinically
recapitulative orthotopic models. Here, we characterize these
bioluminescent PDX by gene-expression profiling; comparing orthotopic and
ectopically propagated bioluminescent PDX to their non-transduced
parental PDX counterparts.Methods: Pancreatic (PANx-005-Luc) or
metastatic breast (HBCx-14-Luc) PDXs stably transduced with lentiviral
luciferase were dissociated and implanted orthotopically into pancreas or
mammary fat pad respectively or subcutaneously into the flank of NOD scid
gamma (NSG) mice. Likewise, the parental reporter-free PANx-005 or
HBCx-14 PDX were implanted subcutaneously into NSG mice. For
luciferase-expressing PDX implanted orthotopically, tumor growth was
monitored in-life (Xenogen IVIS Lumina Series III instrument (IVIS)). For
the PANx-005-Luc, orthotopic tumors were harvested at a mean tumor
radiance (TR) of 2.53 106 + 1.63 106 ph/s, while ectopic
luciferase-transduced and parental tumors were harvested at a mean tumor
volume of 530 + 337mm3. For the HBCx-14-Luc, orthotopic tumors were
harvested individually when TR reached 6.5 109 ph/s while ectopic
luciferase-transduced or parental tumors were harvested when tumor
volumes reached 1500 + 362.5mm3. Tumor samples were fixed in 10% neutral
buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin-blocks for histological
analysis. RNA was extracted from all tumors and full-coverage human
genome gene-expression profiling was performed. Major differences
observed in microarray data was validated via quantitative biochemical
assays.Results: Stable expression of lentiviral luciferase did not result
in significant gene-expression changes to PDX lines, while site of
implantation altered some gene-expression characteristics of the
PDX.Conclusions: The introduction of an integrating stable bioluminescent
reporter does not significantly alter the gene-expression characteristics
of PANx-005 or HBCx-14 PDX. Site of implantation plays a role in
gene-expression of PDX tumor models.

