Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSCLC cells internalize ATP in vitro and in vivo using multiple
endocytotic pathways


Upregulated glycolysis in cancer, the Warburg effect, has been studied
for almost one century. However, the biological reasons for the
upregulation are still debated and the effect is far from fully
understood. One of the major controversies related to the effect is the
role of ATP synthesis. Intratumoral ATP concentrations are found to be
103-104 times higher than those in normal tissues of the same cell
origin. However, whether and how cancer cells use the abundant
extracellular ATP was unknown until we recently reported that cancer
cells internalize ATP by macropinocytosis (1). Extracellular ATP was
found to increase intracellular ATP concentration and promote cell
proliferation and drug resistance in cancer cells (1). Here we report
that, using a nonhydrolyzable fluorescent ATP (NHF-ATP) as an ATP
surrogate, high and low molecular weight dextrans as endocytosis tracers
and fluorescence microscopy detection, cultured human NSCLC A549 and
H1299 cells as well as xenografted A549 tumors were found to internalize
ATP at concentrations within the reported intratumoral ATP
concentrations. Endocytosis inhibitor studies show that in addition to
macropinocytosis, clathrin- and caveolae-mediated endocytoses contribute
to the ATP internalization, which led to a 30% increase in intracellular
ATP level after 45 min of ATP incubation. This increase cannot be
accounted for by purinergic receptor signaling or increased intracellular
ATP synthesis rates. Internalization of NHF-ATP and dextran exhibits
time-dependent profiles parallel to the extracellular ATP-induced
intracellular ATP level elevation. All these demonstrate the observed ATP
increase is a result of internalization of extracellular ATP and NHF-ATP
is a powerful tool for studying ATP internalization. These findings
significantly deepen our understanding of the Warburg effect by showing
how cancer cells in tumors take up intratumoral ATP and perform
previously unrecognized biological functions. It strongly suggests
ATP-sharing among cancer and stromal cells and identifies multiple novel
anticancer targets (2).1. Qian Y, Wang X, et al., Cancer Lett. 351(2014):
242-5.2. Chen X, Qian Y, Wu S. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 79(2015): 253-263.

