Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined treatment with PD-L1 blockade and a TLR7/8 agonist
dramatically enhances antitumor immunity


[Aim] Toll like receptor (TLRs) are expressed in many types of immune
cells and function as a key sensor of microbial products. Ligand binding
to TLRs leads to activation of signaling pathways in innate immune cells,
particularly dendritic cells and subsequent induction of adaptive immune
responses. TLR7/8 agonists have been shown to enhance antiviral and
antitumor immune responses via multiple cytokine production such as IFN-,
IL-1, IL-6 and TNF. Resiquimod (R-848) is a synthetic
imidazoquinoline-like molecule that binds to TLR7 and TLR8. Presently,
resiquimod has been used as a topical drug for skin cancer and viral
infection, because of severe side effects of systemic administration.
Thus far, the clinical results of anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 therapy have
showed great benefits by inducing tumor regression and improving
survival. However, the patients obtained the benefits of this treatment
are around one third. An additional approach is required to enhance the
efficacy of PD-1 blockade therapy. In this study, we examined the effects
of combined treatment with anti-PD-L1 antibody and a low dose of
resiquimod administration in two murine tumor models (a squamous cell
carcinoma cell line, SCCVII and a colon carcinoma cell line, Colon26).
[Methods] Anti-PD-L1 mAb (MIH5, 200 g/mouse) and/or resiquimod (1.73
g/mouse) were intraperitonealy administrated at three times a week and
tumor growth was evaluated. [Results and Discussion] In a Colon26 model,
either anti-PD-L1 (MIH5) mAb or resiquimod treatment alone slightly
decreased tumor growth, but the combined treatment dramatically reduced
the tumor growth and completely eradicated the tumor in some of mice. In
a SCCVII model, monotherapy with resiquimod markedly reduced the tumor
growth and completely eradicated the tumor in some of mice. The combined
treatment further enhanced the efficacy. The delayed combined treatment
at day 7 also showed the reduction of tumor size. Functional analyses at
3-4 wks after the tumor inoculation revealed that monotherapy with
resiquimod in the SCCVII model and the combined treatment in both models
significantly enhanced the percentages of IFN-+-expressing CD8+ T cells,
but did not clearly affect the percentages of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells.
Our results suggest that TLR7/8 agonist administration alone markedly
enhanced antitumor responses in a selected tumor model and the combined
treatment with PD-L1 blockade and a TLR7/8 agonist further amplify their
effects.

