Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the impact of somatic alterations across human cancers


Large-scale cancer genomics projects like The Cancer Genome Atlas have
generated a comprehensive catalog of somatic mutations and copy number
aberrations across many tumor types, but the role of most frequently
altered genes remains obscure. To better model the impact of these
alterations, we developed a novel computational strategy for exploiting
parallel phosphoproteomics and mRNA sequencing data for large tumor sets
by linking dysregulation of upstream signaling pathways with altered
transcriptional response through the transcriptional circuitry. Our
modeling allows us to interpret the impact of somatic alterations in
terms of functional outcomes such as altered signaling and transcription
factor (TF) activity.We used this novel machine learning strategy to
train phosphoprotein-TF interaction models across 12 human cancers for
which large reverse-phase protein array and RNA-seq data sets are
available through TCGA. First, we used this approach to identify shared
and cancer-specific roles of TF/signaling regulators across cancer types.
Then we performed a statistical analysis to associate frequent somatic
aberrations with alterations in inferred TF and signaling protein
activities. From our analysis, we gained many novel insights into cancer
biology. We identified both known (e.g FOXO1 for breast cancer) and novel
TF regulators of cancer (e.g. ELK1 for head and neck cancer). Many of
these identified TF regulators were significantly associated with
survival outcome in bladder urothelial, renal cell clear and endometrial
carcinoma.Next we performed a comprehensive cross-cancer analysis and
identified relationships between somatic alterations and downstream
transcriptional effects and signaling pathway activation. We observed
that specific molecular aberrations have different functional
consequences in different cancer types. For example, PIK3CA mutations are
associated with altered activities of a diverse set of TFs across cancers
that are involved in cell cycle, apoptosis, metabolism and MAPK/ERK
signaling. Notably, in cell line models, we validated some of the altered
TFs predicted by our model. We showed that PIK3CA mutation leads to ELK1
activation in breast and head and neck cancer models. We further found
that different set of TFs are associated with a specific mutation in
different cancers due to the different background of genomic aberrations
in each cancer. For example, KRAS mutations are associated with a
distinct set of TFs depending of cancer-specific co-mutation profiles
(e.g. co-mutations of KRAS and TP53 in lung adenocarcinoma and
co-mutations of KRAS and APC in colorectal cancer).Our analysis revealed
both known and novel interactions of frequently altered genes with
signaling pathways and transcriptional programs in a pan-cancer context.
Patterns of co-alterations across cancers may provide new insights
relevant to targeted therapy and may be crucial to optimizing combination
therapies.

