Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of IL-17-secreting immune cells in pancreatic cancer
stemness


Little is known about how the immune system influences pancreatic cancer
stemness. Using a murine model of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(PanIN), we have previously reported that KrasG12D induces expression of
IL-17 receptors (IL-17RA) on emerging PanINs, as well as pancreatic
infiltration by IL-17-producing CD4+ and gamma-delta-T cells. Forced
IL-17 over-expression dramatically accelerates PanIN initiation and
progression, while inhibition of IL-17 signaling using either genetic or
pharmacologic techniques effectively prevents PanIN formation. When IL-17
signaling was blocked using monoclonal antibodies on transgenic mice
harboring PanINs, transcriptional analysis of Kras-mutated epithelial
cells revealed significant down-regulation of multiple stemness-related
genes: doublecortin-like kinase 1 (Dclk1) [2], Trefoil factor 1
(Tff1)[3], Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) [4], and others. Dclk1 has been recently
described as a marker of tumor initiating cells and its functional role
in cancer initiation and development is currently being studied. We found
that adenovirus mediated-IL-17 overexpression in the murine pancreas
harvesting Kras mutation results in PanINs with significantly higher
number of Dclk1+ cells that PanINs generated in the presence of a
luciferase control virus. Reversely, the genetic ablation of IL-17 in the
hematopoietic compartment of the same type of mice resulted in PanINs
with significantly lower number of Dclk1+ cells when compared with PanINs
from mice transplanted with wild type (WT) bone marrow. We have found
that in vitro stimulation of KPC cells (obtained from KrasG12D/+; LSL-
Trp53R172H/+; Pdx1Cre mice) with IL-17A results in direct induction of
Dclk1, Aldh1 and SHH protein expression in a time-dependent and
dose-dependent fashion, validating the results of our gene microarray in
a different system and at the protein level. Furthermore, we have found
that one of the mechanisms by which IL-17 induces Dclk-1 and ALDH1a1 is
through activation of NF-KB canonical pathway. We found that IL-17 had no
effect in KPC cells proliferation in 2D culture. However, stimulation of
matrigel embedded- KPC cells with IL-17A resulted in significant increase
in tumorspheres formation in vitro. But even more important, KPC cells in
vitro incubated with IL-17A for 7 days have accelerated capacity for in
vivo- tumor initiation when injected subcutaneously into syngeneic
immune-competent mice, confirming the functional in vivo role that
IL-17-immune secreting cells have in inducing pancreatic cancer stemness.
Better understanding of the regulation that IL-17-secreting immune cells
can impose on pancreatic cancer- tumor initiating cells would be of high
importance given the potential translational value of blocking IL-17
signaling for pancreatic cancer prevention and treatment with the
currently available IL-17 neutralizing monoclonal antibodies.

