Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of human cytomegalovirus microRNA in
triple-negative breast cancer tumors


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of the breast
cancer cases.These tumors are heterogeneous and aggressive, fail to
respond to targeted therapy, have poor prognosis, and a high risk of
relapse. The molecular basis of this breast cancer subtype is currently
unknown. Viruses, such as human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV), and human papillomavirus (HPV), are major suspects in the
etiology of breast cancer. Since miRNAs have been implicated in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer, including triple-negative breast cancer,
we hypothesized that viral miRNAs may play a role in this aggressive
disease. The objective of this project, therefore, was to determine the
identity, prevalence, sequence variation, and differential expression of
viral miRNAs in TNBC tumors as compared to control samples. We conducted
a comprehensive profiling of viral miRNAs in 48 TNBC tumors as compared
to 15 control normal breast tissues, utilizing deep sequencing analysis
software and publically available deep sequencing data. Five novel
putative HCMV miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed in TNBC
tumors as compared to controls. Two of the putative miRNAs were
differentially expressed in 60-79% of the TNBC tumors as compared to 0%
of normal controls. Two additional putative miRNAs were expressed in
67-88% of TNBC tumors as compared to 25-31% of normal controls. One
putative miRNA was expressed in 67% of TNBC tumors as compared to 88% of
normal samples, while 1 putative miRNA in addition to HCMV-US25-1-3p
displayed no significant differences. These putative HCMV miRNAs localize
within genomic regions of HCMV that encode UL56 DNA packaging terminase
subunit 2, single-stranded DNA-binding protein, noncoding RNA4.9, and
enveloped glycoprotein M. Ongoing work has so far computationally
validated one of these miRNAs as a novel HCMV miRNA. This is the first
report on the differential expression of HCMV miRNAs in TNBC tumors.
Since TNBC tumors are extremely heterogeneous, it is intriguing that
60-80% of TNBC tumors specifically express the same HCMV miRNA. Our
findings suggest that these differentially expressed HCMV miRNAs may
potentially play a role in the pathogenesis of TNBC.

