Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cigarette smoke and bile acids induce metabolic reprogramming
mediated by uncoupling protein-2 (UCP2) during esophageal carcinogenesis


Background: In cancer cells, glucose is processed not through
mitochondrial respiration, but mainly through glycolysis to form lactate
and minimal ATP (Warburg effect). Glutamine is an essential amino acid in
cancer cells and the primary fuel for the mitochondria. Uncoupling
protein 2 (UCP2) decreases mitochondrial proton membrane potential and
reduces reactive oxygen species (ROS). Limited information is available
regarding mechanisms that link environmental risk factors such as
gastro-esophageal reflux and cigarette smoking to metabolomic alterations
in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). The present study was undertaken to
examine the effects of cigarette smoke and bile acids on UCP2 expression,
metabolic activity, and malignant phenotype of EAC cells.Methods: Ten EAC
lines were screened for UCP2 expression using qRT-PCR and immunoblot
techniques. Two EAC lines, Flo-1 and NCI-SB-ESC2 (Esc2), had low and high
UCP2 expression, respectively. Flo-1 and Esc2 cells were exposed to
normal media with or without cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) and/or the
bile acid, deoxycholic acid (DCA) for 5 days. Cell growth, migration,
invasion, and clonogenicity were examined using CellTiter 96 Aqueous Kit,
scratch, and soft agar clonogenicity assays. Mitochondrial respiration
and glycolytic capacity were analyzed using the Seahorse Extracellular
Flux Analyzer, and ATP and Lactate Production Kits. Levels of ROS were
quantitated using Cellular Reactive Oxygen Species Detection Kit.Results:
Flo-1 cells had low UCP2 protein expression and large spare mitochondrial
respiratory capacity, whereas Esc2 cells exhibited high UCP2 protein
expression and no spare mitochondrial respiratory capacity. CSC and DCA
mediated synergistic increases in lactate levels with decreases in ATP
production (Warburg effect) without altering levels of UCP2 or ROS in
Flo-1 cells. In contrast, similar treatment did not alter lactate or ATP
production, but did synergistically deplete UCP2 and increase ROS levels
in Esc2 cells. Whereas CSC and DCA exposure did not alter proliferation,
migration, or invasion of Flo-1 cells, these treatments enhanced
proliferation, migration, and invasion of Esc2 cells.Conclusions:
Following exposure to CSC and DCA, EAC cells can shift toward glycolysis
when spare mitochondrial respiration is present. In contrast, EAC cells
with maximal utilization of glycolysis have no ability to increase
glycolysis with CSC or DCA exposure. However, in these cells, CSC and DCA
down-regulates UCP2 and increases ROS; these metabolic effects coincide
with increased malignant phenotype of EAC cells. These differences
suggest that low levels of UCP2 may function as a metabolic sensor
whereas high levels may serve as a cellular redox trigger effecting ROS.
These preliminary insights into mitochondrial function may help guide the
development of novel therapeutic strategies for EAC.

