Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of specificity protein 1 and survivin expression in
medulloblastoma: Identifying effective therapeutic targets


Medulloblastoma (MB) is an aggressive malignant brain tumor diagnosed
mostly in children. MB is typically treated using a multimodal approach
consisting of surgery, craniospinal irradiation, and chemotherapy. These
treatments cause delayed consequences in pediatric patients. In order to
treat this malignancy effectively, it is important to identify critical
markers associated with the disease and finding specific agents to target
such markers. The transcription factor, Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and
an inhibitor of apoptosis protein, survivin are over expressed in many
cancers and associated with poor prognosis. Sp1 mediates the expression
of several oncogenes including survivin. Even though some evidence exists
for the expression of survivin, the information on Sp1 is still limited
in MB. The primary objective of this study was to determine the
association of Sp1 and survivin in MB and developing the strategies to
target these candidates using less toxic compounds. A human MB tumor
tissue array consisting of 20 tumor and 3 normal controls was stained for
Sp1 and survivin using specific antibodies. Tumor specimens showed
distinct expression for both Sp1 and survivin in majority of tumor
tissues. Using small interference RNA (siRNA) technology, the expression
of Sp1 and survivin was inhibited in MB cell line, DAOY, and the cell
viability was determined at 24 and 48 h using CellTiter-Glo kit. We
observed that the inhibition of Sp1 and survivin by siRNA correlated with
a decrease in DAOY cell viability. Previously, our laboratory showed that
a small molecule, Tolfenamic Acid (TA) inhibits cell proliferation and
tumor growth in mice via targeting Sp1 and anti-apoptotic protein,
survivin. Taken together these results highlight the significance of
targeting Sp1 and survivin for inhibiting MB cell proliferation and tumor
growth in mouse model. Survivin has also been demonstrated to play a role
in chemoresistance. We therefore, tested the combination treatment(s)
involving TA and standard chemotherapeutic agents, Vincristine (Vinc) and
Cisplatin (Cis) using MB cell lines, DAOY and D283. Cells were treated
with TA, Vinc, Cis and combination of TA+Vinc and TA+Cis and the effect
on cell viability and apoptosis was determined. Each drug alone caused a
time and dose dependent decrease in cell viability that was enhanced in
the presence of TA. The combination treatment also resulted in a 2-3 fold
increase in apoptosis as determined by annexin V and propidium iodide
staining. It is plausible that targeting Sp1 and/or survivin induces the
susceptibility of MB cells to chemotherapeutic drugs. These preliminary
results demonstrate the efficacy of combining inhibitors of Sp1 and
survivin with chemotherapeutic agents to enhance their therapeutic
response while limiting the toxicity and side-effects.

