Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring intermittent dosing schedules for the Pan PI3K/mTor
inhibitor PQR309


IntroductionPQR309 is a novel oral balanced dual pan-PI3K and mTOR
inhibitor currently in clinical development for the treatment of solid
tumors and hematological malignancies. Eighty mg PQR309 given once daily
(q.d.) has been established as the MTD in patients with advanced solid
cancers. This dose and regimen was associated with plasma concentrations
that were pharmacologically active in pre-clinical experiments. However,
there is emerging evidence that continuous inhibition of PI3K/mTOR may
not be needed to achieve the full effect of PQR309 on tumor growth
inhibition and therefore further intermittent dosing regimens will be
explored.MethodsIn vivo xenograft studies in nude male rats bearing
PC3-derived tumors were conducted with continuous and intermittent dosing
schedules to estimate effective plasma concentrations. Pharmacokinetic
(PK) data from cancer patients were used to establish a 2-compartment PK
model with first order absorption. The model was applied to simulate PK
profiles after various intermittent dosing schedules including 2 daily
administrations followed by a 5 day wash-out period in a 7 day cycle (2
days ON/5 days OFF) and a regimen with administrations on days 1 and 4 in
a 7 day cycle (eg MON/THUR).ResultsA maximum plasma concentration (Cmax)
of 800-1200ng/mL PQR309 and an impulse interval of 72 hours or less was
associated with maximum effect in the rat xenograft model. In rats PQR309
is rapidly eliminated from plasma but in humans the compound has an
elimination half-life of about 40 hours and accumulates upon multiple
dosing. The applied model predicts that PQR309 administration given 2
days ON/5 days OFF will build up drug exposure to reach levels that
strongly inhibit the targeted signalling pathways. During the 5 day
wash-out period, PQR309 levels will decrease significantly, thereby
reducing the probability of adverse events. For the alternative dosing
regimen MON/THUR, the model predicts a sharp Cmax lasting for a few hours
followed by a decrease in drug levels over the following 3 or 4 days,
thus minimizing accumulation and drug exposure that could lead to adverse
events.ConclusionsBoth intermittent regimens are expected to strongly
inhibit the targeted signalling pathways with high transient
concentrations around Cmax followed by wash-out periods for healthy
tissue recovery to optimize the benefit/risk of the compound. These
regimens are currently being explored in clinical studies.

