Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining whole-exome and RNA-Seq data improves the quality of PDX
mutation profiles


Patient-derived xenograft tumor models (PDX) are of increasing interest
for anti-cancer agent testing due to their close resemblance to patient
tumors. An accurate molecular characterization of the models is essential
1) to select the PDX that best fit the genetic requirements for a
successful cancer therapy investigation and 2) to identify potential
predictive biomarkers of response. In this study, we evaluated the
quality of mutation profiles from whole-exome sequencing (WES) in terms
of concordance with previously acquired mutation data in a large
collection of PDX. Further, we analyzed the persistence of disclosed
mutations at the transcript level with RNA-Seq.From 339 PDX, DNA was
extracted and enriched in exonic regions with Agilent SureSelect kits
before Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencing with a minimum expected
average-of-coverage of 100X. Raw paired-end reads were analyzed by a
PDX-specific bioinformatics pipeline to identify the human mutation
profile. Sequenom Oncocarta and Sanger sequencing data acquired for 29
cancer genes in 272 PDX was used to evaluate the WES mutation profiles.
In parallel, 92 PDX were profiled with RNA-Seq (100M sequencing reads
required) and we investigated the expressed mutation profiles by
comparing with mutations from WES data.Among 502 point mutations found
with classical methods, 95% were retrieved by WES analyses, revealing the
very high sensitivity of the PDX-specific bioinformatics pipeline. 5% of
mutations were missed because of a low coverage, particularly in the
STK11 gene and in the KRAS gene of pancreatic models, possibly due to
poor gene enrichment and high mouse stroma content, respectively. Deeper
sequencing could potentially overcome this lack of coverage.
Additionally, the WES analysis pipeline displays a high specificity,
reporting only 1 additional mutation at gene positions covered with the
classical methods. Finally, 507 mutations were detected by WES at
positions not interrogated by classical methods emphasizing the necessity
for next-generation sequencing (NGS) to obtain a comprehensive mutational
spectrum. The number of mutations found using RNA-Seq data was on average
two times lower and covered 15% of the mutations detected in WES. This
was mainly due to the non-expression of genes or isoforms (40%), the
mono-allelic expression of genes (30%), and low coverage data (15%).
RNA-Seq analysis restricted to expressed genes represents a substantial
complement to WES mutation data and enhances understanding of actual gene
alterations in cancer cells.This study demonstrated the high quality of
mutation profiles obtained by WES and highlights the importance of
integrating expression data to accurately predict the impact of a
mutation at the protein level. An accurate molecular characterization of
models is crucial for the selection of PDX with a specific genetic
background for the evaluation of anticancer agents.

