Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid metabolism-independent role of apolipoprotein (E) levels in
colon carcinogenesis through a regulating inflammation and active -catenin


Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) is critically important for cholesterol
metabolism and lipid homeostasis. Polymorphisms in the ApoE gene have
been implicated in the development of colon cancer and these
polymorphisms may be used as risk indicators for the disease. Accruing
evidence suggests new lipid metabolism-independent functions for ApoE
both in inflammation and cardiovascular diseases. Ironically, ApoE was
shown to up-regulate cyclooxygenase-2 in vascular smooth muscle cells and
given the critical role of the COX-2 in colon carcinogenesis, these
results suggest a pro-colon cancer function for the lipoprotein. In the
present study, we show that a mere deletion of ApoE promotes systemic
inflammation as assessed by TNF- level in sera of mice under a regular
diet. Concomitantly, TNF- mRNA levels were significantly higher in the
colon of ApoE-/- mice suggestive of localized inflammation. In contrast
to smooth muscle cells, in vitro studies with primary colon epithelial
cells (CECs) show that ApoE-deficiency substantially increased COX-2
expression in response to oxidized (ox)LDL both at the protein and mRNA
levels. OxLDL-induced expression of COX-2 in WT CECs was highly sensitive
to PP2 treatment, a Src inhibitor, and to LY294002, a pan-PI3K inhibitor.
Surprisingly, while oxLDL-induced COX-2 expression was sensitive to PI3K
inhibition, its sensitivity to Src inhibition was minimal suggesting that
ApoE deficiency may promote COX-2 expression through a Src-independent
mechanism. Similarly to COX-2, ApoE-deficiency also enhanced basal and
ox-LDL-induced expression of MCP-1, IL-1, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1. Using a
cohort of colon cancer patients and healthy controls, we show that the
overall levels of ApoE in sera of colon cancer patients were
significantly lower than those of healthy controls (p = 0.0028). We have
utilized ApcMin mice, well-characterized mouse model of intestinal tumor.
Using this genetic background, we have generated ApoE+/- and ApoE-/-
lines which were utilized in this study. We found that inhibition of ApoE
through gene heterozygosity led to 50% reduction in the level of ApoE
protein and a significant increased the number tumors in these mice
compared to their wildtype counterparts. These changes in tumor burden
were accompanied by slight changes in the lipid profiles of the ApoE+/-
mice. Surprisingly however, when examining the results of ApoE-/-, we
found that the tumor burden was not increased over that seen in the ApoE
heterozygous mice, but the lipid profiles were elevated dramatically.
This suggests that the mechanism through which ApoE affects lipid
metabolism is separate from that which is involved in the formation of
colon tumors. This aggravation of the tumor burden may be associated with
a stimulus-independent increase in the levels of the active form of
-catenin. These results suggest that ApoE deficiency may be informative
for the risk of developing colon cancer.

