Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD24 exists in the nucleus and drives cancer growth


CD24 is an oncoprotein whose high level of expression in patient tumors
yields a poor prognosis. This observation has been shown in breast,
prostate, pancreas, ovary, colorectal, and bladder cancers. In vitro,
elevated expression of CD24 has been shown to drive cancer cell
proliferation while in vivo, it promotes tumor growth and
metastasis.Cancer stem cells (CSC), in many different tissue types, are
denoted by the presence or absence of CD24 cell surface expression. Most
prominent among these tissue types is the finding that sorting breast
cancer cells for a CD24neg population yields a CSC cohort. Using bladder
cancer cells we discovered that a CD24neg sorted population exhibits a 2
fold increase in anchorage independent growth relative to parental cells
and a 5 fold increase relative to cells depleted of CD24 by RNAi
(shCD24). In vivo we determined that CD24neg cells were dramatically more
successful than shCD24 cells at establishing metastases (6/10 vs 0/10
mice). Strikingly, we found that treatment of CD24neg cells with CD24
siRNA eliminated their increased growth potential. These results strongly
suggest a significant biological role for non-surface CD24. Therefore, we
set out to determine the precise locations of CD24 within cells and
assess any possible biological relevance.Cellular fractionation
experiments revealed the existence of CD24 in the nuclear fraction in 3
different bladder lines as well as lines from breast, lung, colon and
prostate cancer cells. Furthermore, this nuclear signal was the same in
both CD24neg cells and parental cells. Using immunofluorescence we
observed CD24 signal colocalizing with DAPI signal. Again, this nuclear
signal remained relatively unchanged in CD24neg cells compared to
parental cells. We also found that blocking nuclear import (Ivermectin)
lead to a decrease in nuclear CD24 signal and blocking nuclear export
(Leptomycin B) lead to an increase in CD24 signal in the nucleus,
suggesting cells actively regulate nuclear CD24 levels. To assess the
potential functional significance of nuclear CD24 we expressed a mutant
which localizes exclusively to the nucleus (NLS-CD24). Comparing cells
expressing NLS-CD24 to those expressing either wild-type CD24 (Wt-CD24)
or a control construct with a scrambled amino acid sequence in place of
NLS (Scr-CD24) revealed that NLS-CD24 expressing cells exhibit a 2-3 fold
increase in anchorage independent growth over both Wt-CD24 and Scr-CD24.
Similarly, growth rates of subcutaneous tumors in mice expressing
NLS-CD24 were 3 times higher than those expressing Wt-CD24.Taken
together, we discovered and validated a nuclear cohort of CD24 and found
that nuclear specific expression of CD24 promotes greater growth
phenotypes both in vitro and in vivo. Thus, it is important that cancer
models and therapeutic approaches involving CD24 expression consider this
nuclear cohort.

