Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methodological considerations in the preparation of biomimetic
reference materials for ctDNA assays


Clinical utilization of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has become commonplace for
NIPS testing and has recently been more widely deployed to quantitate
cell-free circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) for use in cancer patient care
longitudinally across the treatment spectrum from subclinical, to
diagnosis and through treatment. The scarcity and unstable nature of the
cfDNA analyte in human plasma is problematic and thus the lack of robust
detection methods has limited clinical validation. In this work we sought
to avoid the inherent limitations of plasma-based patient reference
materials and developed a strategy to prepare a biomimetic reference
material which is sufficiently equivalent to the cfDNA found in patients
with malignant cancers. Thus far the scarcity and physical form of ctDNA
in human plasma has attenuated the validation of assays for clinical
utility. To this end, we have generated a biosynthetic construct with
short DNA fragments containing relevant cancer mutation sequences,
including single-nucleotide variations, insertions and deletions in BRAF,
EGFR, KRAS, NRAS, PIK3CA or HER/ERBB2. The mutant fragments were titrated
into normal human reference DNA, GM24385, and ultrasonically sheared to
160 bp. Precise allele frequency blends were verified by digital PCR
(dPCR) prior to encapsulation to enhance stability and compatibility with
commutable plasma. The reference material is formulated to 20 ng/mL of
extractable DNA in modified Seracare Matribase to confer commutability in
pre-analytic processes. These materials have been quantitated by dPCR
and/or Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). A dilution panel was prepared at
10%, 5%, 2.5%, 1.25%, 0.1% allele frequency (mutant:normal DNA).
Linearity (R2 = 0.9997) was observed by dPCR (measured vs. expected) and
the NGS detected, Swift Accel-Amplicon 56G Oncology Panel (R2 = 0.997).
Due to the low abundance of ctDNA, a characterized reference set is
critical to validate assays that are developed with extremely low limit
of detection. Data will be presented to show the breadth of this
methodology and its utility in validating NGS and dPCR assays.

