Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPDEF enforces tumor quiescence by shifting the transcriptional
targets of activated -catenin


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) carcinogenesis is driven by a series
of genetic and epigenetic changes that results in the oncogenic
transformation of normal colonic mucosa. Canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway activation, with resultant high -catenin transcriptional
activity, is frequently implicated human CRC ( 90% of CRC); however,
there are currently no treatments targeting this pathway. We have
previously reported that SAM Pointed Domain Ets transcription Factor
(SPDEF) is a colonic tumor suppressor that negatively regulates canonical
Wnt/-catenin signaling. In agreement with the tumor repressor role of
SPDEF, the absence of SPDEF enhances intestinal tumor formation, while
re-expression of SPDEF inhibits colon adenocarcinoma proliferation in
both genetic (Apcmin/+) and chemically colitis-associated (AOM/DSS) CRC
models. However, the molecular mechanism by which SPDEF mediates
colorectal tumor repression is still largely unknown. Here we aim to
elucidate the molecular mechanism by which SPDEF mediates repression of
canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling in CRCs.Material and Methods: To achieve
our goal, we directly analyzed the effects of SPDEF expression in
-catenin-driven intestinal tumors in vivo using a new inducible mouse
model (Lgr5CreERT2; -cateninexon3; Rosa26rtta-ires-EGFP; TRE-Spdef) and
human colon cancer xenografts. Moreover, wildtype or truncated SPDEF
mutants were used for -catenin transcriptional activity assay,
co-immunoprecipitation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation in human colon
cancer cell lines.Results: In this study, we find that SPDEF is
sufficient to inhibit -catenin-driven intestinal tumorigenesis and shrink
established tumors in both transgenic mice and xenografted human colon
cancer cells. SPDEF inhibits canonical -catenin transcriptional activity
through protein-protein interaction, independent of its DNA binding
capacity. We find that SPDEF disrupts the binding between -catenin and
its DNA binding partners TCF1 and TCF3, but not LEF1 and TCF4,
selectively displacing -catenin from the promoter/enhancer regions of
cell cycle genes without affecting stem cell signature genes. Consistent
with this observation, re-expression of SPDEF enforces a quiescent state
on -catenin-driven tumor cells in vivo. Taken together, for the first
time, we unveil a novel mechanism in which SPDEF shifts the
transcriptional targets of activated -catenin to regulate the active to
quiescent switch in tumor initiating cells. These findings provide
insights into the mechanisms that can regulate tumor cell quiescence, and
offer a novel approach for targeting canonical Wnt/-catenin
transcriptional machinery as a therapeutic strategy.

