Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-definition single cell analysis (HD-SCA) reveals enrichment
in androgen receptor (AR) expression in tumor cell clusters in bone
marrow and blood of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC) patients


Introduction. The analysis of tumor cells in the circulation (CTC)
provides an opportunity for non-invasive characterization of mCRPC and
monitoring of therapy response, but it is the bone where prostate cancer
cells almost consistently migrate to, expand and adapt to therapy. We
adapted the HD-CTC assay to bone marrow aspirates (BMA) to discern
features most significant to the tumorigenicity and the dynamics of
metastatic progression in this disease, and to allow for serial
comparison of tumor cells in the circulatory and bone compartments. Since
available experimental data suggests that tumor cells organized in
clusters are more important contributors to metastasis than single CTC,
we evaluated their presence and characteristics in the 2
compartments.Methods. Peripheral blood and BMA obtained through the
posterior iliac crest were synchronously collected from individual mCRPC
patients (n = 89) while progressing on therapy, and tumor cells in them
were detected and characterized using the HD-SCA high-content platform.
This flexible non-enrichment-based approach allows for quantification of
cell morphometric and protein expression parameters and provides easy
access to individual cells and cell clusters for single cell genomics and
proteomics analysis. Candidate tumor cells based on cell size and
morphology were presented and manually classified as DAPI and
cytokeratin-positive and CD45-negative. Clusters were defined as two or
more tumor cells in direct contact. AR protein expression and
sub-cellular localization were also examined for each tumor cell and
tumor cell cluster.Results. Metastatic tumor cells were detected in 24/61
(39%) available BMAs. A greater number of tumor cells were organized in
clusters, and clusters were generally larger, in BMAs than in blood (50%
vs. 33%, and 20% vs. 5% with 6 or more cells, respectively). In 14
patient-matched and synchronously collected blood and BMA specimens with
at least 1 tumor cell, we found 10 (71%) with clusters in the BMA (13-357
clusters/case, with the exception of 1 case that had 1 cluster), while
only 3 (21%) had CTC clusters (2-4 clusters/case) (p = 0.02). The 4 cases
that had no clusters in the marrow did not have any clusters in the
blood. Patients with larger cluster size did significantly worse both in
terms of progression-free (p = 0.002) and overall survival (p = 0.02). AR
expression in individual cells was significantly higher in those forming
part of cell clusters than in single cells, and was positively correlated
with cluster size, both in blood and BMAs.Conclusions. Tumor cell
clusters are frequent in the circulation and especially in the bone
marrow of mCRPC patients whose disease has progressed to therapy. In this
setting, the increasing AR expression observed in tumor cell clusters is
of probable biological relevance.

