Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ephrin B2 and Dll-4 mediated co-dependence of tumor and
endothelial progenitor cells in human hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly vascularized tumor, which
preferentially recruits new blood vessels from the hepatic artery to fuel
its growth, through mechanisms not well understood. Here, we examined the
intercellular cross-talk of HepG2 (human HCC) and endothelial progenitor
cells (EPC) in transwell co-cultures to mimic initial tumor parenchyma
and stroma interactions. We present evidence showing that, in culture,
HepG2 cells secrete factors to induce an activated EPC phenotype, namely,
an increase in survival, growth, proliferation and migration rates. EPC
cells showed a significant increase in growth (40%) and survival (80%)
when co-cultured with HepG2 cells. Simultaneously, activated EPCs
improved the viability of HepG2 cells. A major mediator of intercellular
crosstalk are the secreted microvesicles called exosomes. Exosomes
constitute a set of distinct nanovesicles (30-100 nm), endosomal in
origin, constitutively secreted by many cells. They are involved in
intercellular communication by transferring proteins and RNA from one
cell to another. Intercellular crosstalk between these HepG2 cells and
EPCs cells lead to qualitative and quantitative changes in the exosomal
cargo secreted by the respective cells. The exosomal cargo constituting
various proteins and genetic material have been demonstrated to be
involved in processes which promote remodeling of extracellular matrix
(ECM), biological adhesion and pathways modulating developmental
processes and progression of inflammation, leading to cancer growth and
development. In other work with glioma cell-derived exosomes has shown
the presence of Ephrin A and B receptors which suggests a prominent role
of secreted exosomes in stimulating and guiding tumor angiogenesis, a
hallmark characteristic of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Additionally,
our results with co-cultures of tumor and endothelial cells show that
angiogenesis signaling in EPC appears to be induced by HepG2 cells via
elevated endothelial Ephrin B2 and DLL-4 expression. Overall, our results
demonstrate the co-dependence of HCC and EPC intercellular crosstalk,
likely accomplished via secreted exosomes, in the initial stages of HCC
establishment and stimulation of angiogenesis and development, thus a
promising target for new clinical strategies.

