Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalized models to guide precision medicine


BACKGROUNDPrecision oncology is a clinical approach aimed towards
tailoring treatment strategies for patients based on the genetic profile
of each patient's cancer. Available cell line models alone often do not
accurately recapitulate the genetic profile of individual patient tumors
and therefore limit preclinical evaluation of newly targeted agents.
Furthermore, a high failure rate of drug candidates can be attributed in
part to the use of monolayer cultures as the initial screening method
that is associated with highly variable responses and does not predict
clinically observed chemoresistance. In our Englander Institute for
Precision Medicine we developed a program utilizing patient derived tumor
organoids, in combination with individualized genomic sequencing,
targeted and/or high throughput drug screenings to nominate drug
candidates in a precision patient care setting. Drug candidates are
further validated with personalized in vivo models. Utilizing these
various genomic and biological platforms for pharmacological screenings,
we can more closely recapitulate the in vivo tumor of individual patients
and can more accurately model personalized therapeutic response and
resistance in vitro and in vivo.DESIGNFresh tissue samples were
collected, washed and mechanically or enzymatically dissociated and then
plated in a Matrigel (BD) scaffold with primary culture media. Primary
spheres were characterized according to our cytology, histology and
genomic platforms. Established and characterized tumor organoids were
expanded, cryopreserved for banking, used for in vitro studies and
implanted in nude mice for patient derived xenografts (PDXs) to further
validate potential drug candidates.RESULTSOur success rate in generating
patient derived pan-cancer tumor organoids is 30%, depending on specimen
quality and tumor type (e.g. endometrial cancer 70%, metastatic prostate
cancer 15%). Morphology and molecular profiles show good concordance
among tumor organoids and native tumor tissues. The success rate in
establishing PDXs from organoid cultures is currently at 70-80%. In vitro
and in vivo drug screenings show tumor specific drug
sensitivity.CONCLUSIONWe have developed protocols for the generation and
characterization of individual patient-derived tumor organoids.
Cytopathology, histopathology and molecular pathology represent important
platforms in our Precisicon Medicine Program. Tumor organoid
characterization, pharmacological screenings and drug validation in PDX
models are effective models which can be used to tailor standard of care
treatment, study drug resistance, and nominate novel therapeutic targets
unique to the individual genomic landscape and biology of each tumor.

