Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of mTOR inhibition in triple-negative breast cancer


BACKGROUND:Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) represent the 10-17% of
all diagnosed breast cancers (BC) and are characterized by the absence of
ER/PgR expression, HER2 amplification and often show a basal-like
phenotype. TNBC are often diagnosed in patients with BRCA1 germline
mutation and unfortunately treatment options are still limited. The mTOR
(Mammalian Target Of Rapamycin) pathway seems to play an important role
in BC pathogenesis and it is possible to target this pathway by
inhibitors such as rapamycin. In human BC cross talk between ER/PgR
receptors signaling and the mTOR pathway is believed to be responsible
for resistance to hormone therapy probably due to a down regulation of
hormone receptors. Based on these evidences we have hypothesized that the
inhibitors of mTOR pathway may lead to the up-regulation of ER, PgR and
HER2 in TNBC cell lines.METHODS:For this study we used TNBC cells
(MDA-MB-231 and BT20) cultured in DMEM:F12 (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's
Medium) with 10% bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin (1%) and 50
mg/mL of streptomycin under standard conditions (37C in an atmosphere
composed of 16% O2, 79% N2 and 5% CO2).Cells were initially treated with
Rapamycin (1, 5, 10, 15 microM) for 24, 48, and 72h in order to verify if
the drug determines a blockade of cell proliferation. Before drug
administration, the cells were subjected to serum starvation by
eliminating serum from culture medium. The evaluation of cell viability
following the administration of the drug was carried out using the MTT
assay. Real time PCR analyses were carried out in order to evaluate gene
expression modifications of ER, PgR and HER2 receptors, through Taqman
probe chemistry.RESULTS:The preliminary cell viability experiments
conducted on different TNBC cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and BT20), showed no
significant cytotoxic effects by increasing Rapamycin concentrations (1,
5 and 10 microM) after 72h treatment, except for the higher concentration
(15 microM) for which a cytotoxic effect was observed.The following qPCR
approach highlighted significant variations in estrogen and progesterone
receptor gene expression for the TNBC cell lines after 24, 48, 72h with
1, 5, 10 microM Rapamycin. In particular their expression level resulted
up-regulated. Unlikely no association between mTOR inhibition and HER2
expression level were identified, suggesting no effects of mTOR
inhibition on HER2 expression.CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES:To these
preliminary results suggest that the mTOR inhibition leads to
re-expression of hormone receptors. This finding supports a potential
clinical application of mTOR inhibition in TNBC. The perspective of
phenotype change upon rapamycin treatment prompts new therapeutic
scenarios. However, further investigations are needed to explain the
biological mechanisms driving these changes.

