Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) reduces TLR-4 induced acute
inflammation and prevents chronic inflammation driven carcinogenesis


Inflammation is a critical component and contributor of carcinogenesis.
Toll like receptors (TLRs) are key regulators of innate immunity and
inflammatory signaling. Besides various microbe-associated molecular
patterns, TLRs can also bind to endogenously generated damage associated
molecular patterns (DAMPS) ligands such as heat shock proteins,
surfactant protein A18 and homobility group box-1(HMGB1). While HMGB1, a
TLR-4 ligand is over-expressed in several human neoplasms, preclinical
studies in mouse tumor models have strengthened the role of TLR-4-HMGB1
axis in promoting carcinogenesis. TLR-4 dependent inflammation and
stimulation is accompanied with a switch from respiratory to glycolysis
dominated metabolism, which is critical for the differentiation and
maturation of myeloid cells thus affecting the outcome of an inflammatory
disease. In the present studies we investigated the potential of the
glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) as an energy restriction
mimetic agent for countering the acute and chronic inflammation which can
be employed as a cancer preventive strategy. Oral administration of 2-DG
in drinking water (0.4% w/v) for 7 days reduced the diethyl nitrosamine
(DEN) induced acute inflammation reflected by reduced the serum levels of
TNF(4 fold) and IL-6(7 fold). when administered chronically, 2-DG reduced
the incidence (50%) and the number of papillomas (84%) in DMBA-TPA skin
carcinogenesis model, which correlated with the reduced levels of TNF. In
an acute inflammation model established using LPS (a TLR-4 ligand), we
observed that 2-DG reduced the systemic and macrophage specific
inflammatory response in LPS injected mice. 2-DG (1mM) significantly
reduced the levels of co-stimulatory surface markers (CD80 and CD86) and
associated ROS and NOS effecter functions in mouse macrophagic cell line
(RAW 264.7). These studies suggest that dietary administration of 2-DG
can be used as a strategy for preventing acute inflammation and
associated carcinogenesis.

