Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semaphorin/plexin signalling promotes nucleocytoplasmic
trafficking of nuclear receptors


Androgen receptor (AR) signalling is critical to prostate cancer
progression and androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is the first line of
treatment for metastatic prostate cancer. Acquired resistance to ADT
results from androgen-independent reactivation of the AR pathway
primarily. Prostate tumours also bypass androgen blockade by the
upregulation of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Both AR and GR are
nuclear receptors that bind their respective ligands in the cytoplasm and
then translocate to the nucleus where they act as transcription factors.
Plexins are cell surface receptors for semaphorins. PlexinB1 is
overexpressed and mutated in several cancers including prostate cancer
and deletion of the plexinB1 gene reduces metastasis in mouse models,
indicating an oncogenic role for plexinB1 in prostate cancer.We have
found that activation of plexinB1 by semaphorin4D (Sema4D) results in AR
phosphorylation at serine 81, activation of AR-transcriptional activity
and increased expression of androgen-responsive genes, effects reversed
by plexinB1 knockdown. PlexinB1 activation increases the translocation of
both AR-GFP constructs and endogenous AR to the nucleus in prostate
cancer cells. Furthermore knockdown of AR in the prostate cancer cell
line LNCaP reduces Sema4D-induced anchorage-independent growth of these
cells.To determine if the Sema4D/plexinB1 signalling pathway also affects
translocation of other nuclear receptors to the nucleus, we have also
studied the effect of Sema4D treatment on nuclear trafficking of the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Prostate cancer cells were transfected with
a GR-GFP construct and the subcellular localisation of GR-GFP was
monitored upon Sema4D treatment by immunocytochemistry and confocal
microscopy. The nuclear translocation of endogenous GR was also assessed
following Sema4D stimulation by immunocytochemistry and subcellular
fractionation studies.We found that activation of plexinB1 by Sema4D
results in a significant increase in the percentage of cells with nuclear
GR-GFP and in the nuclear localisation of endogenous GR in prostate
cancer cells.These findings show that plexinB1 activation has a role in
the trafficking and activation of nuclear receptors and so may have a
role in resistance to ADT in late stage prostate cancer.

