Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical prognostic factors in adult with astrocytoma: Historic
cohort


Introduction: Malignant tumors of the central nervous system contribute
extremely to cancer mortality especially in the high risk age groups. In
USA are the second and the fifth leading cause of cancer mortality in men
and women aged 20 to 39 years respectively. Astrocytomas are the most
common and lethal tumors of the CNS, being the most common grade IV
(glioblastoma) (4.37 per 100,000 population).The prognosis of
astrocytomas can be predicted by specific clinical factors allowing
neurosurgeons and neuro-oncologists to define the best treatment for each
patient. Some patients features like age, gender, performance status and
tumor localization have been studied as potential prognostic factors. In
Mexico there are few reports on demographic, clinical characteristics and
prognostic factors in adults.Objective: To explore the clinical
prognostic factors for adults affected with astrocytomaMethods: Using a
historic cohort, we selected by simple randomization, 155 clinical files
from patients with astrocytoma. The main outcome variable was overall
survival time (OS). To identify clinical prognosis factors we used:
bivariate analysis, Cox regression models, log rank test and Kaplan-Meier
survival function.Results: The mean age at diagnosis was 45.7 years.
Compared with other studies, our population was 15 years younger when
diagnosed. Analysis by stage in grade II, III and IV also showed a
younger age of presentation. The OS was 15 months, 9% (n = 14) presented
a survival of 2 years and 3% of 3 years. Kaplan-Meier survival estimate
showed that the variables grade, Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS)>70,
the type of resection, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, alcohol consumption,
familiar history of cancer and clinical presentation were significantly
associated to survival time. Using proportional Hazard Model the
variables: age, grade IV, resection, chemotherapy + radiotherapy and KPS
where prognosis factors.Conclusion: Astrocytoma in our study was present
in young adults. The OS was 15 months, 9% (n = 14) presented a survival
of 2 years and 3% of 3 years. The variables alcoholism, family history of
cancer and clinical presentation influenced significantly survival time,
and showed a tendency in the mortality analyses.

