Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Doublecortin-like kinase 1 marks cancer stem-like cells and
modulates drug-resistance, self-renewal, and tumorigenesis in renal cancer


IntroductionDoublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1), is a tumor stem
cell-specific marker, expressed in many cancers and highly correlated to
cancer initiation, EMT and progression. We recently reported DCLK1's
epigenetic dysregulation and specific overexpression in clear cell renal
carcinoma (RCC). In this study, we assessed DCLK1's value as a
therapeutic target in RCC progression.Materials and MethodsRCC cell line
Caki-2 was infected with Lentivirus to overexpress DCLK1. Moreover, DCLK1
gene expression was knocked down in ACHN and Caki-2 cell lines using
small interfering RNA. Gene and protein expression levels were measured
by real time RT-PCR and Western blotting respectively. Proliferation and
drug resistance was determined by MTT assay. Cell cycle analysis and
sorting of DCLK1+/DCLK1- cells were completed by FACS. Clonogenicity was
evaluated using colony formation assay in matrigel.ResultsOverexpression
of DCLK1 increases Caki-2 cell proliferation, but despite DCLK1's
microtubule localization, there was no evidence of altered cell cycle
status. Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), one of only a few known stem cell
markers in RCC, was highly upregulated (>5-fold) by DCLK1 overexpression
and downregulated (2-fold) by knockdown of DCLK1 in RCC cells. FACS
results also indicated the existence of small ALDH and DCLK1
double-positive populations in both Caki-2 (1.51%) and ACHN (0.54%) RCC
cells. Furthermore, there was approximately 7% more ALDH+ cells in DCLK1
overexpressing Caki-2 cells compared to control. In further support of
molecular hallmarks, we observed increased expression of HIF-1 and
Vimentin mRNA and protein as well as enhanced clonogenic capacity of ACHN
and Caki-2 RCC cell lines in matrigel at baseline and after 72 h
treatment with 0.5 M Sunitinib. Immunocytochemistry of the spheroids
suggested that DCLK1 enhances colony formation ability by triggering
expression of pluripotency factors NANOG and POU5F1/OCT4. Since DCLK1 is
known to have an extracellular domain we performed FACS sorting to
determine if we could isolate a viable DCLK1+ population from the ACHN
cell line. ACHN-DCLK1+ cells had >1.5 fold higher relative colony number
and larger sphere size in three-dimensional clonogenic assay compared to
ACHN-DCLK1- cells. Finally, we performed MTT assays demonstrating that
overexpression of DCLK1 caused Caki-2 cells to become resistant to
Sunitinib, Everolimus, and Temsirolimus compared to controls after 48 h
treatment. Converesely, knockdown of DCLK1 sensitized both ACHN and
Caki-2 cells to Sunitinib and Sorafenib after 48 hours
treatment.ConclusionDCLK1 modulates proliferation, stemness,
tumorigenesis and resistance to FDA-approved drugs, and marks a
population of stem-like cells in RCC. These findings suggest that
targeting DCLK1 may be a novel primary or adjuvant therapeutic strategy
in RCC.

