Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an automated device for size-based enrichment and
isolation of circulating tumor cells in lung cancer patients


Background and Purpose:Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are relatively rare
cells defined as tumor cells circulating in the peripheral blood of
patients with solid tumors. Diagnosis utilizing CTCs is expected to help
guide decision-making for precision cancer medicine. We developed an
automated microcavity array (MCA) system to detect CTCs based on the
differences in size and deformability between tumor cells and normal
blood cells. Here we evaluated its performance using preclinical spike-in
model and blood samples from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small
cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients.Material and method:The automated MCA
system consists of components such as chambered cartridge containing
micro metal filter, reagent and waste reservoirs, and peristaltic pump.
To evaluate the recovery of CTCs, preclinical experiments using NSCLC
cells, NCI-H820, A549, NCI-H441 and NCI-H23 spiked into peripheral whole
blood from healthy volunteers were performed. For clinical evaluation, 6
mL of peripheral whole blood was collected from 50 advanced lung cancer
patients prior to the initiation of chemotherapy and from 10 healthy
donors. Samples were collected in an EDTA-containing tube and were
processed within 3 hours of blood draw. Recovered cells on the filter
were then fixed, permeabilized, and stained automatically and
high-resolution fluorescent images were obtained using fluorescence
microscope. We defined CTC as DAPI-positive, cytokeratin-positive and
CD45-negative cell.Results:Results of the preclinical study showed that
up to 90% of spiked-in tumor cells were recovered, confirming that the
detection sensitivity by this automated device is on par with that by
previous manual detection procedure. Demographics of 50 lung cancer
patients enrolled in clinical study were as follows: median age 72
(range, 48 to 85); male 66%; stage III/IV 12/88%; NSCLC/SCLC 78/22%.
Cells defined as CTC were detected in 2 cases out of 10 healthy
volunteers, of which CTC count was 1 and 2 / 6 mL, respectively. Three or
more CTCs were detected in 71% of patients with advanced lung cancer (39
out of 50) and five or more CTCs were detected in 52% of patients (26 out
of 50) (median CTC count 13.5). Among stage IV NSCLC patients, patients
with extrathoracic metastasis tend to have more CTCs than in those with
intrathoracic metasitasis (median CTC count, 8 versus 4, p = 0.058). A
head-to-head comparison between CellSearch system and our system was
conducted in NSCLC patients, showing the superiority of our system
(median CTC count, 0 versus 11.25, p = 0.0001, n = 17).ConclusionsOur
results suggest that the automated MCA device has a clinical potential
for CTCs diagnosis towards precision medicine in lung cancer. This device
also enables higher throughput owing to its automated procedure. Further
clinical evaluation including the detection of PD-L1 expression will be
performed in an expansion cohort.

