Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MCL-1 expression, through the inhibition of CDK9 and
super enhancer driven transcription, offers multiple opportunities for
rational drug combinations


Downregulating the expression and function of MCL-1 through the
inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) has proven to be a
valuable strategy to target this important pro-survival signal in
malignant cells of numerous cancer types. This is exemplified by the
ability of alvocidib, a potent CDK9 inhibitor, to inhibit the expression
of MCL-1 at both the transcript and protein levels in multiple cell lines
from both hematological and solid tumor origins. The timing and duration
of MCL-1 knockdown varies between cell type; however, the knockdown is
consistent and in some cell lines persistent after the removal of drug.
Although alvocidib has demonstrated single agent activity in both the
clinic and in nonclinical models, strategies that exploit MCL-1-dependent
drug resistance, are allowing for the more rational use of alvocidib in
combination with standard-of-care and investigational agents. Here, we
demonstrate that treatment with alvocidib, followed by treatment with
cytarabine and mitoxantrone (regimen called FLAM), is synergistic in
nonclinical models of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The FLAM regimen
results in a significant increase in apoptosis in comparison to any of
the single agents alone. This synergy correlates with the downregulation
of MCL-1 expression by alvocidib treatment, which places the cancer cells
into a heightened state to undergo apoptosis when induced by cytarabine
and mitoxantrone treatments. Additionally, the FLAM regimen has
demonstrated robust clinical activity in both front-line and
relapsed/refractory AML patients. The knockdown of MCL-1 by alvocidib can
also be exploited when used in combination with 5-azacytidine (5-aza).
BCL-2 family members, including MCL-1 have been described as mechanisms
of resistance to 5-aza. Treatment of cells with alvocidib, to repress
MCL-1 expression prior to 5-aza treatment, reduced the 5-aza cell
viability EC50 more than 2.5-fold, from 1.8 M to 0.6 M in MV4-11 cells.
The alvocidib/5-aza combination also resulted in synergistic increases in
caspase activity relative to either single agent within the combination,
at multiple dose levels. MCL-1 dependence is a known mechanism of
resistance to BCL-2-targeting agents, such as venetoclax (ABT-199).
Alvocidib is an effective approach to targeting MCL-1 leading to the
sensitization of cancer cells to venetoclax. Finally, the rational drug
combinations described here are further supported by the finding that
MCL-1-dependence, measured by NOXA priming, correlates with clinical
benefit from treatment with an alvocidib-containing regimen (eg. FLAM) in
AML patients. In conclusion, MCL-1 is a key downstream target of
inhibiting CDK-9 with alvocidib. Combination strategies using alvocidib
have emerged as a powerful solution for overcoming MCL-1 dependent drug
resistance.

