Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Canine transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder expresses
activated BRAF, but is not sensitive to vemurafenib


Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the most common bladder cancer in
humans and their canine companions. Canine TCCs are usually papillary
infiltrative TCCs of intermediate to high grade. Genetic defects
identified in human TCCs aid in the diagnosis and therapy of human
bladder cancer. We utilized whole exome sequencing to screen canine TCCs
for gene mutations that contribute to pathogenesis. Genomic DNA was
isolated from 11 canine TCCs, 3 matched normal tissue samples, and 2
canine TCC cell lines. Whole exome capture was conducted using the Canine
Agilent Sure-select in-solution capture system, and captured fragments
were sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq2000 platform. The sequences were
mapped to the CanFam3.1 canine reference genome and somatic mutations
were identified using Freebayes. Somatic mutations were characterized and
compared to the Cancer Gene Census (COSMIC). Nonsense, missense, and
insertion/deletion mutations were identified in 126 genes shown to be
drivers or repressors in human cancer. Missense mutations were further
screened using SIFT to identify alterations deleterious to protein
function. The genes exhibiting in/dels, nonsense, or missense mutations
with SIFT scores Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the most common
bladder cancer in humans and their canine companions. Canine TCCs are
usually papillary infiltrative TCCs of intermediate to high grade.
Genetic defects identified in human TCCs aid in the diagnosis and therapy
of human bladder cancer. We utilized whole exome sequencing to screen
canine TCCs for gene mutations that contribute to pathogenesis. Genomic
DNA was isolated from 11 canine TCCs, 3 matched normal tissue samples,
and 2 canine TCC cell lines. Whole exome capture was conducted using the
Canine Agilent Sure-select in-solution capture system, and captured
fragments were sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq2000 platform. The
sequences were mapped to the CanFam3.1 canine reference genome and
somatic mutations were identified using Freebayes. Somatic mutations were
characterized and compared to the Cancer Gene Census (COSMIC). Nonsense,
missense, and insertion/deletion mutations were identified in 126 genes
shown to be drivers or repressors in human cancer. Missense mutations
were further screened using SIFT to identify alterations deleterious to
protein function. The genes exhibiting in/dels, nonsense, or missense
mutations with SIFT scores < 0.45 in at least 2 sites or 2 samples were:
BRAF, RPL5, RANBP2, EWSR1, NONO, PTPRB, LYL1, JAK1, MSH2, PER1, PIM1, and
WRN. In fact, an activating BRAF V to E mutation was identified in 5 of
the tumors and both cell lines. The RPL5 and RANBP2 mutations were also
hotspot mutations identified in 5 and 3 of the samples, respectively.
Mutations were confirmed using Sanger sequencing of amplified genomic
DNA. Interestingly, deleterious RANBP2 mutations were only observed in
non-BRAF mutant samples. Drug sensitivity assays using the BRAF V600E
targeting drug, Vemurafenib, were conducted in the BRAF mutant canine
cell lines as well as the BRAF mutant human A375 melanoma cell line. As
previously described, the IC50 for the sensitive A375 line was
approximately 100 nM, while each of the BRAF mutant canine lines had an
IC50 value 10 M. Reverse transcriptase PCR was used to amplify the coding
sequence for BRAF from the Bliley canine TCC cell line. The amplified
transcript (2125 bp) was sequenced, confirming the heterozygous
expression of the V548 to E mutant form of BRAF in this cell line. The
sequence also indicated that the predicted expressed protein (AA 10 - 715
of XP_013975364.1, corresponding to predicted exons 1 through 20 of
XM_014119889.1) exhibited 99% homology to human BRAF AA53 - 763
(NP_004324.2). BRAF protein expression in these cell lines was confirmed
by Western blot analysis. Thus, insensitivity to Vemurafenib is not due
to differences in canine BRAF, reduced expression, or alternative
splicing of the expressed transcript as previously observed in some
Vemurafenib resistant human melanomas. These data indicate that although
constitutively active BRAF is expressed in canine TCC, other factors may
contribute to pathogenesis.

