Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-Myc and STAT Interactor knock out in the mammary epithelium
prompts hyper-proliferation


N-Myc and STAT Interactor (NMI) is an evolutionarily conserved protein
that is widely expressed in fetal and adult tissues. Early studies
implicated its role in regulating the activities of transcription factors
(such as MYC, STATs, BRCA1, TIP60 etc.) critical to tumor progression and
metastasis. However, the functional relevance of these regulatory
activities of NMI remains unknown. Recent findings from our lab have
revealed that NMI protein expression is decreased by 70% in primary tumor
specimens from patients with metastatic breast cancer. Most recently, we
have found that lack of NMI expression in breast cancer cells confers
resistance to chemotherapy by blocking autophagy-induced cell death. Thus
the status of NMI expression in breast cancer patients may be an
important clinical consideration. Additionally, our functional studies
have demonstrated that loss of NMI expression allows manifestation of TGF
and Wnt driven EMT that results in increased invasion and metastatic
dissemination. Overall, we have noticed a profound impact of NMI on
multiple developmental signaling pathways that are essential for mammary
development as well as tumor progression.To further elucidate the
biological role of NMI, we have created a genetically engineered mammary
specific Nmi knock out model. We observed that in normal murine mammary
tissue Nmi is expressed in the mammary epithelium during all stages of
mammary development. However, it's expression is strikingly induced at
the onset of pregnancy, implicating an important role of NMI in mammary
ductal development and/or lactation. Remarkably, the Nmi knock out mice
exhibit distinctly increased number of alveolar structures (30% more than
in control mice) during lactation. Moreover, these Nmi-/- mammary glands
also show 20% more proliferating mammary epithelial cells (MECs) compared
to respective littermate controls. In addition, 3D-alveologenesis of Nmi
knock out MECs is highly responsive to induction by growth factors such
as TGF and FGFs when compared to MECs from littermate controls.
Hyper-proliferative phenotype has been implicated as one of the key
factors for breast cancer initiation as well as progression. Overall, our
work describes a direct evidence for the role of NMI as a key regulator
of mammary epithelial cell proliferation.

