Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The estrogen related receptor alpha regulates one carbon
metabolism and DNA methylation


Besides genetic alterations, epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA
methylation are implicated in the acquisition of malignant phenotype, and
thus, the use of epigenetic drugs is a promising strategy for anti-cancer
therapy. DNA methylation is the process by which DNA methyltransferase
enzymes (DNMT) add methyl groups to cytosines, using S-adenosine
methionine (SAM) as a methyl donor.Therefore, this process relies both on
the expression of the DNMTs and on the availability of SAM, which is a
component of the one carbon metabolism pathway. In the context of breast
cancer, cell metabolism is tightly regulated by the orphan nuclear
receptor estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRa) and thus, we wondered
whether ERRa could regulate SAM levels and, by extension, DNA
methylation.By analyzing chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
followed by DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq) of ERRa conducted in different
breast cancer cell lines, we discovered that ERRa is located on the
promoter of many genes implicated in one carbon metabolism. Inhibition of
ERRa by RNA interference or with the chemical inhibitor C29 modified the
mRNA levels of these genes and induced changes in SAM levels.
Interestingly, we also observed ERRa binding on the promoter of DNMT1 and
genetic and pharmacological inhibition of ERRa reduced DNMT1 expression
at the mRNA and protein levels. Altogether, these changes ultimately
decreased global DNA methylation in breast cancer cell lines, suggesting
that ERRa is a major driver of this epigenetic mechanism. Surprisingly,
genetic inhibition of DNMT1 or treatment with the DNMT inhibitor (DNMTi)
SGI-1027 reduced the protein levels of ERRa in these cells, unraveling
the existence of a feedback loop between these two pathways. Therefore,
we explored whether treating breast cancer cells with a combination of
C29 and SGI-1027 would represent a good therapeutic approach. We treated
breast cancer cells with a given concentration of C29 and increased
concentrations of SGI-1027 for 24h and observed that C29 highly
sensitized these cells to the DNMTi. Further investigations on xenograft
models will be conducted to validate these results in vivo and
next-generation sequencing will be performed in the context of ERRa
inhibition to study the global DNA methylation alterations and the
consequences on gene expression.In conclusion, we have uncovered a novel
crosstalk between cell metabolism and epigenetics that lead to a better
understanding of the regulation of these events and their influence on
cancer cell biology and drug sensitivity. We propose that targeting these
two pathways with a combination therapy possesses great therapeutic
potential for breast cancer and may be efficacious in other cancers as
well.

