Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotinamide N-methyltransferase in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma primary tumors and metastases


Background/Purpose:Nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT) is an enzyme
involved in the biotransformation of many drugs and xenobiotic compounds.
It is overexpressed in different cancers and has been shown to enhance
the migratory and invasive activity of cancer cells. Additionally, NNMT
is an important regulator of the methylation potential in cells by
consumption of S-adenosyl methionine (SAM), an important substrate for
methyltransferases. By this mechanism NNMT reduces methylation of
proteins such as certain histones leading to epigenetic remodeling and
induced expression of tumor-promoting genes (Ulanovskaya et al, Nat.
Chem. Biol. 2013). In clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the
dominant histological subtype of renal cell cancer, NNMT is expressed at
high levels compared to normal kidney tissue and could represent a novel
therapeutic target, especially for the treatment of metastatic disease
which is marked by a five-year survival rate of below 10% with currently
available therapies.Methods:We analyzed NNMT in a ccRCC patient cohort
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) concerning mRNA expression (n = 463),
somatic variations (n = 410) and association with clinical parameters and
patient survival. In an independent collection of ccRCC tissues (n = 64),
corresponding normal kidney tissues and metastatic tissues from different
organs (n = 129), NNMT mRNA and protein expression were quantified via
Real-Time PCR and immunohistochemical staining of tissue microarrays,
respectively.Results:In both cohorts, NNMT mRNA expression was
significantly upregulated in tumor compared to non-tumor tissue. Somatic
mutations and copy number alterations in the NNMT gene locus were
observed in only a small number of patients. NNMT mRNA expression
correlated weakly with tumor stage and grading in both cohorts, but not
with the presence of lymph node or distant metastases. In Kaplan-Meier
analyses high NNMT expression was associated with worse overall and
cancer-specific survival. In ccRCC metastases from different organ sites,
NNMT mRNA and protein expression were also induced compared to normal
kidney tissue and high expression was again associated with worse patient
survival in Kaplan-Meier analysis (HR = 2.15, Plog-rank =
0.05).Conclusion:NNMT mRNA and protein are highly expressed not only in
primary tissue of ccRCC, but also in metastases derived from different
organs, offering it as a potential drug-target for metastatic ccRCC.
Although NNMT expression is a good prognostic indicator for patient
survival, its molecular function in ccRCC tumorigenesis and metastasis
formation has to be further evaluated.Supported by the Robert Bosch
Foundation, Stuttgart, Germany and the ICEPHA Grant Tuebingen-Stuttgart,
Germany

