Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression subtypes of high grade serous ovarian cancer in
African American women


Ovarian cancer accounts for 5% of cancer deaths and is the fifth leading
cause of cancer death in women in the United States. While incidence is
higher in European American (EA) than African American (AA) women,
five-year survival is worse for AA women (36%) than EA women (44%).
Access to appropriate surgery and treatment is a major contributor but
does not completely explain this disparity. The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) identified four gene expression-based subtypes of the most common
and lethal histotype, high grade serous carcinoma (HGSC): mesenchymal,
proliferative, differentiated, and immunoreactive. We sought to
characterize similarities and differences in gene expression-based
subtypes arising in AA and EA women to determine whether there are
underlying biologic features that may influence survival. We performed
two distinct analyses, first using TCGA data and second using cases from
the population-based African American Cancer Epidemiology Study (AACES).
For both we summarized differential expression patterns for each subtype
with moderated t statistic vectors for >10,000 genes using Significance
Analysis of Microarrays. We calculated Pearson's correlations of these
vectors to determine concordance of expression patterns between subtypes
across EA and AA women. In TCGA, we observed correlations of
subtype-specific expression patterns between the 24 AA and 475 EA tumors
of 0.52-0.60 for each of the four subtypes. Thus, while analogous
subtypes can be identified in AA and EA women, the magnitude of these
correlations suggests that there are potential differences in gene
expression patterns between AA and EA tumors that are assigned to the
same subtype. We generated additional data from 58 AACES HGSC cases using
the Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array 2.0. Instead of assigning these
tumors to previously-defined subtypes, we clustered samples to identify
four subtypes de novo. We observed concordance with two of the TCGA
subtypes; correlations for the mesenchymal-like and proliferative-like
subtypes were 0.56-0.65. The mesenchymal-like subtype was more common in
these AA women than in the TCGA EA women (33% versus 25%), and the
proliferative-like subtype was marginally less common (14% versus 19%).
Concordance for the differentiated-like subtype was considerably lower,
at 0.21, and this subtype was less common in AA than EA women (19% versus
34%). Another subtype comprising 34% of the AA samples was only weakly
correlated (-0.21-0.10) with any of the TCGA subtypes, suggesting that it
is a novel subtype. The limited data available on HGSC in AA women
suggest that at least two subtypes are comparable to those in EA women
but differ in prevalence, and that there may be a novel subtype in AA
women that does not strongly correspond to those described in EA women.

