Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel nanoparticle formulation of Plumbagin for pancreatic cancer
treatment


Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is one of the most fatal of all cancers and is
ranked as the fourth most common cause of cancer related deaths among
both men and women in the US. The management of PanCa, is exceptionally
difficult due to the extremely poor response to available therapeutic
modalities. Highly desmoplastic microenvironment in pancreatic tumor
causes suboptimal drug delivery and increases chemo-resistance. Plumbagin
(PL), a naturally occurring napthoquinone derived from the root of
Plumbago zeylanica L., has showed potent cancer preventive and
therapeutic activity against variety of cancers. However, the clinical
translation of PL has been significantly hampered due to its toxicity and
suboptimal bioavailability. To address these clinically relevant issues,
we have developed and characterized a novel PL-loaded magnetic
nanoparticle (MNP-PL) formulation. This MNP-PL formulation was prepared
using Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) composed of an iron oxide core which
has distinct advantages in i) bio/hemo-compatibility, ii) biodegradation,
iii) higher drug loading capacity and iv) improved bioavailability. Our
novel MNP-PL formulation provided average size of 125 nm in dynamic light
scattering (DLS) and exhibited -9.42 to -10.79 mV zeta potential with an
outstanding PL loading efficiency. We have evaluated anti-cancer
potential of MNP-PL formulation in human PanCa cells (HPAF-II, AsPc1 and
Panc-1). We first performed MTS and colony formation assays to determine
the effects of free PL and MNP-PL formulation on growth of PanCa cells.
In this experiment, cells were treated with various concentrations of
free PL (1-15 M) or MNP-PL (1-15 M) for 24 hrs. Results exhibited
efficient internalization of the MNP-PL formulation in a dose-dependent
manner. As a result, the MNP-PL formulation showed four fold dose
advantage over free PL. IC50 of free PL was recorded 10 M which was
significantly reduced to 2.5 M in MNP-PL. MNP-PL also showed four fold
inhibition in colony formation compared to free PL. MNP-PL treatment more
efficiently inhibited oncogenic CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling pathway in both
PanCa and patient derived stromal fibroblast cells. MNP-PL treatment also
showed decreased expression of CXCR4 protein levels in PanCa cells.
Moreover, MNP-PL treatment inhibited stromal derived factor 1
(SDF-1)/CXCL12 expression in stromal fibroblasts. These results suggest
that our novel MNP-PL formulation has more anti-cancer potential than
free PL against PanCa. In conclusion, MNP-PL formulation may reduce the
toxicity and improve the bioavailability of free PL and could be used for
the treatment of PanCa.

