Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the mechanism of MET-dependent cellular
transformation and potent cytoreductive activity of MGCD265 in novel MET
exon 14 mutation positive cancer models


MET splice site mutations that result in the deletion of exon 14
(METex14del) are implicated as oncogenic drivers in a subset of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). MET exon 14 contains the Y1003 CBL ubiquitin
ligase regulatory binding site that normally mediates CBL-dependent MET
degradation and signal attenuation. Deletion of this exon results in
sustained activation of MET and its downstream signaling pathways. The
diverse splice site mutations leading to exon 14 skipping comprise a
unique and unprecedented class of RTK activating mutations and the
molecular mechanism by which these genetic alterations transform cancer
cells is not fully understood. One major challenge in understanding the
utility of MET inhibition of the METex14del class has been the lack of
available pre-clinical models.In the present study, we generated and
characterized multiple METex14del-driven cancer models to study the
mechanism of MET-dependent cellular transformation as well as the
response to MGCD265, a small molecule inhibitor of MET and AXL.
METex14del models were identified via mining patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) databases or were engineered using genome editing techniques to
generate isogenic pairs of METex14del and WT cell lines.The METex14del
cell lines formed increased size and number of colonies in anchorage
independent growth assays compared to their WT counterparts. The
transformation of METex14del cells was associated with an increase in
durable HGF-dependent activation of MET and downstream signaling pathways
potentially due to dysregulated MET processing and signaling attenuation.
MGCD265 was shown to effectively inhibit this growth and MET-dependent
signal transduction in a concentration-dependent manner. When evaluated
in the amplified METex14del-driven gastric xenograft model Hs746T,
significant tumor regression was observed following MGCD265 treatment. In
addition, MGCD265 demonstrated substantial regression of large
established tumors, in two novel NSCLC METex14del-positive PDX
models.Together, these data confirm METex14del mutations are bona fide
oncogenic drivers and sensitive to targeted therapeutics. Moreover, the
models described in this study represent a relevant pre-clinical platform
to further study receptor hyper-activation and drug action that is
clinically actionable. Identification, development, and understanding of
METex14del models will likely help further guide precision medicine
strategies to treat NSCLC patients harboring these mutations.

