Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of mouse liver and brain colon cancer metastases with
Toca 511 and 5-fluorocytosine for intratumoral production of
5-fluorouracil leads to increased survival, induction of antitumor immune
responses, and reduction of MDSC


Approximately 50% of patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) develop
metastases (mCRC) during the course of disease, with liver the most
frequent site. Standard treatment for mCRC is 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) based
combination therapy, with median survival now >20 months. As a result of
prolonged survival with metastatic disease, incidence of brain metastases
from colorectal cancer is increasing. Approved immunotherapeutic agents
have had limited effect in mCRC except in the subset of subjects (3-6%)
with deficient mismatch repair. Recent studies suggest myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) contribute to cancer immune evasion by
suppressing T cell anti-tumor functions and modulating innate immune
responses.We are pursuing a unique approach to treat cancer via in situ
production of 5-FU. Toca 511 (vocimagene amiretrorepvec), a retroviral
replicating vector, selectively replicates and spreads in malignant cells
and encodes an optimized yeast cytosine deaminase (CD) protein. In
infected cells, CD enzyme is expressed and converts 5-FC
(5-fluorocytosine, an oral anti-fungal drug) to 5-FU. Direct tumor
cytotoxicity and extended immunotherapeutic effects have been reported
using this approach.Toca 511 and Toca FC (extended release 5-FC) is under
investigation in subjects with primary brain tumors, delivered
intratumorally (NCT01156584), by injection into the resection bed
(NCT01470794, NCT02414165), or intravenously (NCT01985256). We tested the
intravenous (IV) approach for the treatment of mCRC in a mouse syngeneic
liver metastasis model. CT-26-luciferase colon carcinoma cells were
delivered via intrasplenic injection producing multiple tumor foci in the
liver. IV delivery of Toca 511 followed by courses of 5-FC resulted in
tumor response, improved survival, and immune mediated inhibition of
rechallenge with tumor. IV delivery resulted in expression of vector
encoded transgene in tumor foci but not in adjacent normal liver. Similar
published results have been obtained in a number of brain tumor models
with Toca 511+5-FC including a CT26 colon carcinoma brain metastasis
model. We further investigated the effect of Toca 511+5-FC treatment on
CRC tumor-induced MDSC in the CT-26 brain metastasis model. Intracranial
cell implantation and intratumoral Toca 511 vector injections were
followed by one course of 5-FC. Expansion of MDSC occurred in brain
tumors and spleens of tumor bearing animals. A significant decrease in
MDSC in spleens and tumors was observed with Toca 511+5-FC treatment
compared to control (p = 0.03, pApproximately 50% of patients with
colorectal cancer (CRC) develop metastases (mCRC) during the course of
disease, with liver the most frequent site. Standard treatment for mCRC
is 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) based combination therapy, with median survival
now >20 months. As a result of prolonged survival with metastatic
disease, incidence of brain metastases from colorectal cancer is
increasing. Approved immunotherapeutic agents have had limited effect in
mCRC except in the subset of subjects (3-6%) with deficient mismatch
repair. Recent studies suggest myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC)
contribute to cancer immune evasion by suppressing T cell anti-tumor
functions and modulating innate immune responses.We are pursuing a unique
approach to treat cancer via in situ production of 5-FU. Toca 511
(vocimagene amiretrorepvec), a retroviral replicating vector, selectively
replicates and spreads in malignant cells and encodes an optimized yeast
cytosine deaminase (CD) protein. In infected cells, CD enzyme is
expressed and converts 5-FC (5-fluorocytosine, an oral anti-fungal drug)
to 5-FU. Direct tumor cytotoxicity and extended immunotherapeutic effects
have been reported using this approach.Toca 511 and Toca FC (extended
release 5-FC) is under investigation in subjects with primary brain
tumors, delivered intratumorally (NCT01156584), by injection into the
resection bed (NCT01470794, NCT02414165), or intravenously (NCT01985256).
We tested the intravenous (IV) approach for the treatment of mCRC in a
mouse syngeneic liver metastasis model. CT-26-luciferase colon carcinoma
cells were delivered via intrasplenic injection producing multiple tumor
foci in the liver. IV delivery of Toca 511 followed by courses of 5-FC
resulted in tumor response, improved survival, and immune mediated
inhibition of rechallenge with tumor. IV delivery resulted in expression
of vector encoded transgene in tumor foci but not in adjacent normal
liver. Similar published results have been obtained in a number of brain
tumor models with Toca 511+5-FC including a CT26 colon carcinoma brain
metastasis model. We further investigated the effect of Toca 511+5-FC
treatment on CRC tumor-induced MDSC in the CT-26 brain metastasis model.
Intracranial cell implantation and intratumoral Toca 511 vector
injections were followed by one course of 5-FC. Expansion of MDSC
occurred in brain tumors and spleens of tumor bearing animals. A
significant decrease in MDSC in spleens and tumors was observed with Toca
511+5-FC treatment compared to control (p = 0.03, p<0.0001;
respectively).The results reported here support the development of Toca
511 and Toca FC as a novel immunotherapeutic approach for patients with
mCRC. A phase 1 study of IV Toca 511 and Toca FC in solid tumors,
including mCRC, is planned (NCT02576665).

