Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying genes that regulate bladder cancer progression and
invasion


Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the most common type of bladder
cancer and can be categorized as either non-muscle invasive (Ta-T1) or
muscle invasive (T2). Approximately 50% of bladder cancers are T1 at
initial diagnosis; however, the recurrence rate for these tumors is high
and they may progress into T2. In this study, we aimed to determine if
there are specific gene expression differences between T1 vs. T2 bladder
cancer that can help identify key regulators in bladder cancer
progression and invasion. T1 and T2 bladder cancer tissues were subjected
to RNA-Seq to evaluate for differences among these stages. Additionally,
the Oncomine database was examined to further narrow down potential
candidates that differentiate T1 from T2. These efforts led to the
identification of an extracellular matrix glycoprotein, fibulin-3
(FBLN3), as being highly expressed in T2 compared to T1 tissues. To
validate these findings, FBLN3 expression was measured using qRT-PCR from
formalin fixed and paraffin embedded tissues from patient bladder samples
ranging from stages Ta-T4. These studies confirmed that FBLN3 expression
was elevated in muscle-invasive compared to non-muscle invasive bladder
cancer. Consistent with these findings, FBLN3 expression level correlated
with the invasive ability of several bladder cancer cell lines.
Specifically, FBLN3 expression was determined using both qRT-PCR and
western blotting amongst the T24, UMUC-13, UMUC-3, RT4, and 5637 bladder
cancer cell lines. The most invasive cell lines, T24 and UMUC-13,
demonstrated the highest FBLN3 expression. In contrast, the least
invasive cells, RT4 and 5637, demonstrated the least FBLN3 expression. To
determine a functional role for FBLN3 in bladder cancer invasion, we
knocked down or increased FBLN3 expression in bladder cancer cell lines
using lentiviral transduction. Knockdown of FBLN3 expression in the T24
and UMUC-13 cells inhibited the invasion and migration of these bladder
cancer cells; whereas, FBLN3 overexpression in the 5637 cells promoted
the invasiveness of the bladder cancer cells. Furthermore, cell viability
and growth rates were not affected by manipulation of FBLN3 expression.
Our results indicate that FBLN3 serves as a pro-invasive factor in
bladder cancer. These findings suggest that FBLN3 could serve as (1) a
biomarker to differentiate T1 from T2 bladder cancers and (2) a promising
therapeutic target.

