Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of O-GlcNAc transferase in tamoxifen resistant breast
cancer cells


O-linked N-acetyl-glucosamine transferase (OGT) is an enzyme that
catalyzes addition of the O-GlcNAc modification to a wide range of
intracellular proteins. The O-GlcNAc modification is a product of the
hexosamine biosynthetic pathway, which requires glucose and glutamine as
substrates. Uptake of both of these nutrients is often up-regulated in
cancer, which in turn leads to an increase in the total protein
O-GlcNAcylation. Increased OGT expression has also been reported in most
cancer types, including the most frequently diagnosed cancer in women,
breast cancer. Many of the breast cancers rely on estrogen receptor alpha
(ER) for proliferation and have shown a strong response to the ER
inhibition, most commonly achieved by treatment with tamoxifen. However,
while efficient, prolonged exposure to tamoxifen commonly causes
resistance and relapse of the disease. It is therefore vital to uncover
mechanisms which contribute to the resistance in order to develop
adequate treatment strategy for these patients.Here, we have investigated
the effect of targeting OGT in an isogenic pair of ER-positive
tamoxifen-sensitive MCF7 and tamoxifen-resistant TAMR breast cancer cell
lines. OGT inhibition decreased viability and triggered cell death in
both cell lines. These responses were associated with over 50% reduction
in ER expression in both MCF7 and TAMR cells. Reduced O-GlcNAcylation has
previously been reported to induce endoplasmic reticulum stress and
activation of transcription factor C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), which
promotes cell death. Targeting OGT resulted in a strong increase of CHOP
expression, which appeared more prominent in the TAMR cells. Finally,
targeting OGT induced a very pronounced cell cycle arrest in the G2/M
phase in the TAMR cells, while the MCF7 cell lined showed a very modest
response.Taken together, these results indicate that targeting OGT leads
to a differential response in the tamoxifen-sensitive and resistant
breast cancer cells. Currently, we are using an expanded panel of
tamoxifen-resistant cell lines to perform expression microarrays,
metabolic flux assays and DNA damage response analysis in order to
uncover the cause of the differential response to OGT targeting. This may
help us identify potential therapeutic combinations that might be
suitable for treatment of tamoxifen-resistant cancers.

