Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD300f-regulated efferocytosis by dendritic cells and macrophages
controls the initiation and resolution of experimental colitis


Phagocytic clearance of apoptotic cells (efferocytosis) is critical for
resolution of inflammation and prevention of chronic inflammatory
disorders, including inflammatory bowel diseases, and
inflammation-associated cancer. CD300f (CLM-1), a cell surface receptor
that recognizes phosphatidylserine exposed on apoptotic cells, has been
shown to promote efferocytosis by macrophages. In the present study, we
found that CD300f plays a critical role in controlling the severity and
duration of dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis, and
CD300f-expressing macrophages and dendritic cells (DC) were identified as
key players controlling disease pathogenesis. Compared to Cd300f+/+ mice,
Cd300f-/- mice showed increased susceptibility to DSS-induced colitis and
impaired resolution of inflammation. In Cd300f-/- mice,
macrophage-mediated efferocytosis was reduced, resulting in apoptotic
cell accumulation in the gut mucosa. In contrast, Cd300f-/- DC engulfed
apoptotic cells more efficiently than Cd300f+/+ DC. CD300f-deficient DC
transfer exacerbated DSS-induced inflammation and delayed its resolution,
whereas CD300f-expressing macrophage transfer attenuated DSS-induced
inflammation. Hyperactive efferocytosis by CD300f-deficient gut DC
resulted in excessive tumor necrosis factor- (TNF-) secretion, which
induced secondary interferon- (IFN-) over-production, both of which
impaired the resolution of colitis. TNF- neutralization resulted in
decreased levels of gut pro-inflammatory cytokines and significant
disease amelioration. Collectively, these results suggest that CD300f is
important for preventing chronic inflammation by enhancing macrophage
efferocytosis and inhibiting TNF- production induced by DC efferocytosis.
From these findings, it is conceivable that increasing
macrophage-mediated efferocytosis and suppressing DC-mediated
efferocytosis through upregulation of CD300f expression would provide a
new therapeutic strategy for inflammatory bowel disease patients.

