Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic and epigenetic dynamics of breast cancer
progression in the MMTV-PyMT mouse model


Using RNA-sequencing and ERRBS (enhanced reduced representation
bisulphite sequencing), we identified genes involved in breast cancer
malignant progression.Human breast cancers have complex molecular
mechanisms of progression and metastasis. To improve diagnosis and drug
development, it is critical to identify the genes and molecular pathways
involved in tumor progression and malignant transition. Using the polyoma
middle T antigen (PyMT) mouse model, we profiled gene expression from
four different stages of tumor progression, including hyperplasia,
adenoma/MIN (mammary intraepithelial neoplasia), early and late
carcinoma. We identified a large number of differentially expressed genes
in tumors compared with normal mammary gland, enriched in E2F targets and
G2M checkpoint genes. Using the temporal information, we found Myc, Sox4
and Casp9 were associated with tumor progression. Using co-expression
network analysis, we identified signature modules of panels of genes,
revealing novel insights into molecular mechanisms of breast
tumorigenesis. For example, Mcm6 and Ncapd2, hub genes in a DNA
replication and cell cycle module, predict metastasis in human samples.
We also found the Hells, Hmgb2 and Cit genes to be increased in
expression in both mouse and human TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas)
datasets.We complemented these studies by profiling DNA methylation using
ERRBS in the same samples. We identified a large number of differentially
methylated cytosines (DMCs), enriched in cis-regulatory elements as well
as near genes in cancer-related pathways. A small subset of the DMCs was
well conserved between the progressive stages of tumorigenesis, with the
greatest shift occurring with the transition to malignancy. We also
observed a global hypomethylation and a shift towards a subset of loci
with hypermethylation with tumor progression. Expression of some
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle genes was negatively correlated with DNA
methylation, which may reflect altered metabolic regulation in carcinoma.
We then constructed a co-methylation network and discovered a module with
decreased DNA methylation in tumor that was enriched with genes from WNT
and MAPK signaling pathways. In addition, we compared our results to the
human TCGA breast carcinoma dataset and found the epigenetic modules to
be overall distinctive between the two species.Altogether, our gene
expression, DNA methylation and network analyses with the PyMT mouse
model shed new light on transcriptional and epigenetic dynamics during
breast cancer malignant progression and reveal gene modules that may
regulate this biological process.

