Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human HER2-overexpressing mouse breast cancer cell lines derived
from MMTV.f.HuHER2 mice: characterization and use in a model of
metastatic breast cancer


Preclinical evaluation of therapeutic agents against metastatic breast
cancer require cell lines and animal models that recapitulate clinical
metastatic breast cancer as much as possible. We have previously used
cell lines derived from the neu-N transgenic model to investigate
anti-neu targeting of metastatic breast cancer using an alpha-emitter
labeled antibody reactive with the rat variant of HER2/neu expressed by
the neu-N model. To investigate alpha-emitter targeting of metastatic
breast cancer using clinically relevant, commercially available
anti-HER2/neu antibodies, we have developed cell lines derived from
HuHER2 mice (MMTV.f.HuHER2 obtained from Genetech). HuHER2 mice develop
breast cancer spontaneously and with a higher frequency than normal
mice.We extracted primary mammary gland tumors, purified the epithelial
breast cancer cells, and established 7 different HuHER2 cell lines. We
also established 2 different cell lines from spontaneous lung metastases
(HuHER2-L1 and -L2). We evaluated HuHER2 protein expression in the cell
lines by western blot analysis. Cell surface receptor expression was
evaluated by immunofluorescence (IF) staining. We performed qRT-PCR to
assess phenotypic measures of aggressiveness and metastatic propensity.
The following were evaluated: ER, PR, Twist1, Vimentin and E-Cadherin.
Sensitivity to trastuzumab antibody, in vitro, was also assessed by
evaluating changes in cellular metabolism via the MTT assay.HuHER2
protein was overexpressed in all of the isolated cell lines. One of the
cell lines (denoted HuHER2-6) had approximately 1.5-8 times more protein
expression compared to the other 6 cell lines developed. The two cell
lines derived from spontaneous lung metastases showed approximately
1.5-fold greater HER2 protein expression than HuHER2-6. HuHER2-6 cell
surface HER2 receptor staining by IF was similar to that of BT-474, a
high HuHER2 expressing cell line. The 2 lung cell lines also showed
comparable cell-surface staining. ER mRNA levels assessed by qRT-PCR were
20% and 0.05% of the level measured in normal mammary gland for the
HuHER2-6 and HuHer2-L2 lines, respectively. The PR levels were also
substantially lower (Preclinical evaluation of therapeutic agents against
metastatic breast cancer require cell lines and animal models that
recapitulate clinical metastatic breast cancer as much as possible. We
have previously used cell lines derived from the neu-N transgenic model
to investigate anti-neu targeting of metastatic breast cancer using an
alpha-emitter labeled antibody reactive with the rat variant of HER2/neu
expressed by the neu-N model. To investigate alpha-emitter targeting of
metastatic breast cancer using clinically relevant, commercially
available anti-HER2/neu antibodies, we have developed cell lines derived
from HuHER2 mice (MMTV.f.HuHER2 obtained from Genetech). HuHER2 mice
develop breast cancer spontaneously and with a higher frequency than
normal mice.We extracted primary mammary gland tumors, purified the
epithelial breast cancer cells, and established 7 different HuHER2 cell
lines. We also established 2 different cell lines from spontaneous lung
metastases (HuHER2-L1 and -L2). We evaluated HuHER2 protein expression in
the cell lines by western blot analysis. Cell surface receptor expression
was evaluated by immunofluorescence (IF) staining. We performed qRT-PCR
to assess phenotypic measures of aggressiveness and metastatic
propensity. The following were evaluated: ER, PR, Twist1, Vimentin and
E-Cadherin. Sensitivity to trastuzumab antibody, in vitro, was also
assessed by evaluating changes in cellular metabolism via the MTT
assay.HuHER2 protein was overexpressed in all of the isolated cell lines.
One of the cell lines (denoted HuHER2-6) had approximately 1.5-8 times
more protein expression compared to the other 6 cell lines developed. The
two cell lines derived from spontaneous lung metastases showed
approximately 1.5-fold greater HER2 protein expression than HuHER2-6.
HuHER2-6 cell surface HER2 receptor staining by IF was similar to that of
BT-474, a high HuHER2 expressing cell line. The 2 lung cell lines also
showed comparable cell-surface staining. ER mRNA levels assessed by
qRT-PCR were 20% and 0.05% of the level measured in normal mammary gland
for the HuHER2-6 and HuHer2-L2 lines, respectively. The PR levels were
also substantially lower (<0.01%) relative to normal mammary gland (MG)
tissue. The HuHER2-6 line expressed 1.4 times more HuHER2/neu mRNA than
BT-474. The mRNA for E-Cadherin in HuHER2-L1 and -L2 was 20% of MG
tissue. The mRNA for TWIST1 and Vimentin were similarly elevated 3-fold
and 1.5-fold, respectively, relative to MG. At trastuzumab concentrations
ranging from 10 to 500 ug/ml, cell metabolism was decreased to 50%.These
lines show all the hallmarks of highly aggressive, metastatic breast
cancer and are being used to establish a left cardiac ventricle injection
model of widespread HER2/neu positive metastatic breast cancer to
evaluate combination therapy with alpha-particle emitter labeled HER2/neu
reactive antibodies.

