Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICOS signaling promotes CD4+ effector T-cell function during
antitumor responses


Inducible costimulator (ICOS) is a CD28-related cell surface receptor
which provides an important costimulatory signal to T cells during
activation. Prior work has found that anti-ICOS antibodies can promote
anti-tumor immunity in vivo, but it is unclear whether this effect
results from ICOS signaling blockade and/or agonism, or whether direct
antibody-mediated depletion of ICOS+ Tregs is responsible for enhancing
anti-tumor immunity. Here, we generated anti-ICOS-L blocking antibodies
in mice and engineered such antibodies to contain mouse IgG1 Fc regions
with low Fc receptor engagement and good pharmacokinetics. These reagents
were used in vivo to specifically block ICOS signaling in syngeneic mouse
tumor models without potential depletion of immune cells through ADCC.
The role of ICOS signaling in anti-tumor immunity was addressed both in
isolation, and together with combination immunotherapy treatments of
mouse syngeneic tumor models, followed by flow cytometry-based
characterization of peripheral and tumor-infiltrating T cell subsets.
Finally, CT26 tumor cells were engineered to express mouse ICOS-L in a
doxycycline-inducible fashion to promote additional ICOS signaling within
the tumor microenvironment.Initial characterization of ICOS blockade in
tumor models revealed that inhibition of ICOS signaling alone was
sufficient to mediate a modest anti-tumor effect, and characterization of
intratumoral T cell populations demonstrated a specific reduction of
intratumoral Tregs with ICOS signal deprivation. A survey of previously
identified immunomodulators found that, like anti-CTLA-4, anti-OX40
treatment of tumors was able to drive upregulation of ICOS on multiple T
cell subsets, while anti-4-1BB therapy was not. Combining ICOS-L blockade
with these additional immunotherapeutic approaches showed that inhibition
of ICOS signaling had little impact on CD8+ T cell-mediated anti-tumor
immunity induced by anti-4-1BB. However, the efficacy of anti-OX40
therapy, which depletes Tregs and relies to a large degree on CD4+
effector T cells responses, was significantly impaired with ICOS-L
blockade. In contrast, the induction of additional intratumoral ICOS
signaling in established tumors increased the frequency of tumor
rejection and overall survival when combined with anti-OX40 therapy.Taken
together, these results show that ICOS signaling during the anti-tumor
immune response acts on both effector and regulatory T cell subsets, and
thus manipulation of ICOS signaling alone may be an inefficient strategy
for immunotherapy. However, the use of ICOS agonists in combination with
Treg-depleting therapies such as anti-OX40 should limit the potential to
promote Treg function or expansion and instead result only in enhanced
CD4+ effector T cell responses.

