Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GenePattern Notebooks: an integrative analytical environment for
cancer research


As the availability of genetic and genomic data and analysis tools from
large-scale cancer initiatives continues to increase, the need has become
more urgent for a software environment that supports the entire idea to
dissemination cycle of an integrative cancer genomics analysis. Such a
system would need to provide access to a large number of analysis tools
without the need for programming, be sufficiently flexible to accommodate
the practices of non-programming biologists as well as experienced
bioinformaticians, and would provide a way for researchers to encapsulate
their work into a single executable document that included not only the
analytical workflow but also the associated descriptive text, graphics,
and supporting research. To address these needs, we have developed
GenePattern Notebook, based on the GenePattern environment for
integrative genomics and the Jupyter (formerly IPython) Notebook system.
GenePattern Notebook unites the phases of in silico research - experiment
design, collaborative analysis, and publication - into a single
interface. GenePattern Notebook presents a familiar lab-notebook format
that allows researchers to build a record of their work by creating cells
containing text, graphics, or executable analyses. Researchers add,
delete, and modify cells as the research evolves, supporting the initial
research phases of prototyping and collaborative analysis. When an
analysis is ready for publication, the same document that was used in the
design and analysis phases becomes a research narrative that interleaves
text, graphics, data, and executable analyses, serving as the complete,
reproducible, in silico methods section for a publication. GenePattern
Notebook also supports programmers and bioinformaticians, providing
seamless interoperation between code blocks and GenePattern analyses
within a notebook document. We are collaborating with cancer research
laboratories to create GenePattern Notebook documents to serve as
examples of integrative genomics research that can be enabled through
this system. Potential notebook topics include characterization of
intratumoral heterogeneity from single cell RNA-Seq data, effective
clinical interpretation of comprehensive genomic profiling from whole
exome sequencing of a patient's tumor and germ line samples, and
identification of master regulators/transcription factors associated with
the downstream transcriptional effects associated with the activation of
an oncogene. We will make these and other notebooks available in an
online GenePattern Notebooks repository, where other researchers may also
contribute their notebooks.

