Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smad7 knockdown in colon cancer cells activates protein kinase
RNA-associated eIF2 pathway thereby leading to cell death


Background. Up-regulation of Smad7, an inhibitor of TGF-1, occurs in
sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). Knockdown of Smad7 with a specific
antisense oligonucleotide (AS) leads to activation of eIF2, an attenuator
of protein synthesis, and arrest of CRC cells in the S phase of the cell
cycle with the downstream effect of inducing cell death.Aim. To
investigate the mechanisms by which Smad7 knockdown activates
eIF2.Methods. Phosphorylation of eIF2 was evaluated in CRC cell lines
(i.e. HCT116 and DLD-1) either untreated or treated with Smad7 sense (S)
or AS by Western blotting (WB) and immunofluorescence (IF). Expression of
ATF4 and CHOP, two downstream targets of EIF2, were evaluated by IF and
activation of PKR, GCN2 and PERK, up-stream kinases that induce eIF2
phosphorylation, was assessed by WB. Wild type or PKR-deficient CRC cells
treated with Smad7 AS were monitored for eIF2 activation and induction of
death. Finally, we assessed whether enhanced phosphorylation of eIF2 seen
in cells treated with Smad7 AS was also associated with reduced
interaction between eIF2 and PP1, a phosphatase that normally
dephosphorylates eIF2.Results. Smad7 knockdown increased ATF4 and CHOP
expression thus confirming previous data showing activation of eIF2
phosphorylation in CRC cells treated with Smad7 AS. Among kinases that
induce eIF2 phosphorylation, only PKR was activated by Smad7 knockdown.
Consistently, silencing of PKR reduced but did not abolish Smad7
AS-induced eIF2 phosphorylation and cell death, thus suggesting the
existence of further mechanisms that control eIF2 phosphorylation in
Smad7-deficient cells. Indeed, in CRC cells, Smad7 interacted with PP1
and Smad7 knockdown reduced association of PP1 with eIF2.ConclusionsData
show that Smad7 is involved in CRC cell survival and suggest that Smad7
is a valid target for therapeutic intervention in CRC.

