Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An aptamer-based multiplexed proteomic technology reveals
differential PKC ligand responses


Bryostatin 1 (Bryo 1) is in clinical trials for cancer and Alzheimer's
disease. Whereas Bryo 1, like the phorbol esters, binds to and activates
protein kinase C (PKC), it paradoxically antagonizes many but not all
phorbol ester responses. The mechanistic basis for this differential
response is still unknown.In the LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line,
the typical phorbol ester PMA causes growth inhibition whereas Bryo 1
does not. Previously, we showed that PMA induces dramatic changes in gene
transcription in the LNCaP cells as determined by gene expression
microarray analysis. The effects of Bryo 1 on gene expression were
initially similar at 1 hr but were variably more transient, as seen at 6
hr, depending on the specific gene. We think that this transiency of
action is a critical mechanistic feature of Bryo 1.The current study
extends to the comparison of the effects of Bryo 1 and PMA on the level
of global protein expression. Using a new generation of protein-capture
SOMAmer (Slow Off-rate Modified Aptamer) reagents, the SOMAscan
(Somalogic, Boulder, CO) proteomic assay simultaneously measures over one
thousand analytes within a minute amount of protein sample. SOMAmer
reagents are chemically modified single stranded DNA-based protein
affinity reagents that recognize specific conformational epitopes of
native 3D proteins with good specificity and dynamic range. The
technology is emerging as a highly sensitive, multiplexed and
quantitative proteomic tool for biomarker discovery and validation. 1,129
targets (covering major gene families including receptors, kinases,
growth factors, and a diverse collection of secreted, intracellular and
extracellular proteins or domains) were evaluated in both total cell
lysate and nuclear extracts of LNCaP cells treated with DMSO, PMA and
Bryo 1 for 60 minute and 6 hours. Compared to the DMSO control, the
lysates of cells treated for 60 minute with either PMA and Bryo 1 had
over three hundred targets that showed significant changes (pBryostatin 1
(Bryo 1) is in clinical trials for cancer and Alzheimer's disease.
Whereas Bryo 1, like the phorbol esters, binds to and activates protein
kinase C (PKC), it paradoxically antagonizes many but not all phorbol
ester responses. The mechanistic basis for this differential response is
still unknown.In the LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line, the typical
phorbol ester PMA causes growth inhibition whereas Bryo 1 does not.
Previously, we showed that PMA induces dramatic changes in gene
transcription in the LNCaP cells as determined by gene expression
microarray analysis. The effects of Bryo 1 on gene expression were
initially similar at 1 hr but were variably more transient, as seen at 6
hr, depending on the specific gene. We think that this transiency of
action is a critical mechanistic feature of Bryo 1.The current study
extends to the comparison of the effects of Bryo 1 and PMA on the level
of global protein expression. Using a new generation of protein-capture
SOMAmer (Slow Off-rate Modified Aptamer) reagents, the SOMAscan
(Somalogic, Boulder, CO) proteomic assay simultaneously measures over one
thousand analytes within a minute amount of protein sample. SOMAmer
reagents are chemically modified single stranded DNA-based protein
affinity reagents that recognize specific conformational epitopes of
native 3D proteins with good specificity and dynamic range. The
technology is emerging as a highly sensitive, multiplexed and
quantitative proteomic tool for biomarker discovery and validation. 1,129
targets (covering major gene families including receptors, kinases,
growth factors, and a diverse collection of secreted, intracellular and
extracellular proteins or domains) were evaluated in both total cell
lysate and nuclear extracts of LNCaP cells treated with DMSO, PMA and
Bryo 1 for 60 minute and 6 hours. Compared to the DMSO control, the
lysates of cells treated for 60 minute with either PMA and Bryo 1 had
over three hundred targets that showed significant changes (p<0.01).
While a similar scale of signaling response was observed in the 6 hour
PMA treated total cell lysate, less than 50 targets differed from the
DMSO control in the 6 hour Bryo 1 treated samples (pBryostatin 1 (Bryo 1)
is in clinical trials for cancer and Alzheimer's disease. Whereas Bryo 1,
like the phorbol esters, binds to and activates protein kinase C (PKC),
it paradoxically antagonizes many but not all phorbol ester responses.
The mechanistic basis for this differential response is still unknown.In
the LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line, the typical phorbol ester PMA
causes growth inhibition whereas Bryo 1 does not. Previously, we showed
that PMA induces dramatic changes in gene transcription in the LNCaP
cells as determined by gene expression microarray analysis. The effects
of Bryo 1 on gene expression were initially similar at 1 hr but were
variably more transient, as seen at 6 hr, depending on the specific gene.
We think that this transiency of action is a critical mechanistic feature
of Bryo 1.The current study extends to the comparison of the effects of
Bryo 1 and PMA on the level of global protein expression. Using a new
generation of protein-capture SOMAmer (Slow Off-rate Modified Aptamer)
reagents, the SOMAscan (Somalogic, Boulder, CO) proteomic assay
simultaneously measures over one thousand analytes within a minute amount
of protein sample. SOMAmer reagents are chemically modified single
stranded DNA-based protein affinity reagents that recognize specific
conformational epitopes of native 3D proteins with good specificity and
dynamic range. The technology is emerging as a highly sensitive,
multiplexed and quantitative proteomic tool for biomarker discovery and
validation. 1,129 targets (covering major gene families including
receptors, kinases, growth factors, and a diverse collection of secreted,
intracellular and extracellular proteins or domains) were evaluated in
both total cell lysate and nuclear extracts of LNCaP cells treated with
DMSO, PMA and Bryo 1 for 60 minute and 6 hours. Compared to the DMSO
control, the lysates of cells treated for 60 minute with either PMA and
Bryo 1 had over three hundred targets that showed significant changes
(p<0.01). While a similar scale of signaling response was observed in the
6 hour PMA treated total cell lysate, less than 50 targets differed from
the DMSO control in the 6 hour Bryo 1 treated samples (p<0.01). Similar
results were obtained for the nuclear extracts. Good assay
reproducibility was observed within replicates. While the protein
analysis confirmed the transient nature of Bryo 1 action, comparison of
the SOMAscan protein expression data with the mRNA transcript analysis
revealed substantial differences, indicating the importance of monitoring
signaling response at both the transcriptomic and proteomic levels. It
further identified a rich set of protein targets involved in the
differential PKC signaling by different ligands. On-going studies seek to
characterize the basis for the transient signaling response following
Bryo 1 treatment.

