Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semaphorin 3C is an androgen receptor-regulated gene


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in North America. The androgen receptor (AR) is a member of the
nuclear receptor superfamily of transcription factors and is heavily
implicated in PCa progression. First-line therapies frequently target the
AR axis and are initially met with favourable response but restored and
aberrant AR signaling fuel disease progression to stages for which
treatment is palliative. Transcriptional targets of the AR include genes
involved in cell growth and cell fate but are not completely described.
The semaphorin family of signaling proteins is a large grouping of
cell-surface or secreted signaling proteins that function in neurogenesis
and development. The roles of semaphorins in cancer are becoming
increasingly evident however mechanistic details surrounding their
involvement in cancer are poorly defined. One member of the class 3
semaphorins, SEMA3C, has been shown to confer invasive phenotypes in
prostate cancer cells. Using the AR-positive LNCaP cell line we show that
SEMA3C is an androgen-responsive gene. Additionally, using RSAT DNA
analysis software we identify an androgen response element (ARE) in
intron 2 of SEMA3C and show that AR is recruited to this genomic region
in an androgen-dependent manner in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Furthermore, the isolated ARE binds to the AR-DNA binding domain in gel
shift assays and can be transactivated by AR in reporter gene assays.
Finally we show that the pioneering factor, GATA2, is necessary for
AR-mediated expression of SEMA3C. Collectively, our work identifies
SEMA3C as a direct transcriptional target of AR in support of our
hypothesis that dysregulated AR signaling drives inadvertent upregulation
of SEMA3C and PCa disease progression. Deregulated AR signaling underpins
prostate cancer progression and underscores the need to elucidate
transcriptional targets of AR. Identification of SEMA3C as a novel target
of AR provides the rationale for targeted therapies directed against
SEMA3C.

