Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fc-FcR interaction impacts the clearance and antitumor activity of
antibody-drug conjugates in NSG mice


Majority of preclinical efficacy studies for cancer therapeutics are
performed on tumor models implanted in immune-deficient mouse strains,
including athymic nude, severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), or
NOD-SCID/IL2Rgamma null (NSG) mice. To better understand the correlation
between drug exposure and preclinical antitumor activity of biologics, we
evaluated the pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles of antibodies and
antibody-drug conjugates (ADC) in four strains of mice commonly used in
cancer research, including BALB/c, athymic nude, SCID, and NSG. To our
surprise, antibodies and ADCs had an abnormally short serum half-life in
NSG mice, compared to other strains of mice.We hypothesized that the fast
clearance from plasma in NSG mice may reduce the overall exposure of
xenografts to the ADCs, resulting in underestimation of antitumor
activity. This was confirmed by comparing cAC10-vcMMAE in CD30+
Karpas-299 tumors implanted in either SCID mice or NSG mice. A single
dose of 1 mg/kg cAC10-vcMMAE ADC resulted in complete remission of
Karpas-299 tumors implanted in SCID mice (5/5). In contrast, the same
treatment regimen had no effect on Karpas-299 tumors implanted in NSG
mice (0/5). This observation suggests indeed the shortened exposure
penalizes ADC efficacy in NSG models.We then hypothesized that the fast
clearance of ADCs from plasma in NSG mice could be mediated by Fc-FcR
interaction; compromising this interaction may improve the serum
half-lives of antibodies and ADCs and thus enhance ADC-mediated antitumor
effects in NSG mice. To test this, we utilized a mutant antibody with the
amino acid substitutions of E233P:L234V:L235 in its Fc domain that result
in significantly reduced FcR binding (G1V1). These mutations restored the
serum exposure in NSG mice to that level comparable to other strains of
mice. As a result, treatment of 1 mg/kg cAC10G1V1-vcMMAE led to tumor
remission in Karpas-299 tumors grown in NSG mice, correlating with
extended exposure. In parallel, pretreatment with human IV immunoglobulin
also enhanced ADC exposure and antitumor activity in the NSG mice.In
summary, these results suggest preclinical PK/PD assessment should be
performed in the same strains of mice, especially when NSG xenograft
models are used to evaluate activities. Moreover, reduced FcR binding may
enhance ADC exposure and allow a better assessment of therapeutic
potential of biologics in NSG-based xenograft models.

