Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAX mutations in endometrial cancer are associated with poor
patient outcome, altered E-box binding, and increased tumor vascularity


In contrast to aberrant MYC-signaling, MYC associated factor X (MAX)
mutation is not common in many cancers but occurs in a limited number of
specific tissue types, where it may be important. We sequenced MAX in 540
endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC) DNAs. Mutations were seen 5.37% of
samples with two hotspots, H28R (n = 12) and R60Q/W (n = 4 R60Q and n = 1
R60W), which accounted for 60% of the mutations seen. MAX mutation was
associated with reduced recurrence-free survival (RFS) (P = 0.03; HR [95%
CI] = 3.798 [1.10-13.0]) and with advanced stage (P = 0.024) and high
tumor grade (P = 0.048). The association with reduced RFS remained
significant in multivariable analysis (P = 0.05 HR = 2.40 [1.00-5.74]),
strongly suggesting MAX mutation contributes to clinical aggressiveness
in EEC.Focusing on the H28R hotspot mutation, we performed whole
transcriptome expression profiling using AN3CA endometrial cancer cell
lines stably expressing exogenous long and short isoforms of flag-tagged
MAX-WT and MAX-H28R. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering and principle
component analysis proved that the expression profiles for the MAX-H28R
long cells were strikingly different than the MAX-H28R short, MAX-WT and
unmodified cells.The MAX:DNA interface contains a predicted hydrogen bond
between his28 and a guanine residue in the E-box motif. We hypothesized
that the his-arg mutation seen in EECs would alter DNA binding, and
assessed altered binding via chromatin immunoprecipitation/qPCR (ChIP).
MAX-H28R had higher affinity for the NPM1 and CDK4 promoter regions, both
of which include E-boxes that are well-established MYC/MAX targets. EMSAs
for the same regions confirmed ChIP results, and showed that the
supershifted MAX-WT and MAX-H28R complexes had different motilities,
consistent with altered confirmation. We showed that an anti-MYC antibody
was not able to supershift the EMSA fragment, indicating MYC is not part
of the MAX:DNA complex. Co-IP, however, showed MAX-H28R retains MYC
binding ability. Based on these findings, we conclude the differences
seen in EMSA were with MAX homodimers. RNA-seq revealed differential gene
expression in MAX-H28R mutated tumors, and ChIP showed enhanced MAX-H28R
affinity for E-boxes in several of the differentially expressed genes.In
vivo, MAX-H28R AN3CA xenografts were markedly hemorrhagic compared to
MAX-WT. MECA-32 (pan-endothelial marker) staining proved that the
MAX-mutant tumors had significantly more vessels per field (2.4-fold
increase, P = 0.002). Work is ongoing to test for paracrine factors
elaborated by the H28R-mutant AN3CA cells that might contribute to the
vascular phenotype.Taken together these data implicate MAX mutation as a
novel driver of endometrial tumorigenesis, contributing to tumor
aggressiveness through enhanced tumor vascularity and potentially other
mechanisms.

