Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGFA/NRP1 signal contributes to cell adhesion and motility in
breast cancer cells


Background and objective:Bevacizumab suppressed tumor angiogenesis by
blocking the VEGFA signal into endothelial cells. Although, bevacizumab,
in combination with chemotherapy, has exhibited some therapeutic efficacy
for metastatic breast cancer, its impact on overall survival has not been
proved.According to recent studies, VEGF is a multi-function molecule
targeting not only endothelial cells but also other cell members in tumor
microenvironment, including cancer cells, fibroblasts, immune cells, and
so on. In this study, we aimed to reveal VEGF-related molecular
mechanisms on breast cancer cells itself.Methods and Results:A
VEGF-expressing basal-like type breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231 cells
(231 cells) were used. VEGFA of 231 cell was knocked out using
Crisper-Cas9 system (VEGFA-KO). Compared to the wild type (WT) 231 cells,
VEGFA-KO 231 cells showed rounded and weakened adhesive morphology.
Scratch assay and motion picture assay demonstrated the VEGFA-KO 231
cells had impaired cell motility. Bevacizumab treatment to WT 231 cells
did not induce this morphologic change.Next, we generated soluble
neuropilin-1 (sNRP1) overexpressed 231 cells. sNRP1 consists of the NRP1
extracellular domain that includes a VEGFA-binding site, traps VEGFA to
function as an antagonist. sNRP1-231 cells exhibited rounded and lower
adhesive morphology similar to that of VEGFA-KO 231 cells.Bevacizumab and
NRP1 bind VEGFA at amino acid motifs from exon 3-4 and exon 7 of VEGFA,
respectively. Thus, our findings suggested that VEGFA could play a role
in cell morphology and motility via NRP1 for 231 cells, and that
bevacizumab could not block the VEGFA/NRP1 signal.DiscussionNRP1 is a
transmembrane protein that has been identified as a VEGF-A receptor. NRP1
is expressed by endothelial cells and functions as a co-receptor of
VEGFRs, enhancing VEGF-A binding and promoting downstream signaling. NRP1
is also expressed in variety of cancer cells including breast cancer.
Since NRP1 molecule lacks kinase activity, there have been efforts to
find the mechanisms of NRP1 signaling. To date, NRP1 expression of tumor
cells has been shown to contribute to proliferative signal transduction
from VEGF-A. Previous study showed VEGF-A/NRP1 signals induced the
phosphorylation of Akt leading to breast cancer cell survival (Bachelder
et al., 2001). And another study showed that the NRP1 cytoplasmic region
enhanced the interaction between NRP1 and GIPC1/Syx/RhoA, and promoted
tumor cell proliferation. However, the precise mechanisms regarding NRP1
signaling remains unknown.In conclusion, knocking out of VEGFA and
trapping of VEGFA by sNRP1 induced weakened adhesive morphology and
impaired cell motility in 231 cells. Because cell adhesion and motility
are important factors for tumor metastasis, VEGFA /NRP1 signaling in
breast cancer might be related to breast cancer metastasis, and can be a
useful therapeutic/preventive target for breast cancer.

