Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting chromatin dynamics in malignant progression


Tumor-initiating cells within a cancer exhibit distinct patterns of
transcription factors and gene expression compared to stem cells within
their healthy tissue. Little is known about the key transcription factors
that dictate chromatin remodeling and the accompanying transcriptional
changes that ultimately hardwire the malignant behavior of
tumor-initiating stem cells. Here, by in vivo chromatin and transcription
profiling, we show that dramatic shifts in large open-chromatin
(super-enhancer) landscapes underlie these differences. Focusing on one
of the most common and life-threatening cancers world-wide, squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), we show that super-enhancers of SCC-stem cells contain
the binding sites for a distinct set of putative master transcription
factors. Many of their genes, including Ets2 and Elk3, are themselves
regulated by SCC super-enhancers, suggesting a cooperative feed-forward
loop. Malignant progression requires these genes, whose knockdown
severely impairs tumor growth and prohibits progression from benign
papillomas to SCCs. Interestingly, ETS2 is known to be phosphorylated and
activated by RAS/MAPK signaling, and knockdown of ETS2 results in loss of
expression of SCC super-enhancer-associated genes. Conversely, in vivo
forced expression of an active ETS2 version harboring a phosphomimetic
substitution at the MAPK-activation residue is sufficient to trigger
cellular transformation without oncogenic RAS. Moreover,
ETS2-overactivation in epidermal progenitors rewires the super-enhancer
landscape and induces SCC super-enhancer associated genes including Fos,
Junb, Klf5 and Elk3. Finally, we identify dramatic remodeling of the
Cxcl1/2 locus from an H3K27me3-repressed to an ETS-regulated,
super-enhancer-activated state, and provide evidence for their autocrine
oncogenic role in SCCs through a cognate receptor Cxcr2. Together, our
findings unearth an essential regulatory network required for the SCC
chromatin landscape and unveil its importance in malignant
progression.This work was funded by grants from the National Institutes
of Health (R01-AR31737) and NYSTEM #CO29559.

