Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STING activation in the tumor microenvironment with a synthetic
human STING-activating cyclic dinucleotide leads to potent anti-tumor
immunity


Stimulator of Interferon Genes (STING) is a critical signaling sensor of
the innate immune system. STING binds cyclic dinucleotides (CDN) produced
by an intracellular enzyme in response to presence of intracellular DNA,
including tumor-derived DNA. STING-mediated production of host type I
interferon within the tumor microenvironment (TME) leads to the priming
and activation of systemic tumor antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell immunity
and tumor regression. A novel synthetic CDN derivative (ADU-S100), with
superior STING-activating and anti-tumor properties, was developed for
clinical translation. ADU-S100 has enhanced cellular uptake properties
and stability, as compared to bacterial- and mammalian-derived CDNs.
Induced cytokine expression from a panel of donor human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) expressing a variety of STING alleles,
including a homozygous haplotype for the most refractory human allele
(R232H), indicate that ADU-S100 activates STING across a diverse human
population. Direct engagement of STING through intratumoral (IT)
administration of ADU-S100 results in effective anti-tumor therapy and
long-term survival in various mouse syngeneic tumor models. IT injection
of ADU-S100 also generates substantial systemic immune responses capable
of rejecting distant metastases and provides long-lived immunologic
memory. Mechanistic studies demonstrate that STING-mediated anti-tumor
immunity is due in part to an acute pro-inflammatory cytokine response as
well as a tumor-specific CD8+ T cell response. Anti-tumor efficacy is
enhanced by combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors, for example
anti-PD1, informing future clinical development. By virtue of the ability
to elicit innate and T cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity in the TME,
these results demonstrate that CDNs have high translational potential for
the treatment of patients with advanced/metastatic solid tumors.

