Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYB-QKI rearrangements in angiocentric glioma drive tumorigenicity
through a tripartite mechanism


Diffuse pediatric low-grade gliomas (PLGGs) are among the most common
solid tumors in children. While BRAF mutations and MYBL1 rearrangements
have recently been identified as diagnostic and treatment related
oncogenic drivers in pediatric gangliogliomas and diffuse astrocytomas,
respectively, for the majority of diffuse PLGGs the oncogenic driver(s)
remain unknown. Recent efforts to identify new oncogenic drivers lack
sufficient power to determine the true frequency of alterations in genes
or to associate specific alterations with rare histological subtypes,
such as Angiocentric gliomas (AGs). To address this issue, we performed
genomic analysis of new and published data from 249 PLGGs including 19
AGs. We identified MYB-QKI fusions as a specific, recurrent, single
candidate driver event in AGs. Although MYB is expressed during early
brain development in a subset of progenitor cells, it is not known to
play a role in normal cortical brain where AGs frequently occur. In vitro
functional studies show MYB-QKI rearrangements promote tumorigenesis in
mouse neural stem cells (mNSCs) through three mechanisms: MYB activation
by truncation, enhancer translocation driving aberrant MYB-QKI
expression, and hemizygous loss of the tumor suppressor QKI. Expression
of the MYB-QKI fusion increases mNSC proliferation and activates known
MYB target genes including KIT and CDK6. H3K27ac enhancer profiling of AG
tumors demonstrate active enhancer elements are translocated proximally
to the MYB promoter while in vitro promoter assays confirmed that QKI
enhancer sequences activate the MYB promoter. Together with functional
studies demonstrating that MYB-QKI can also bind and activate the MYB
promoter, these data support a positive auto-regulatory feed-back loop
model in which active MYB-QKI is able to drive its own expression through
enhanced MYB-promoter-activation. Furthermore, when injected
orthotopically into immunodeficient mice, expression of truncated MYB or
MYB-QKI is sufficient to induce tumor formation that recapitulate
histologic and immunophenotypic characteristics of AGs. Analysis of AG
specific MYB-QKI fusion represents the first example of how a single
driver rearrangement simultaneously transforms cells via three genetic
and epigenetic mechanisms in a cancer.

