Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of immune homeostasis by direct activator BH3-only
proteins


The BH3-only proteins BIM, BID, and PUMA have emerged as both inhibitors
of anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins and direct activators of the
pro-apoptotic executioner proteins BAX and BAK, and have been implicated
in regulating immune cell homeostasis. For example, BIM is a master
regulator of B and T cells and its deletion in mice causes splenomegaly
and lymphocytosis. Although deletion of Bid or Puma do not grossly impact
murine hematopoietic organs, loss of each can protect lymphocytes from
certain forms of cell death. Combined deletion of Puma and Bim causes
increased lymphocytosis and spontaneous development of B-cell lymphoma,
while loss of BID and BIM leads to delayed T cell contraction following
antigen-mediated proliferation. To investigate the role of direct
activator BH3-only proteins in regulating the adaptive immune response
over time, we performed peripheral lymphocyte analyses on single and
combinatorial knock-outs of Bim, Puma, and Bid. Select genotypes, such as
Bim/, Bim/Puma/, and Bim/Puma/Bid/ mice, show lymphocytosis early in life
but, unexpectedly, counts were observed to gradually normalize by 40
weeks of age. Given the dominant role of BIM in immune cell homeostasis,
we investigated whether this phenotype was dictated by global deletion of
Bim or intrinsic to T or B cell-specific Bim deletion. In generating and
analyzing Lck-cre and CD19-cre Bim floxed animals, we found that T
cell-specific Bim deletion recapitulated early lymphocyte expansion
followed by contraction, whereas the lymphocytosis of mice with B
cell-specific Bim deletion showed no age-related changes. Further
characterization of aged Lck-cre Bim floxed mice revealed spleen weights
similar to wild type mice, and thymocytes with increased sensitivity to a
range of apoptotic stimuli; these mice also have an increased percentage
of regulatory T cells compared to similarly aged wild-type mice, as has
been reported for globally-deleted Bim/ animals. To determine the
mechanism underlying the observed lymphocyte contraction, we performed
qRT-PCR analysis for a panel of BCL-2 family proteins. We find that aged
Lck-cre Bim floxed mice manifest upregulation of a series of BH3-only
transcripts, including Puma and Bid, reflective of an intriguing
compensatory mechanism to remedy, over time, the lymphocytosis that
derives from Bim deletion in T cells. These studies provide new insight
into the complexity and dynamism underlying BH3-only regulation of immune
cell homeostasis during health, disease, and aging.

