Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a highly selective B/CRAF kinase inhibitor that
exhibits antitumor activities in RAS and BRAF mutant tumors with minimal
paradoxical activation


The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway is
frequently activated in human cancers due to genetic alterations that can
occur at multiple nodes in the pathway, the most prevalent of which are
mutations in RAS or BRAF. While BRAFV600 mutant tumors are effectively
treated with existing RAF inhibitors, RAS mutant cancers and tumors
expressing atypical BRAF mutants remain an unmet medical need. Emerging
biology has demonstrated that the CRAF kinase functions as a critical
mediator of mutant KRAS-driven cell proliferation and tumor development.
CRAF was also shown to be the mediator of feedback-mediated pathway
reactivation following MEK inhibitor treatment in KRAS mutant cancers.
Hence selective inhibitors that potently inhibit the activity of CRAF
could be both effective in blocking mutant RAS-driven tumorigenesis and
in alleviating feedback activation. We have developed a type II
ATP-competitive inhibitor that inhibits both B- and CRAF kinase
activities at picomolar IC50 values in biochemical assays with high
selectivity profile against a panel of 456 human kinases. The inhibitor
not only inhibits MAPK signaling activity in tumor models harboring
BRAFV600 mutation, but also inhibits mutant N- and KRAS-driven signaling
with minimum paradoxical activation, likely due to its activity in
inhibiting both RAF monomers and dimers with similar potencies.
Correspondingly, profiling data of the inhibitor in a panel of 480 human
cancer cell lines shows that it has higher antitumor activities in cell
lines harboring BRAF or RAS mutations as compared to those that are
wild-type. The inhibitor is orally bioavailable, it demonstrates a direct
PK/PD relationship and causes tumor regression in multiple cell line and
primary human tumor derived xenograft models that have BRAF, NRAS or KRAS
mutations with good tolerability. Thus, we have developed a next
generation RAF inhibitor with unique biochemical and cellular properties
that enables its antitumor activities in RAS mutant tumors.

