Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary supplement 3, 3-diindolylmethane (DIM) as an
antiangiogenic agent in breast cancer


Tumor angiogenesis refers to the sprouting and cooption of proliferating
endothelial cells (ECs) from adjacent pre-existing host vasculature, and
is a key target of cancer therapy. Tumor cells exploit their
microenvironment by releasing cytokines and growth factors to promote and
support angiogenesis. Within this complex tumor microenvironment, we and
others have shown that tumors can recruit bone marrow derived endothelial
progenitor cells that differentiate into mature bone marrow-derived
endothelial cells and incorporate into sprouting tumor neovessels. Under
pathological circumstances, such as breast cancer, a clear association
between estrogen receptor expression by ECs, angiogenic activity, and/or
tumor invasiveness has been made. Approximately, 80% of breast cancers
are hormone-receptor-positive cancers, thus enabling tamoxifen as the
mainstay of breast cancer therapy. The roles of the anti-estrogens
fulvestrant (ICI) and the dietary supplement 3, 3-diindolylmethane (DIM)
on cell-cell interaction and angiogenesis have not been fully elucidated.
This study is designed to evaluate and compare the effect of these
antiestrogens on angiogenesis at the cellular and molecular levels using
tube formation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) as an in
vitro angiogenesis model. HUVEC cells were treated with serial dilutions
of either DIM or ICI in presence and absence of (3nM) estrogen, and
subjected to in vitro tube formation, proliferation, migration, and
angiogenesis antibody array assays. We report that HUVEC cells are more
sensitive to DIM than ICI. At 25 M concentration, DIM significantly
inhibited the crucial steps of angiogenesis including HUVEC cells
proliferation, migration, cytokine release, and tube formation in an
estrogen independent manner. On the other hand, at 1 M concentration, ICI
significantly exerted an antiangiogenic effects inhibiting HUVEC cells
proliferation, migration, and tube formation, but this effect was totally
dependent on the presence of estrogen. These results are validated by our
observation that HUVEC cells express estrogen receptor beta (ER-) and not
estrogen receptor alpha (ER-). A correlative effect between the
antiangiogenic activity of DIM and ER- upregulation was noted. We believe
that the anti-estrogenic activity of DIM is mediated through the genomic
and non-genomic activity of ER- in endothelial cells predicting a new
target for DIM to manifest its antiangiogenic effect.

