Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of oncogenic mutation hotspots via
three-dimensional proximity


One of the greatest challenges in studying the genomic basis of human
cancer is distinguishing the few mutations that directly contribute to
tumorigenesis (drivers) from the many biologically neutral mutations
(passengers). Existing methods can identify highly recurrent individual
mutations or mutated genes, but capturing functional yet infrequent
long-tail mutations remains challenging. While individually uncommon,
these long-tail mutations are present in as many as one-third of cancer
patients, and for many of them targeted therapies currently exist.
Therefore, improved approaches to identify individual driver mutations in
the long tail will facilitate our understanding of their potentially
diverse biological and clinical significance. Some of these mutations can
be identified as hotspots based on their recurrence on or around the same
residue. Others may occur in different regions but are actually close in
protein three-dimensional structures. We have developed a novel method
that identifies mutations that significantly cluster together within
three-dimensional proximity in protein structures, or 3D hotspots. We
applied this method to a combined collection of mutation data of 21,000
sequenced tumor samples in 74 cancers.Our analysis confirmed many
well-studied 3D hotspots of functional mutations in cancer genes such as
KRAS, BRAF, IDH2, SMAD4, FBXW7, SPOP, RHOA, and PTPN11. Most of these
genes have well known individual hotspots, but our analysis suggests that
additional mutations in other residues of the protein are adjacent in the
folded protein structure and may also be oncogenic. We also identified
novel 3D hotspots in known cancer genes such as EP300, MAP2K1, and KDR,
as well as several other genes of unknown significance that harbor 3D
hotspots (e.g., DCC). Most of these hotspots are present in multiple
cancers.To explore the functional consequences and potential
translational significance of long-tail low-incidence mutations
identified by our method, we assessed several MAP2K1 mutations in vitro.
MAP2K1 (MEK1) is a critical effector of MAPK signaling, harbors
conventional single-codon hotspots in several cancer types, and a number
of selective MAPK pathway inhibitors are either FDA-approved or are being
investigated in early-phase clinical trials. Our experiments confirmed
that these mutations activate MAP2K1 and confer sensitivity to MAP2K1
inhibition.We have provided an implementation of the algorithm via an
interactive web resource connecting to cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics
(http://cbioportal.org/) for easy interpretation of cancer genomics data
in the context of three-dimensional structures. By adding to cBioPortal's
already powerful capacity of clinical decision support, our method and
analysis provide a useful approach of interpretation, prioritization and
extension of biologically significant and clinically actionable mutations
in cancer.

