Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of the Archer FusionPlex solid tumor panel in the JAX
cancer treatment profileTM


Introduction: A comprehensive somatic tumor profile with associated
treatment selection options requires the detection of gene fusions. After
evaluating the clinical utility of multiple methods of gene fusion
detection, it was determined that the Archer FusionPlex Solid Tumor Panel
(AFPSTP) best compliments the JAX Cancer Treatment ProfileTM (JAX-CTPTM)
clinical test in terms of workflow, specimen requirements and turnaround
time. Here we describe our analytical validation process for the AFPSTP
assay.Methods: AFPSTP was validated using 24 samples: 5 JAX Patient
Derived Xenograft (PDX) cases, 4 translocation positive controls, 2 FFPE
cancer samples, 1 normal tissue sample, and 12 cell lines. Nine of the
cell lines were previously identified as positive for fusion transcripts
and 3 lacked detectable fusion events. The validation was executed in 5
phases: (1) confirm that AFPSTP was able to detect known fusion or lack
of fusion events in characterized specimens; (2) determine inter-assay
concordance; (3) determine intra-assay concordance; (4) LOD and (5)
sensitivity.Results: The fusion detection results for this validation are
listed in Table 1. All but one of these fusion events was previously
identified. The one novel fusion was confirmed using TaqMan RT-PCR. In
addition to the expected fusions, 4 false positive events were detected,
2 due to mispriming and 2 determined to be WT read through transcripts.
The fusion detection inter and intra-assay concordance was found to be
100% and the sensitivity was calculated to be 91.67% at a LOD of
5%.Conclusion: This analysis outlines the clinical validation of the
incorporation of AFPSTP into the JAX-CTPTM test system. Once
incorporated, the AFPSTP assay will accomplish the goal of making
JAX-CTPTM a more comprehensive somatic tumor profiling assay without
affecting the current acceptable turnaround time or required input
material.
List of 15 samples that were found to be fusion positive and the
corresponding detected fusion.

