Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteotoxic isolevuglandins are a central feature of
radiation-induced pulmonary injury


The development of radiation induced lung injury (RiPI) is a major
barrier that limits the dose that can be administered for controlling
locally advanced lung cancer. Although progress has been made toward
identifying the pathophysiological events responsible for RiPI, there is
still a substantial gap in knowledge. It is well established that
oxidative stress is central to the progression of RiPR. In addition,
reoccurring cellular injury appears to be a critical event for promotion
of radiation-induced fibrosis. Yet, the exact mechanism by which reactive
oxygen species (ROS) promotes injury and the nature of the reoccurring
injury remain to be fully elucidated. Isolevuglandins are generated by
free radical peroxidation of phospholipid-esterified arachidonic acid.
Isoketalation, defined as covalent adduction of isolevuglandins to the
-amino group of protein lysine residues, is emerging as a novel mechanism
by which ROS contributes to the genesis of some diseases. Although
isoketalation promotes proteotoxicity and cytotoxicity that can
contribute to disease progression, there is currently a lack of knowledge
concerning its role in RiPI, the identity of susceptible proteins or
whether the process can be genetically regulated. We used a multifaceted
approach that included wild type, Nrf2 and p47 null mice, confocal
microscopy, and LC-MS/MS analysis of affinity purified proteins to
address these questions. Mass spectrometry and gene ontology analysis
identified several potential protein targets involved in cytoskeletal
regulation, Wnt signaling, integrin signaling, chemokine and cytokine
signaling and histone biology. Genetic evidence linking oxidant challenge
to protein adduction was provided from the mouse knockout studies where
it was shown that Nrf2 expression suppressed, while NADPH oxidase
activity promoted isoketalation. We found that when isoketalation
exceeded a critical level, cells underwent apoptosis. We identified the
cell types in mouse lung that are susceptible to adduction. In a C57BL/6j
murine model of radiation induced pulmonary injury we found that ionizing
radiation increased the level of adduction concomitant with the
development of a chronic apoptotic phenotype. We used human idiopathic
pulmonary fibrotic (IPF) tissue as a surrogate for radiation-induced
pulmonary fibrotic tissue, which is very hard to obtain. Human IPF and
radiation-induced lung injury share a common phenotype that includes
slow/chronic development and a prominent ROS component. We found an
abundance of adducted protein in human IPF compared to control lung
tissue, identified collagen 11 as one of the highly adducted proteins and
show that adduction impairs collagen degradation by MMP1. In summary,
these data support the hypothesis that radiation-induced oxidant stress
promotes pulmonary injury, in part, by a hitherto, unrecognized
mechanism: isoketalation. Supported in part by NIH/NHLBI Grant
RO1HL112286.

