Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BET inhibitor INCB054329 enhances the activity of checkpoint
modulation in syngeneic tumor models


Inhibitors of the BET family of bromodomain proteins have been shown to
be growth inhibitory across a spectrum of tumor types due to their
ability to regulate the expression of key survival and cell fate
determining genes such as c-myc. In addition to their role in cancer,
studies using genetic knockdown and small molecule inhibitors have
demonstrated that targeting BET proteins controls the expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokine genes in macrophages and is therapeutic in
models of acute inflammation. These data suggest that in addition to
their tumor intrinsic effects, BET inhibitors may also regulate the
cytokine milieu within the tumor microenvironment and have
immunomodulatory activity in cancer. To study this aspect, we evaluated
INCB054329, a novel and selective BET inhibitor currently in Phase 1
trials, alone and in combination either with epacadostat, a highly
selective IDO1 inhibitor, or with PD-1/PD-L1 axis blockade in syngeneic
tumor models using immunocompetent animals. When used alone, INCB054329
suppressed a panel of cytokines and chemokines in a whole blood assay,
confirming that INCB054329 can antagonize a pro-inflammatory response.
The potency of INCB054329 in reducing the levels of these inflammatory
mediators in the whole blood assay was similar to that for inhibition of
c-myc, suggesting that the effects were on-target. INCB054329 was capable
of inhibiting the growth of multiple syngeneic tumor models in
immunocompetent mice, whereas only modest tumor growth inhibition was
observed in immunodeficient mice and a lack of activity was observed in
vitro, supporting the immunomodulatory activity of the compound. Because
maximal in vivo tumor growth inhibition required an intact immune system,
we investigated the impact of INCB054329 on various immune cell subsets,
both in vitro and in vivo. Of note, increases in effector T cell
populations were observed and efforts are ongoing to further characterize
the tumor infiltrating immune cells following INCB054329 treatment. The
mechanistic complimentarity of this novel BET inhibitor-mediated
immunomodulation was also evaluated in combination with other
therapeutically relevant mechanisms, including IDO1 inhibition and PD-1
axis blockade. Enhanced efficacy was observed with all
INCB054329-containing regimens. These data demonstrate for the first time
that BET inhibition can suppress tumor growth through both
tumor-intrinsic and immune modulatory mechanisms, and support the
potential of epigenetic-based, immunotherapy combinations as a novel
approach to cancer therapy.

