Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution in noncancerous esophageal mucosa in normal and
cancer-bearing individuals


BackgroundEsophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) represents the most
common form of esophageal cancer worldwide, especially in East Asia,
where alcohol drinking and smoking have been implicated in the field
carcinogenesis of ESCC. However, the oncogenic process therein has been
poorly understood in terms of gene mutations.Patients & MethodsA total of
100 samples, including cancer, dysplastic, and non-dysplastic esophageal
tissues, were obtained from 24 individual with (N = 14) or without (N =
10) ESCC (a median of 2.5 samples per case: 129) either by endoscopy or
surgery and were subjected to whole exome sequencing (WES). An additional
paired cancer/non-caner samples from 32 patients was analyzed by targeted
sequencing (TS). All samples were analyzed for copy number alterations
(CNAs) using SNP array- and/or digital sequencing-based
karyotyping.ResultsIn WES, clonal evolution in esophageal epithelia, as
determined by the presence of somatic mutations, was detected in 21 of 21
cancer, 12 of 12 dysplastic, and 63 of 67 non-dysplastic samples, where
the mean number of mutation per sample showed a significant trend to
increase in cancer (65) and dysplastic samples (50) compared to
non-dysplastic samples (13) (P = 2.110-11). CNAs, especially those
involving CDKN2A, CCND1, YAP1, and EGFR, were frequently affected in
cancer samples, but rarely so in non-dysplastic samples. Non-dysplastic
samples tended to have smaller allelic burden and therefore, clone size,
compared to dysplastic and cancer samples (P = 2.210-16). Mutations had a
predominant age-related signature in non-dysplastic samples but
increasing APOBEC3A/3B patterns was observed in cancer and dysplastic
samples. Shared mutations were found only within cancer tissues but never
among dysplastic or non-dysplastic samples, suggesting the latter lesions
are clonally independent from each other. In accordance with previous
reports, TP53 mutations were found in 21/21 cancer samples and also found
in dysplastic (11/12) and non-dysplastic samples at a lower frequency
(26/67). Strikingly, non-dysplastic samples harbored a very high
frequency of NOTCH1 mutations (51/67), which were also found in cancer
(3/21) and non-dysplastic (8/12) samples but at much lower frequencies (P
= 6.610-7). TS of validation samples confirmed the trend of higher NOTCH1
(84% vs. 25%) and lower TP53 mutation rates (38% vs. 100%) in
non-dysplastic samples compared to cancer samples. The number of
mutations in non-dysplastic samples was higher in drinkers than
non-drinkers. Multiple NOTCH1 mutations were more common in cancer
patients and drinkers than non-drinkers.ConclusionClonal proliferation in
non-cancer esophageal epithelia is common even in non-ESCC cases and
extensive in ESCC cases. NOTCH1 and TP53 mutations play major roles in
clonal evolution in common but may have differential impacts on
esophageal carcinogenesis, which is likely to be shaped by APOBEC-induced
mutations and CNAs.

