Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergy between statins and BCL-2 inhibitors in blood cancers


BCL-2 is a key pro-survival protein that is highly expressed in many
leukemias and lymphomas. ABT-199 (venetoclax) is a small molecule
inhibitor of BCL-2 that has demonstrated promising clinical potential in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). However, other hematologic
malignancies are less responsive to ABT-199 as a single agent, suggesting
that combinations of targeted therapies may be required to elicit more
promising responses. We have investigated the potential of combining
ABT-199 with HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR) inhibitors (statins), which have
known anti-cancer potential in hematologic malignancies. Using multiple
chemically distinct statin compounds, we observed profound synergistic
induction of apoptosis when combined with ABT-199 in both human diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) as well as acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
cell lines. This synergy was also seen in primary murine B lymphoma cells
over-expressing MYC and BCL-2. Importantly, addition of exogenous
mevalonate completely rescued cells from the combination, confirming
on-target efficacy of HMGCR inhibition. Using BH3 profiling, we found
that simvastatin significantly primed lymphoma cells for undergoing
apoptosis (termed mitochondrial priming). Notably, the degree of priming
correlated with its ability to synergize with ABT-199, suggesting that
this method may be used to predict patient responses. Strikingly, the
combination did not synergize to kill normal human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy donors, suggesting that statins may
selectively prime cancer cells for apoptosis. Mechanistic studies support
the hypothesis that statins synergize with ABT-199 by suppressing protein
prenylation, particularly protein geranylgeranylation. In support, the
addition of exogenous geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) completely
rescued cells from the effects of simvastatin. Furthermore, selective
inhibition of protein geranylgeranyl transferase (GGT) was sufficient to
recapitulate the effects of simvastatin in combination with ABT-199.
Lastly, we have identified Rap1A de-prenylation as a marker of
pharmacodynamic response to statins in vivo. Thus, this project
highlights a novel combination for use in aggressive lymphomas,
establishes its efficacy and tolerability using preclinical models, and
provides proof-of-concept to warrant investigation of its clinical
potential.

