Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral cancer cells may hijack stem cell altruism to survive during
extreme hypoxia, and exposure to chemotherapeutic drugs


The mechanism of tumor hypoxia induced reprogramming of cancer cells are
not understood well. Hypoxia might activate evolutionary preserved
cellular defense mechanism that could contribute to tumor progression and
metastasis. We recently described that during hypoxia/oxidative stress,
human embryonic stem cells (hES) exhibit an altruistic defense mechanism,
where a few cells reprogram to a highly undifferentiated state, and
secrete glutathione to protect rest of the community of cells from
oxidative stress induced DNA damage (Das B et al, Stem Cells, 2012). The
altruistic stem cells phenotype exhibited high HIF-2alpha and low p53
activity. After a few weeks, the reprogrammed cells, although highly fit
to survives, underwent spontaneous apoptosis/differentiation by
re-activating the p53/MDM2 oscillation. Thus, the reprogrammed cells
sacrificed its own fitness to enhance the fitness of the rest of the
community, an altruistic behavior (Das B et al. Stem Cells, 2012). Here,
we investigated the potential hijacking of the altruistic defense
mechanism by oral cancer cells during exposure to hypoxia. We exposed the
four oral cancer cell lines SCC-25, SCC-15, SCC-9 and SCC-5 to extreme
hypoxia followed by re-oxygenation for 72 hours. We found that while
majority of cancer cells underwent apoptosis, a few cancer cell lines
survived, exhibited side-population (SP) phenotype, high level of
HIF-2alpha, Nanog, Sox-2 and MYC. The SP cells exhibited migratory
activity, as well as high tumorigenic and metastatic activity in NOD/SCID
mice. ChIP assay indicated that HIF-2alhpa interact with MYC and NOTCH1.
The conditioned media of SP cells exhibited high level of glutathione,
and ability to protect non-SP cells from cisplatin-induced toxicity.
These results indicate that HIF-2alpha and MYC may cooperate to reprogram
a few oral cancer cells to altruistic stemness phenotype. The altruistic
phenotype that exhibited cytoprotective activity against cisplatin
mediated toxicity. Thus, similar to bacteria, where altruistic biofilm
exhibit novel drug resistance mechanism, stem cell altruism may serve as
a novel drug resistance mechanism in oral cancer.

