Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico prediction of the clinical response to the mTOR
inhibitor everolimus using a Boolean model: validation from a cohort of
the SHIVA trial


Introduction:Around half of currently marketed molecularly targeted
agents (MTAs) in oncology have a companion diagnostic predictive
biomarker that is usually a single molecular alteration (e.g. V600E BRAF
mutation for the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib), whereas around half of MTAs
lack a predictive biomarker of efficacy (e.g. mTOR inhibitors). We aimed
at modeling mathematically the response to the mTOR inhibitor everolimus
taking into account coexisting molecular alterations and validating the
model on clinical data from the everolimus cohort of the SHIVA trial
(Lancet Oncol. 2015).Material and methods:We constructed the molecular
signaling network corresponding to the most frequent altered genes found
in different cancer types. We translated this network in a Boolean model
and simulated it stochastically. We also developed a method to simulate
the pharmacodynamics of everolimus. A function comprising the
probabilities of the phenotypes of the model (cell cycling, apoptosis,
senescence and quiescence) has been used to predict the tumor growth
kinetics from the molecular profiles. We evaluated whether the in silico
model could be validated on clinical data from 45 patients with various
tumor types treated with everolimus in the SHIVA trial following the
identification of a molecular alteration involving the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway. The correlation between the reported progression-free survival
(PFS) in the SHIVA trial and the PFS predicted by the model was
evaluated.Results:There were 34 unique associations of alterations
detected by target sequencing, comparative genomic hybridization array
and immunohistochemistry in the cohort of 45 patients. We found a
non-linear relation between the predicted PFS from the model and the
reported PFS from the trial (Pearson correlation = 0.91, p value =
1e-17). The two patients with the best PFS, one harboring a metastatic
germinal tumor and the other a metastatic breast cancer, are precisely
predicted by the model. Similarly, the model was able to predict
efficiently the resistant tumors to everolimus.Conclusion:We were able to
predict the response to everolimus and confirmed these predictions in
data reported in the SHIVA trial using an in silico model of the
molecular determinant of tumor growth. By this mean, we provide a novel
approach to predict treatment response from the association of molecular
alterations.

