Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational strategy for targeting MCL1 amplified tumors with
CDK9 inhibitor


BCL-2, BCL-XL, and MCL-1 are members of the prosurvival family of
proteins that regulate the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. These
proteins are often amplified or overexpressed in multiple tumor types.
Previously, we showed that non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines
with low BCL-XL expression (high MCL-1 / BCL-XL ratio) are
MCL-1-dependent. TCGA data shows MCL1 amplification is one of the
frequent genetic events in NSCLC adenocarcinoma (20%) and breast cancer
(15%), while BCL2 is frequently amplified in activated B-cell like
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (11%) and BCL2L1 in colorectal cancer
(15%). We hypothesize that cancer cell lines with MCL1 amplification
and/or high MCL-1 / BCL-XL ratio depend on MCL-1 for survival and are
sensitive to inhibition of CDK9, a component of the transcriptional
elongation complex that regulates MCL-1 expression. In this study, we
demonstrate that NSCLC, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and ovarian
cell lines with amplified MCL1 or low BCL-XL expression (high MCL-1 /
BCL-XL expression ratio) are MCL-1-dependent, and are sensitive to
dinaciclib, a CDK9 inhibitor. Cell lines with high BCL-XL expression
could be re-sensitized to dinaciclib when co-treated with BCL2/BCL-XL
inhibitor navitoclax (ABT-263) or BCL-XL-selective inhibitor A-1155463,
suggesting BCL-XL as a resistance factor. Indeed, exogenous expression of
BCL-XL rescues sensitive cell lines from dinaciclib. As reported in TCGA,
ovarian, NSCLC and TNBC patients with MCL1 amplification also have high
MCL-1 expression, and we hypothesized that these patients to be sensitive
to CDK9 inhibitors. We developed a fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) assay to detect MCL1 amplification which can potentially select
patients that may benefit from dinaciclib treatment. We show that fifteen
percent of NSCLC patients have high MCL1 amplification, similar to
published data. In addition, we have identified other predictive
biomarkers associated with sensitivity in TNBC cell lines from gene
expression analysis. In conclusion, we have developed a translational
strategy for identifying MCL-1-dependent cancers that may be sensitive to
CDK9 inhibitors in the clinic.Disclosures:All authors are employees of
AbbVie. The design, study conduct, and financial support for this
research were provided by AbbVie. AbbVie participated in the
interpretation of data, review, and approval of the publication

