Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic biomarkers as molecular targets for individualized
neoadjuvant treatment for cervical cancer


Cervical cancer is one of the most prevalent malignancy and of higher
mortality in the world, and is considered a marker of underdevelopment.
Conventional radiotherapy is one of the treatments used for this type of
cancer. 30 to 40% of patients with similar prognosis factors not respond
equally to a comparable standard treatment. The poor response to
radiotherapy leads to the development of innovative and effective
therapies for cervical cancer locally advanced, metastatic and
refractory. A comparative analysis of cervical cancer in the context of
other cancers may reveal that it is relatively smaller number of targeted
molecular agents that have been tested. Accordingly, a number of
biological agents are currently in clinical development for the purpose
of, inhibiting angiogenesis, molecularly address EGFR and IGF-1R,
modulation of cell cycle, of histone deacetylases, COX-2, mTOR and tumor
microenvironment (hypoxia and glycolysis). Within work that we have been
developing, reported that gene expression of IGF1R is a strong predictive
marker for lack of response to radiotherapy, patients have 28.6 times
higher risk of failure treatment; Objective: To determine whether
expression of IGF-IR, GAPDH, HIF-1 alpha, Survivin, GLUT1, CAIX, HKII and
clinicopathological parameters can be used as prognostic biomarkers to
treatment outcome and as possible molecular targets. Patients & Methods:
This prospective cohort study included 149 patients with squamous cell
carcinomas of the uterine cervix in FIGO stages IIB and IIIB between 2008
and 2011. The mean age was 46 years. Of the 149 patients, 61 were treated
with radiotherapy and 88 with concurrent radiochemotherapy. Expression of
the proteins CAIX, GLUT-1, HIF1, HKII, IGF-IR, IGF-IR and Survivin was
determined by immunohistochemistry in biopsies taken before treatment.
Results: The highest increase was found in expression of GAPDH (100%),
Survivin (87%), followed of, IGF-IR (76.5%), IGF-IR (74.5%), IGF-IR and
IGF-IR concordance in the expression(73%), HIF1 (74.1%); strong
expression was observed with low frequency for GLUT-1 (31.1%), CAIX
(16.2%), HKII (10.6%). We found that patients who do not express IGF-1R,
GLUT1 and having hemoglobin levels > 11g/dl have improved overall
survival compared to those that express IGF-1R, GLUT1 and having
hemoglobin 11g/dl (P = 0.0158). Conclusions: Using the expression of
GLUT1, IGF-1R and Hb levels ( 11g/dl) as therapeutic molecular targets
could contribute to an appropriate therapeutic management as
individualized neoadjuvant treatment for cervical cancer

