Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting NAMPT in Ewing's sarcoma cells


Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is the second most common bone cancer in children and
adolescents with a high metastatic potential. Tumor development is driven
by the specific t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation resulting in
the generation of the chimeric transcription factor EWS-FLI1.NAD is a key
metabolite of energy metabolism being involved in cellular redox
reactions, DNA repair, and in the maintenance of genomic stability
serving as a donor of ADP-ribose. This study describes targeting NAMPT
(nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase), the rate-limiting enzyme in
salvage generation of NAD, by FK866 in ES cells. Using FK866 has been
proposed as a treatment option for various inflammatory diseases as well
as cancer, rendering ES cells with high NAMPT expression especially
susceptible to FK866-induced cytotoxicity.Here we report that NAMPT
inhibition in ES cells leads to exhaustive NAD depletion, followed by a
delayed reduction of ATP levels and concomitantly to apoptosis-mediated
cell death. These effects can be reversed by nicotinic acid, a substrate
for the NAD salvage generation. However, the use of a
doxycycline-inducible shRNA against EWS-FLI1 revealed that the cytotoxic
activity of NAMPT inhibition is significantly lowered in the absence of
EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1-low ES cells have higher viability and lower rates of
apoptosis throughout inhibitor treatment compared to cells with high
EWS-FLI1 expression. Additionally, changes in mitochondrial respiration
and glycolytic rate can be observed when comparing untreated versus
EWS-FLI1 knockdown ES cells after NAMPT inhibition. Interestingly, loss
of EWS-FLI1 leads to elevated NAD levels and results in alteration of RNA
expression of some enzymes involved in the NAD synthesis pathway. These
results might explain the high susceptibility of Ewing Sarcoma cells to
FK866 treatment.Taken together, our data reveal evidence of an important
role of the NAMPT-mediated NAD salvage pathway in the energy homeostasis
of ES cells and suggests NAMPT inhibition as a potential new treatment
approach for Ewing Sarcoma in combination with standard
therapies.Supported by the Austrian Science fund, grant I1225-B19; and
the Research Manitoba and CancerCare Manitoba Foundation.

