Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastric cancer in the age of targeted agents: identification and
validation of novel therapeutic strategies through the generation of a
patient-derived xenografts platform


Gastric cancer is the world third leading cause of cancer mortality. In
spite of the significant therapeutic advances, the overall clinical
outcome for patients with advanced gastric cancer is poor, with 5-20%
5-year survival. The only targeted therapy approved so far are
trastuzumab, and Ramucirumab which have given unsatisfactory results.
Around 50% of gastric tumors bear genetic alterations affecting tyrosine
kinase pathways (mainly EGFR, HER3, FGFR2 and MET pathways, besides HER2)
but their clinical validation as tumor drivers is missing. The need for
new therapeutic options and the possible presence of druggable targets
prompted us to investigate potential targeted therapies for this
disease.Our project aims at identifying and validating targeted
therapeutic strategies in gastric cancer, through the generation of a
platform of gastric tumor patient-derived xenografts (PDXs), animal
models in which tumor surgical specimens are directly transferred into
mice. Upon engraftment, the tumor is split and re-implanted in a cohort
of mice, allowing the simultaneous testing of different drugs on the same
tumor. Thanks to the establishment of a network of 15 Italian centers for
samples collection, we generated around 80 gastric PDXs and successfully
derived cell lines and organoids from engrafted tumors. Among the tumors
collected so far, we found HER2, EGFR, FGFR2, MET and KRAS
amplifications. This gastric PDX platform will be exploited for: 1)
Validation of candidate oncogenes as relevant targets and identification
of efficient therapeutic strategies 2) Identification of novel molecular
targets; 3) identification of genetic predictors of
response/resistance.In the PDX platform we identified one tumor bearing a
high level of MET gene amplification (26 gene copies). We thus performed
a preclinical study on a cohort of patient-derived xenografts generated
from the MET-amplified gastroesophageal tumor. Despite the high
amplification level, MET inhibitors induced only a partial response,
while the combined anti-MET/EGFR treatment led to complete tumor
regression. Most important, the combo treatment also prevented resistance
onset. This data represent the proof of concept that a combined
anti-MET/EGFR therapy can be more effective than anti-MET treatment alone
in MET-amplified gastroesophageal tumors, in the absence of EGFR genetic
lesions.

