Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel targets and monoclonal antibodies for cancer therapy


The identification of markers targetable by specific mAbs represents a
high medical need in cancer therapy. Our objective is to discover novel
tumor-associated proteins showing promise as targets for monoclonal
antibody (mAb) therapy, and to generate and validate highly specific mAbs
for therapeutic applications. The approach we used to discover novel
tumor markers is based on a high through-put immune-histochemical (IHC)
screening of tumor and normal tissues using collections of murine
polyclonal and mAbs raised against recombinant human proteins. In the
course of such analysis, we discovered and validated different surface
exposed proteins over-expressed in one or more cancers. Here, we report a
surface exposed protein mainly over-expressed in ovary and breast
cancers. Interestingly, the protein is highly expressed in high grade
breast cancers. Approximately 40% of cancers in which the protein is
over-expressed belong to the triple negative subtype. In line with IHC
data, an expression profile analysis in different cells lines showed that
this protein is expressed in ovarian and breast cancer cell lines. In
breast cell lines, high expression was found in triple negative cells
positive to the androgen receptor. Gene silencing experiments combined to
phenotypic analysis, showed that loss of protein expression significantly
reduces cell proliferation and invasiveness. Several mAbs able to
recognize the target protein on the surface of breast and ovary cancer
cell lines have been selected and validated in a number of immunoassays.
The specificity of the mAb binding was confirmed by gene silencing and
competition assays with peptides encompassing the mAb epitopes. Specific
mAbs able to detect the protein in cancer cells in IHC are under
validation. These antibodies show limited reactivity on normal human
tissues and are negative on PBMC from normal donors. Moreover, these mAbs
are efficiently internalized by cancer cells, suggesting that they are
amenable to the development of Antibody-Drug-Conjugate. Finally, they
efficiently recognize the macaca protein ortholog, thus facilitating
future safety studies in non-human primates. Overall, results so far
accumulated highlight the potential of this novel tumor-associated
protein and available mAbs for the development of targeted therapy
against ovarian cancer and triple negative breast cancer. Other promising
targets and related monoclonal antibodies will be described during the
meeting.

