Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using a genome-editing approach for the stepwise establishment of
zebrafish models of pediatric high-grade gliomas and MPNSTs


By high-throughput sequencing of cancer patient's genomes, driver
mutations have recently been described in high-grade pediatric glioma, an
aggressive type of brain tumor in children. The most prominent recurrent
mutations were found in four genes, namely NF1, TP53, ATRX and H3F3A. NF1
and TP53 are tumor suppressor genes and their loss of function is
characteristic for various human malignancies. However, the mechanisms
through which precise missense mutations in H3F3A and loss-of-function of
ATRX influence tumor biology remain largely unknown. In our project, we
employ the genome-editing technology CRISPR-Cas9 to develop a zebrafish
model of pediatric high-grade glioma, in order to examine the impact of
these mutations on tumor onset and progression. We previously created a
zebrafish line that is deficient for tp53 (tp53-/-) and has a
loss-of-function mutation in 3 of 4 alleles of nf1 (nf1a+/-, nf1b-/-),
which is duplicated in zebrafish. These fish develop high-grade gliomas
with low penetrance and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs)
with high penetrance. By CRISPR-Cas9 we further incorporated early
frameshift mutations of atrx in the background of tp53-/-, nf1a+/-,
nf1b-/-. All analyzed fish injected with Cas9-mRNA and CRISPR guide-RNAs
(gRNAs) targeting atrx coding sequences showed germline transmission of
mutant alleles, of which one third were frameshift mutations. Primary
CRISPR-Cas9 atrx-gRNA injected tp53-/-, nf1a+/-, nf1b-/- fertilized eggs
developed as mosaics and exhibited increased tumor penetrance and faster
onset of MPNSTs and these tumors harbored atrx mutations in 8/10 analyzed
samples. This indicates that atrx loss-of-function mutations cooperate
with loss of tp53 and nf1 tumor suppressors. Gliomas were not observed in
mosaic atrx mutated fish, and these will be reanalyzed in stable atrx
mutant lines. Next, we will add previously described missense mutations
of h3f3a. To unravel the synergy between oncogenic mutations in atrx and
h3f3a in tumor progression, mutant stable lines for both genes will be
investigated independently and in a combined manner. The zebrafish model
of pediatric high-grade gliomas and MPNSTs that we are developing will be
useful to dissect the mechanisms underlying cooperation among driver
mutations and for small molecule screens to identify specific inhibitors
of cell growth and survival in these malignancies.

