Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycodelin-producing endometrial adenocarcinoma cells are
resistant to TGF


Glycodelin is a secreted glycoprotein belonging to lipocalin protein
family. It is expressed mainly in reproductive and glandular tissues.
Glycodlin is involved in the regulation of reproductive and immune
systems and it drives epithelial differentiation. In endometrium, the
expression of glycodelin is abundant in secretory phase of the menstrual
cycle, while in proliferative phase it is not expressed. Most studies
agree that glycodelin is not expressed in endometrial cancer. To study
the effects of glycodelin in endometrial cancer cells, we have made
stable glycodelin-producing HEC-1B endometrial adenocarcinoma cells.
Previously, we have shown that glycodelin differentiated HEC-1B cells
towards less malignant phenotype and the cells formed significantly
smaller tumors in preclinical xenograft mice. In addition,
glycodelin-producing cells were resistant to phorbol ester-stimulated
migration and phenotypic differentiation, which was mediated by repressed
activation of PKC. Here we studied the effect of TGF on
glycodelin-induced differentiation of the HEC-1B
cells.Glycodelin-producing and control cells were plated on Matrigel and
grown with or without TGF. The media was changed every second day and the
cells were monitored up to one week. For Western blot analysis the cells
were grown on Matrigel and TGF was added for 0-2h, after which the cells
were detached from Matrigel and lysed.TGF induced control cells to form
net-like structures, similar to those found after phorbol ester exposure.
However, the glycodelin-producing cells remained unresponsive. PKC siRNA
and PKC inhibitor Rottlerin inhibited the effects of TGF. Western blot
analysis showed equal phosphorylation levels of SMAD2 in
glycodelin-transfected and control cells. In contrast, PKC and ERK1/2
were differently phosphorylated, indicating the involvement of
MAPK-pathway in the TGF-induced changes of the control cells.Endometrial
cancer is the most common cancer of the female reproductive tract in
developed countries. However, the molecular mechanisms affecting the
pathogenesis of the disease are still poorly understood. It has been
suggested that TGF is involved in carcinogenesis of endometrial cancer.
Therefore, our results showing that glycodelin-producing HEC-1B
endometrial adenocarcinoma cells are resistant to the effects of TGF, due
to the repressed PKC phosphorylation, may be important to understand the
pathogenic mechanisms of endometrial cancer.

