Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineating immune networks in colorectal cancers to predict
effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors using CANScript platform
technology preserving tumor immune microenvironment


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer related
mortality. Recent findings from clinical studies showed that immune
checkpoint inhibitors are making good progress towards clinical practise.
However, existing biomarkers and 3D platforms are not equipped to offer
reliable prediction of response of these drugs. We recently engineered a
personalized ex vivo systems biology based platform using patient tumors
called CANScriptTM (Majumder B et al Nat. Commun. 2015, Goldman A et al
Nat. Commun. 2015) and a companion in vivo patient derived immune
reconstituted xenograft model (Mi-HTX) preserving multiple critical
phenotypic profiles orchestrating tumor-immune cross talk and
dysfunction. We further performed baseline characterization of immune
markers (CD4, CD8, CD68, CXCR4 and CD45-RO). Intratumor heterogeneity of
both M1 and M2 phenotypes were observed irrespective of
clinico-pathological features. Baseline CD68 enrichment status was found
to be correlated with therapy failure for some patients where clinical
outcome (PERCIST) was available. Flow cytometry and microarray analysis
showed preservation of diverse sets of functional CD4, CD8 and NK
phenotypes along with degranulation markers (CD107a), IFN- and FoxP3 in
both in vivo and ex vivo tumors reconstituted with ex vivo primed PBMC.
The comparative response profiling of these models following treatment
with immune checkpoint inhibitors suggested enhanced antitumor effects
(as measured by multiple functional parameters like viability,
proliferation, morphology and apoptosis). Together, these findings
highlight the strengths of immune-competent functional testing tools to
stratify patients for precision immunotherapy where direct response
prediction biomarkers are still elusive.1. Majumder B et al. Nat.
Commun.6:6169 (2015).2. Goldman A et al. Nat. Commun. 6:6139 (2015).

