Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic dysregulation and cancer mortality in a national cohort
of African-Americans and whites


Introduction: Complex biological pathways link metabolic dysregulation
(obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia and diabetes) with cancer
tumorigenesis, progression and metastasis, and those include higher
circulating insulin, chronic inflammation, and increased visceral fat
stores and estrogen. In this study, we examine the association between
metabolic dysregulation and cancer mortality in a racially diverse cohort
of adults.Methods: A total of 25,038 African-American and White adults
recruited through the prospective Reason for Geographic and Racial
Disparities in Stroke (REGARDS) study were included in this study.
Socio-demographics, medical history, and biomarkers (including blood
pressure, fasting blood glucose, C-reactive protein, HDL and LDL
cholesterol, height, weight, waist and hip measurements) were assessed at
baseline. Metabolic dysregulation was defined in two ways: 1) based on
Alberti et al. (2009) criteria of at least three of: high blood pressure,
elevated triglycerides, reduced HDL cholesterol, elevated fasting blood
glucose and high BMI; and 2) factor analysis of 15 variables indicative
of metabolic abnormalities, including BMI, diabetes, triglycerides, total
cholesterol, diastolic and systolic blood pressure, and fasting blood
glucose. Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was used to model
the hazards of cancer mortality in relation to each individual component
as well as the cluster of metabolic dysregulation.Results: About 51% of
African-American females, 38% of African-American males, 38% of White
females and 40% of White males met the joint criteria for metabolic
dysregulation. White females in the highest quartile of the factor
associated with high fasting blood glucose and diabetes experienced a
2-fold increase in cancer mortality (HR: 2.02, 95% CI: 1.27 - 3.20)
compared to those in the lowest quartile. In crude analysis, elevated HDL
cholesterol (HR: 1.16, 95% CI: 1.02 - 1.31), elevated blood pressure (HR:
1.33, 95% CI: 1.15 - 1.54), and elevated fasting blood glucose (HR: 1.23,
95% CI: 1.09 - 1.40) were each associated with higher mortality, although
these associations were attenuated after adjusting for gender, race, age,
and SES. However, in the fully adjusted model, having at least three of
the five metabolic dysregulation components was associated with a 46-61%
increased hazard of cancer-related death compared with having none (HR
for 5 components: 1.61, 95% CI: 1.02 - 2.55).Conclusion: There are marked
racial differences in the prevalence of metabolic dysregulation, and the
strong association with cancer mortality suggests that this may be a
major factor in the observed and persistent disparities in cancer
mortality. Metabolic abnormalities are highly modifiable through
lifestyle changes and medication; appropriate prevention strategies have
significant potential to reduce the risk of tumor metastasis, recurrence
and death.

