Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microglia/macrophages activation status in diffuse gliomas


Diffuse gliomas are primary brain tumors characterized by infiltrative
growth and high heterogeneity, which renders the disease mostly
incurable. Advances in genetic analysis have characterized molecular and
epigenetic alterations leading to impact on patients overall survival and
clinical outcome, particularly in glioblastoma (GBM). However, glioma
tumorigenicity is not controlled uniquely by its genetic alterations. The
crosstalk between tumor cells and the surrounding microenvironment plays
a crucial role in modulating glioma growth and aggressiveness. The most
abundant non-neoplastic cells in this microenvironment belong to the
myeloid lineage, comprising resident microglia, with central nervous
system (CNS)-tailored functions, and infiltrating monocytes/macrophages
from the bone marrow. Understanding the dynamics between tumor and
myeloid cells and the correlation between oncogenic molecular alterations
in the tumor and the inflammatory activation status of innate immunity
cells would elucidate potential treatment alternatives. Our large cohort
of human glioma consisted of both astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma
tumors, ranging from grades II to IV. Using high-throughput DNA
sequencing and immunohistochemistry, we have classified GBM samples in
proneural, classical and mesenchymal. Next, we evaluated the activation
status of microglia/macrophages within these samples. Despite the great
heterogeneity, we observed higher levels of myeloid markers (IBA1, CD11b
and CD68) in astrocytic tumors compared to oligodendrocytic ones and to
non-neoplastic (NN) tissue. Anti-inflammation markers, such as CD163, are
also more abundant in astrocytomas, as well as in the mesenchymal and
classical GBM subtypes, while pro-inflammation markers, such as IL1-beta,
show a more widespread expression throughout samples. Our preliminary
data suggests an immune-suppressive and growth supportive characteristic
for tumors with worse clinical outcome, linked to an activation profile
of myeloid cells. Further exploring the characteristics and dynamics of
innate immune cells within the microenvironment of different grades and
subtypes of glioma is crucial for the better understanding of the disease
progression.

