Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimized 7-Plex cell-free DNA assay for clinically relevant KRAS
mutations in colorectal cancer


Background: KRAS gene mutations are present in approximately 40% of
colorectal adenocarcinomas and predict for nonresponse to the
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies used in routine clinical
practice. The most common activating mutations in this malignancy occur
in codons 12 and 13 of exon 2. Determination of KRAS mutational status
from tumor samples is an essential tool for managing patients with
colorectal cancer (CRC) but requires tissue obtained by invasive
percutaneous or surgical biopsies. Recent advances allow for the
isolation and analysis of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from the peripheral
blood. A highly sensitive multiplex technology that uses low amounts of
input DNA is needed to establish cfDNA as a liquid biopsy to personalize
care.Methods: Digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) is a particularly sensitive
method for detecting rare and low copy targets. Related work led to 7
individual assays, and to companion 4-plex and 3-plex assays, to
accommodate the 7 common KRAS mutations and internal controls. A single
7-plex assay is favored to maximize efficiency and minimize cost. We
optimized the RainDrop Digital PCR System to collectively detect the
G12/G13 KRAS mutations, given that documentation of a mutation (not the
specific mutation) is the factor of clinical relevance. Commercially
available cell lines and genomic DNA aliquots were used as reference
standards and for determinations of sensitivity and limit of blank (LOB).
Initial clinical validation samples included tumor DNA derived from FFPE
tissue (n = 10), cfDNA from healthy donors (n = 10), and cfDNA from
metastatic CRC patients with tumors of known KRAS mutation status (n =
4). All assays were run in triplicate to confirm reproducibility.Results:
Custom Taqman MGB probes were selected for KRAS wild type (WT), G12A,
G12C, G12D, G12R, G12S, G12V, and G13D to allow for testing in a single
reaction. LOB was 9 per 110(6) droplets on the basis of WT controls,
including cfDNA samples from healthy donors. Evaluation of cell line DNA,
genomic DNA aliquots, and FFPE samples demonstrates that the assay
detects mutant KRAS with 100% accuracy and 0.1% mutant DNA in a total
input of 10 ng WT/mutant DNA. With the clinical samples, concordant KRAS
findings between cfDNA and tissue were obtained for two patients with WT
tumors and one patient with a KRAS G12S mutant tumor. cfDNA analysis did
not detect the G12V mutation identified in the colon primary of the other
patient. Evaluation of additional clinical samples is in
progress.Conclusions: Our 7-plex G12/G13 KRAS assay has excellent
accuracy and is able to detect the KRAS mutations of interest at low
(0.1%) mutation frequencies. Additional studies are being performed on
prospectively collected plasma samples from patients with metastatic CRC
of known KRAS mutation status. Large scale correlation between tumor
mutation status and cfDNA findings will be performed to validate our
assay for clinical implementation.

