Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming the resistance to the anti CD20 treatments in chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia


Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is the most common leukaemia in the Western
countries. Treatment of CLL and other lymphomas is based on cytostatic
drugs in combination with rituximab or other monoclonal antibodies
targeting the B-cell surface marker CD20. Although the CD20-antibodies
have revolutionized the therapeutic perspectives of indolent B-cell
lymphomas, the treatment of CLL with CD20-antibodies is often
inefficient, a feature which has been explained by the inherently low
CD20 expression in CLL. It has been shown previously that CD20 is
epigenetically regulated in some lymphoma cell lines and that some
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) can increase CD20 expression in
B-cell lymphomas both in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, we utilized the
HDACi valproate to upregulate CD20 both in CLL cell lines and in
patients.Two CLL patients with del13q were treated with valproate at
serum levels around 800 M for three days in three 21-day cycles. CD20
expression was analyzed by Real time-PCR and flowcytometry on the B-CLL
cells isolated from peripheral blood.In addition, the valproate-induced
histone modifications and changes in repressor/activator complexes of the
CD20 promoter were investigated in the CLL cell lines and in patients.In
the patient 1, CD20 expression was increased 2 times after 2 weeks of
treatment, suggesting long-term effects by valproate. Neither the mRNA
stability nor the protein stability seems to be affected by Valproate,
suggesting transcriptional effects. However, no effects were observed in
the patient 2. In contrast to patient results, Valproate increases CD20
transcript and protein levels by 2,5 times in the CLL-cell line I83-E95
after 48 hours. Here, the activating histone mark, acetylated H3K9, is
enriched on the CD20 promoter suggesting valproate-related effects on the
epigenome. Our study will continue the characterization of
valproate-related effects on the epigenetic signatures of the CD20
promoter in CLL cells in vitro and in vivo, dissecting the mechanisms
underling low CD20 expression in CLL.

