Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of calreticulin in the spontaneous development of lung
adenocarcinoma: Evidence from a novel transgenic mouse model


Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer related deaths in both men
and women worldiwide. The overall 5 year survival rate of lung cancer
ranges between 5-15% (depending on the subtype). Based on
histopathological criteria, lung cancer is subdivided into two main
subtypes: small cell lung cancer (15%) and non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC 85%). Adenocarcinoma a subtype of NSCLC is the most common type in
both sexes, and it has a poor response to chemotherapy. We recently
developed a transgenic mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma by
overexpressing calreticulin (CRT) under the control of Tie2-promotor. The
main phenotype of these mice is high incidence of metastatic lung
adenocarcinoma similar to human patients. Immunohistological analysis
showed these tumors to be SP-C+ve and CC10-ve phenotype. At the initial
stages most of cells in the hyperplegic area and adenoma stained positive
for exogenous CRT and HSCs markers, and as the tumor differentiated to
carcinoma there were a significant loss of exogenous CRT and HSCs markers
and increased expression of SP-C.The aim of our current project was
therefore to identify the mechanism of development of metastatic lung
adenocarcinoma in this mouse model. To address this objective we carried
out microarray and quantitative proteomic analysis of tissue and cell
lines isolated from lungs of this transgenic mouse model.Microarray
analysis showed activation of cluster of genes involved in cellular
development, growth and proliferation. Some of these pathways include
genes invlved in VEGF signal transduction pathways and Epherin receptor
signaling, at the same time there were decreased expression of cell-cell
interaction and communication (needed for metastasis). At the protein
level we observed a significant increase in proteins involved in tumor
progression, invasion and metastasis. In addition we observed a
significant change in the expression of genes invloved in lipid
metabolism (both at protein and RNA level) in the lung of these mice. The
change in the expression of lipid metabolizing genes suggest the
metabolic shift needed during tumor progression.In conclusion, our data
suggests that CRT as an endoplasmic reticulum chaperone and a regulator
of intracellular calcium homeostasis affects multiple genes invivo
resulting in the development of tumor.This research was funded by Qatar
National Research Fund (NPRP4-043-3-016).

