Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent pediatric ependymomas exhibit increased tumorigenicity
in mouse brains of patient-derived xenograft models


Ependymoma is the third most common malignant pediatric brain tumor,
accounting for 10% all intracranial tumors in children. Current standard
treatment for ependymoma patients include maximally safe surgical
resection followed by radiation therapy. The degree of gross total
resection remains the best prognostic factor, although more molecular
characterization has been completed in recent years demonstrating several
subgroups of ependymoma that can more accurately predict clinical
outcome. 5-year event free survival is 40-85% and varies depending on the
extent of surgical resection, tumor grade, and other prognostic factors.
Prognosis is even more dismal in those patients with recurrent
ependymomas which occurs in nearly half of the patients, and there are no
known curative options to offer these patients other than palliative
re-irradiation and additional surgeries. Chemotherapies and molecular
targeted therapies have not been proven to increase survival outcomes.
Therefore, it is imperative to learn more about the biology of recurrent
diseases and identify the cellular driver of ependymoma recurrence, as
well as understanding the mechanisms of therapy resistance. We
hypothesize that ependymoma recurrence is driven by a subpopulation of
therapy-resistant tumors cells with enhanced tumorigenicity in SCID
mice.Between the years of 2005 to present, we have collected a total of
77 pediatric ependymoma patient tumor samples from across the country. Of
those, we identified 9 patients with recurrent ependymomas in which we
have collected tumor samples from each recurrence. The median age of
these patients is 6 years old (ranges from 2 - 10 years) and has a 2:1
male to female ratio. The median time to first recurrence is 35 months
(ranges from 9 - 61 months). 5 patients had one recurrence, 2 patients
had two recurrences, 1 patient had 3 recurrences, and 1 patient had more
than 5 recurrences and we have tumor tissues from this particular patient
over the span of 6-year period. To study the tumorigenicity of these
brain tumors at the different clinical stages, whether at diagnosis,
first recurrence, second recurrence, or beyond, we directly implanted
tumor cells (10,000 cells/mouse) from all 9 patients into the matched
locations in the brains of SCID mice (e.g., human cerebral tumors to
mouse cerebrum, human cerebellar tumors to mouse cerebellum). In 3 of the
9 models, tumor formation was confirmed in mouse brains from the latest
recurrent patient tumor, while samples from the same patient from earlier
stages either did not form tumors in mouse brains or are currently
pending. Tumor formation in the remaining models are still pending.In
conclusion, our preliminary findings demonstrate progressive enhancement
of tumorigenicity during ependymoma recurrence. This has become a very
unique and extremely valuable platform to study brain tumor recurrence.

