Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial 16srRNA variants and complex III expression in
serous ovarian cancer


Patients suffering from serous ovarian cancer (SOC) are typically
diagnosed at later stage, drastically decreasing their five-year survival
prospect. Diagnostic tools, including the measurement of elevated levels
of the CA125 protein released by ovarian tumors, provide valuable
information but are inherently limited in specificity in diverse
populations. Hence, there remains a need for more advanced diagnostic
tests to distinguish the different histopathological subclasses to
improve treatment outcome. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), by products of
normal energy production within the mitochondria, are among the list of
compounds believed to be involved in aging and the pathogenesis of many
human diseases. Moreover, elevated ROS levels may cause subtle changes in
regions of the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) inducing oxidative stress and
tumor microenvironment. Consequently, the events could be used to
establish potential mtDNA markers involved in the progression of SOC as
an age related disease. The aim of this study is to determine
mitochondrial mutational roles and protein expression level in both
precancerous and malignant stages of SOC. In the current study PCR-based
sequencing was used to detect mtDNA sequence variants in the 16srRNA
gene, known to be highly mutated in SOC. The gene spans 1671 to 3229 bp
within the mtDNA and is highly conserved. Thirty-one frozen SOC tissue
samples of four histopathological subclasses [cystadenoma, n = 7;
borderline, n = 8; and malignant stages III/IV, n = 8 and normal no egg,
no surface epithelium as a control, n = 8] were examined. Additionally,
expression of mitochondrial complex III (Coenzyme Q-cytochrome c
reductase) was evaluated using western blot analysis. Forty variants were
detected of which three were unreported. G1811A, an unreported variant
was detected in 50% of the borderline samples. The unreported variant
C2794G was detected in normal, cystadenoma, and borderline with an
increasing frequency of 50%, 83% and 100% correspondingly, however did
not display in the malignant samples. A3364G an unreported variant was
observed in all four categories with a frequency of approximately 70% or
higher. Complex III was expressed progressively in normal, borderline and
malignant samples. Moreover, the expression of complex III was
significantly higher in the malignant samples compared to the normal
control. Results from this study could suggest that the genetic
instability of 16srRNA region may play a role in ovarian tumorigenicity.
Additionally the over expression of complex III in the malignant stages
could serve as a target for chemotherapy of serous ovarian disease.

