Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NYGC glioblastoma clinical outcomes pilot study: Discovering
therapeutic potential in glioblastoma through integrative genomics


Current adjuvant therapeutic options for the treatment of Glioblastoma
(GBM) are often determined by limited histological information.
Additionally, most GBM clinical trials for targeted chemotherapeutic
agents do not distinguish the genetic mutational tumor profiles of the
patients recruited and have failed to reach successful treatment
endpoints. The New York Genome Center (NYGC) has undertaken a
glioblastoma clinical sequencing outcome pilot study to better determine
personal treatment options for patients with GBM using integrated genomic
data. During the initial phase of this study for 2015 NYGC has performed
whole genome sequencing (WGS) on 10 primary GBM tumor-normal pairs,
analyzed each patient's tumor for single nucleotide variants, structural
variants and copy number alterations. In addition RNA sequencing and a
DNA methylation assay were also performed on several of the patients. The
patient's genomic profile was then compared to a database of known
targeted therapeutic approaches. A final tumor board composed of NYGC
scientists, GBM consortium scientists and treating oncologists then
reviewed all data prior to identifying a final therapeutic strategy. Data
from the first 10 patients revealed RB1 variants to be predominant in
half of the patients. SNV's in NF1 or PIK3R1 were also discovered in 4
out of 10 samples. Remaining lower frequency variants occurred in TP53,
PDGFRA, PTEN, PIK3CA, ERBB3, SMO, STAG2, ACVR1, NFKB1 and JAK3. Analysis
of copy number alterations resulted in 8 of 10 patients containing the
characteristic chromosome 7 amplification combined with chromosome 10
deletion, affecting EGFR and PTEN, respectively. Extreme amplification
with potential double minute structural variation of EGFR containing the
A289V mutation was observed in 2 of 10 samples. Two samples contained a
potentially targetable over-amplification of the PDGFRA/KIT/KDR
chromosome 4 locus. Predominant deletions resided in CDKN2A, ESR2, PTEN
and FLT3. Hemizygous deletions of RB1 combined with RB1 nonsense or
missense variants were observed in 4 samples. To date, RNA sequencing was
performed on 5 patient samples. Most strikingly the combination of DNA
and RNA sequencing revealed the presence of a putative activating MET
exon skipping event in the extracellular domain. This MET variant was
considered as a potential targetable variant. Therapeutic options
resulting from WGS genomic profiles were the PI3K inhibitor BKM120 (60%),
half of these had an additional aberration in MET and were recommended
for the combinatorial trial NCT01870726. Drug recommendations for the
treatment of GBM based on specific N = 1 patient genomic profiles were
also made for nilotinib, vismodegib and palbociclib. Here, we present the
first phase of the NYGC GBM clinical outcome study demonstrating how
patient WGS information can provide more precise therapeutic options in
the treatment of glioblastoma.

