Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of GnRH-(1-5) on endometrial cancer cell lines


The Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) is a central regulator of
reproductive function and behavior. In the periphery, GnRH is secreted by
gynecologic tissues to exert local effects. Furthermore, GnRH is
processed in the extracellular environment by the metalloendopeptidase
EP24.15 to generate the bioactive metabolite, GnRH-(1-5). We have
previously demonstrated that GnRH-(1-5) transactivates the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway to promote cell migration by
binding the orphan receptor GPR101 in the Ishikawa and ECC-1 endometrial
cancer cell lines. In this study, we sought to determine whether the
effects of GnRH-(1-5) were dependent on the stage of the endometrial
cancer. Cell lines ACI-181, ACI-52, and ACI-80 derived from endometrial
cancers representative of stages 1, 2, and 3 respectively were tested in
their response to GnRH-(1-5) treatment. Furthermore, the expression of
GPR101 was confirmed by western blot analysis. Treatment with 100nM
GnRH-(1-5) did not have significant changes in phospho-EGFR (pEGFR)
levels in all ACI cell lines. However, subsequent measurement of ERK
phosphorylation demonstrated that ACI-181 cells treated with GnRH-(1-5)
had significantly (p The Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) is a
central regulator of reproductive function and behavior. In the
periphery, GnRH is secreted by gynecologic tissues to exert local
effects. Furthermore, GnRH is processed in the extracellular environment
by the metalloendopeptidase EP24.15 to generate the bioactive metabolite,
GnRH-(1-5). We have previously demonstrated that GnRH-(1-5)
transactivates the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway to
promote cell migration by binding the orphan receptor GPR101 in the
Ishikawa and ECC-1 endometrial cancer cell lines. In this study, we
sought to determine whether the effects of GnRH-(1-5) were dependent on
the stage of the endometrial cancer. Cell lines ACI-181, ACI-52, and
ACI-80 derived from endometrial cancers representative of stages 1, 2,
and 3 respectively were tested in their response to GnRH-(1-5) treatment.
Furthermore, the expression of GPR101 was confirmed by western blot
analysis. Treatment with 100nM GnRH-(1-5) did not have significant
changes in phospho-EGFR (pEGFR) levels in all ACI cell lines. However,
subsequent measurement of ERK phosphorylation demonstrated that ACI-181
cells treated with GnRH-(1-5) had significantly (p < 0.05) increased
levels in the pERK2 subunit but not pERK1, which parallels our initial
findings in the Ishikawa cell line. No changes in pERK1/2 levels were
determined in the other cell lines. To measure the effect of GnRH-(1-5)
on cell migration, we implemented a wound closure assay. Interestingly,
ACI-181 and ACI-52 cells had increased migration in response to
GnRH-(1-5) treatment. To determine whether another pro-migratory pathway
is regulated by GnRH-(1-5) in these cells, we measured TGF- bioactivity
using a cell-based assay from conditioned media of cells treated with
GnRH-(1-5). We found that ACI-181 and ACI-52 cells had significantly
(pThe Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) is a central regulator of
reproductive function and behavior. In the periphery, GnRH is secreted by
gynecologic tissues to exert local effects. Furthermore, GnRH is
processed in the extracellular environment by the metalloendopeptidase
EP24.15 to generate the bioactive metabolite, GnRH-(1-5). We have
previously demonstrated that GnRH-(1-5) transactivates the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway to promote cell migration by
binding the orphan receptor GPR101 in the Ishikawa and ECC-1 endometrial
cancer cell lines. In this study, we sought to determine whether the
effects of GnRH-(1-5) were dependent on the stage of the endometrial
cancer. Cell lines ACI-181, ACI-52, and ACI-80 derived from endometrial
cancers representative of stages 1, 2, and 3 respectively were tested in
their response to GnRH-(1-5) treatment. Furthermore, the expression of
GPR101 was confirmed by western blot analysis. Treatment with 100nM
GnRH-(1-5) did not have significant changes in phospho-EGFR (pEGFR)
levels in all ACI cell lines. However, subsequent measurement of ERK
phosphorylation demonstrated that ACI-181 cells treated with GnRH-(1-5)
had significantly (p < 0.05) increased levels in the pERK2 subunit but
not pERK1, which parallels our initial findings in the Ishikawa cell
line. No changes in pERK1/2 levels were determined in the other cell
lines. To measure the effect of GnRH-(1-5) on cell migration, we
implemented a wound closure assay. Interestingly, ACI-181 and ACI-52
cells had increased migration in response to GnRH-(1-5) treatment. To
determine whether another pro-migratory pathway is regulated by
GnRH-(1-5) in these cells, we measured TGF- bioactivity using a
cell-based assay from conditioned media of cells treated with GnRH-(1-5).
We found that ACI-181 and ACI-52 cells had significantly (p<0.05)
increased TGF- bioactivity in response to GnRH-(1-5), indicating that
these cells produced higher levels of bioactive TGF-. It is likely that
TGF- and/or other growth factors may promote pro-survival and/or
pro-migratory signaling cascades via an autocrine mechanism. These
results further suggest that GnRH-(1-5) may exert differential effects on
endometrial cancer cells that are not dependent on cancer
progression.Funding Sources: This research was supported by grants from
the John P. Murtha Cancer Center at Walter Reed National Military Medical
Center through the Uniformed Services University and the National Science
Foundation (IOS-1052288).

