Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of immune responses as a consequence of androgen
deprivation therapy in patients with biochemical progression of prostate
cancer


We evaluated the immune responses in 28 patients enrolled in a phase II
trial at the National Cancer Institute (NCI). The aim was to investigate
the effects of 3 months of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) with
goserelin on the immune responses in patients with biochemical
progression of prostate cancer following local definitive therapy. PBMC
and sera were collected before treatment and after 3 months. We performed
flow cytometry to evaluate the frequencies of subsets of CD4+ and CD8+
T-cells, regulatory T-cells (CD4+ CD25hi CD127 FoxP3+), MDSCs and CD4 and
CD8 recent thymic emigrants. CD4 T-cell proliferation and NK-cell lytic
activity were evaluated. Serum samples were analyzed for cytokines, sCD27
and sCD40L.The baseline characteristics were: median age 64 years,
testosterone 361 ng/dl, PSA 2.2 ng/ml, PSA-doubling time 7.0 months, and
Gleason score 7. After 3 months of ADT we found no significant changes in
NK-cell function or frequencies of NK subsets. CD4+ T-cell proliferation
decreased slightly. The number of CD4+ effector memory T-cells decreased,
but other CD4 subsets were unchanged. The frequencies of CD4 and CD8
recent thymic emigrants did not change. Regulatory T-cells (including the
CTLA4+ subset), and the effector:Treg ratio did not change. In contrast,
the frequency of granulocytic MDSC decreased (PWe evaluated the immune
responses in 28 patients enrolled in a phase II trial at the National
Cancer Institute (NCI). The aim was to investigate the effects of 3
months of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) with goserelin on the immune
responses in patients with biochemical progression of prostate cancer
following local definitive therapy. PBMC and sera were collected before
treatment and after 3 months. We performed flow cytometry to evaluate the
frequencies of subsets of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells, regulatory T-cells (CD4+
CD25hi CD127 FoxP3+), MDSCs and CD4 and CD8 recent thymic emigrants. CD4
T-cell proliferation and NK-cell lytic activity were evaluated. Serum
samples were analyzed for cytokines, sCD27 and sCD40L.The baseline
characteristics were: median age 64 years, testosterone 361 ng/dl, PSA
2.2 ng/ml, PSA-doubling time 7.0 months, and Gleason score 7. After 3
months of ADT we found no significant changes in NK-cell function or
frequencies of NK subsets. CD4+ T-cell proliferation decreased slightly.
The number of CD4+ effector memory T-cells decreased, but other CD4
subsets were unchanged. The frequencies of CD4 and CD8 recent thymic
emigrants did not change. Regulatory T-cells (including the CTLA4+
subset), and the effector:Treg ratio did not change. In contrast, the
frequency of granulocytic MDSC decreased (P<0.01). There was an increase
in the sCD27:sCD40L ratio (P = 0.012), due to decreased sCD40L. There was
a decrease in the serum levels of IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10,
IL-12p70, GM-CSF and IFN. There were no changes in the serum levels of
TNF or CXCL2 after therapy.In conclusion, three months of ADT with
goserelin did not alter the immune response in a way that would decrease
the likelihood of successful immunotherapy after this treatment. The
decreased MDSC and the increased sCD27:sCD40L ratio could indicate a more
favorable immune environment.

