Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of in-vivo isolated EpCAM-positive
circulating tumor cells in high-risk prostate cancer patients


Introduction: CTC have been verified as prognostic markers for disease
progression in various cancer types. The main aim of the EU project
CTC-SCAN is to validate the number of CTC isolated from patient's blood
as a prognostic marker for relapse in high-risk prostate cancer patients
treated with primary radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy. In this
study, we present our results on gene expression profiling of CTCs that
were isolated, using the CellCollector, a novel clinical device designed
for the in vivo isolation of EpCAM-positive CTCs.Patients and methods: We
first developed and validated 3 multiplex and 3 single-plex highly
sensitive RT-qPCR assays amplifying:a)Epithelial
markers:CK-19,EpCAM,E-CAD & PBGD, b)Stem cell markers:PSCA,ALDH1,CD133&
HPRT, c) EMT markers: TWIST, VIM, N-CAD and B2M and d)PSA, e)TMPRSS2-ERG
fusion, f)Plastin-3. 62 patients and 36 healthy volunteers participated
in the study. After in vivo isolation, total RNA was extracted from
captured cells,followed by cDNA synthesis. RT-qPCR was performed for the
molecular characterization of captured cells. In all cases, peripheral
blood was also collected for CTC analysis by CellSearch and the
EPISPOT.Results: The findings of our study are summarized in Table 1.
Briefly, in 13/15(87%) samples, in which at least one cell was detected
by CellSearch, we detected the expression of at least one gene. In 28/47
samples, negative by CellSearch, we detected the expression of several
genes by the developed RT-qPCR assays. In 9/14 samples that were
exclusively found to be positive by EPISPOT for PSA immunospots, at least
one of the analyzed genes was also expressed.Conclusions: In vivo
isolation of CTC in combination with a downstream molecular analysis is
minimally invasive, and in combination with high specific and sensitive
RT-qPCR assays for CTC detection and molecular characterization seems
very promising. Comparison studies with the CellSearch and the EPISPOT
have shown a higher sensitivity, but a poor agreement.


