Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination treatment of orexin-A and NAB-paclitaxel in pancreas
cancer: in vitro and in vivo studies


Orexin-A (OxA) and orexin-B (OxB) are hypothalamic peptides involved in
the sleep/wake control which interact with two class A GPCR, OX1R and
OX2R. We have demonstrated that OX1R was highly expressed in digestive
cancers including cancer of colon1, pancreas2 and liver. In these
cancers, orexin-A induces a mitochondrial apoptosis and a strong
inhibition of tumor growth in nude mice xenografted with digestive cancer
cell lines1,2. In the present work, we have compared and combined the
effect of OxA and NAB-paclitaxel which represents the gold standard
reference in the chemotherapeutic treatment of pancreas cancer, on their
anti-tumoral properties. The incubation of AsPC-1 pancreatic cancer cell
line which expressed OX1R, with 0.1M OxA or 0.1 M NAB-paclitaxel reveals
a cell growth inhibition of 36% and 51%, respectively. The addition of
0.1 M OxA and 0.1M NAB-paclitaxel on AsPC-1 cells reveals a significantly
cell growth inhibition of 70% suggesting that the double treatment was
more efficient than individual treatment. Moreover, the addition of 0.1M
OxA and 0.1 M NAB-paclitaxel induces 25% of cell apoptosis determined by
annexin-V labeling, as compared to single treatment with 0.1M OxA (18%)
or 0.1 M NAB-paclitaxel (12%). Additionally, we explore the sequential
treatment by OxA and NAB-paclitaxel on cell growth of AsPC-1 cells. Our
results evidenced than 48h treatment by OxA followed by 48h treatment of
NAB-paclitaxel induced an inhibition of 35% of cell growth. In contrast,
the reverse treatment (48H NAB-paclitaxel followed by 48h OxA) induces an
inhibition of cell growth of 60%. OxA intraperitoneal injection (2
injections/week of 1.12 moles/kg OxA and/or NAB-paclitaxel) in nude mice
xenografted with AsPC-1 cells, shows that OxA and NAB-paclitaxel induces
an inhibition of tumoral volume of 60% and 62%, respectively. Moreover,
injection of OxA plus NAB-paclitaxel induces an inhibition of tumoral
volume of 70%. Sequential treatments of xenografted tumors in mice with
OxA and NAB-paclitaxel was investigated and revealed 72% tumor growth
inhibition when mice were treated 30 days with OxA followed by 30 days
with NAB-paclitaxel and 83% tumor growth inhibition when they were
treated 30 days with NAB-paclitaxel followed by 30 days with OxA. These
results indicate that: 1) the addition of OxA and NAB-paclitaxel improves
the effect of individual treatment; 2) the sequential treatment
consisting of first OxA treatment followed by NAB-paclitaxel treatment
was more efficient than reverse treatment. In conclusion, OxA was close
to NAB-paclitaxel treatment in term of response and suggest that combined
treatment OxA/ NAB-paclitaxel represents a new promising pancreas cancer
therapy1Voisin et al., Cancer research 2011, 71:3341-512Speisky et al.,
AACR annual meeting, 2014, San Diego, USA

