Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal primary tumors and metastases are highly homogeneous
regarding driver mutations


Genetic mutations play a key role in the phenotypic and functional
heterogeneity that arise among cancer cells within a tumor. The distinct
tumor subclones can be intermingled or spatially separated and recent
studies suggest this subclonal architecture varies dynamically throughout
the disease course. As such, there is a need to accommodate this level of
genetic heterogeneity in the classical notion that the carcinogenic
process evolves in a stepwise manner through the accumulation of a
specific set of mutations along time.To genetically compare independent
lesions from the same patient in the progression of colorectal carcinoma
(CRC), we selected 16 patients with metastatic CRC with available primary
tumor (PT), lymph node (LN) and liver metastases (LM), and corresponding
normal mucosa (NM), resulting in 65 samples. Clinical data were available
for all patients. DNA was extracted from FFPE tissues after morphologic
evaluation by a pathologist. Sequencing was performed with the Ion PGM
system using Ampliseq primer panels consisting of a multiplex PCR
covering approximately 2,800 COSMIC mutations from 50 oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes frequently mutated in human cancers. Genes include APC
and CTNNB1, considered the initial genetic event in CRC development. NM
from all patients was sequenced to identify germline genetic variants.
Data was analyzed on the Ion Torrent Server v4.2 using the Variant Caller
and Coverage Analysis plugins. Ion Reporter Server and IGV were used for
variant annotation and reads visualization, respectively.A total of 1212
somatic variants were detected among the 65 samples. C/G>T transitions
were the most prevalent alterations. In keeping with its initiating role,
APC mutations showed the highest allelic fraction in the majority of
samples. Seven samples exhibited a remarkably high number of variants
(mean = 145). Excluding these, an average of 3,5 variants were observed
per sample. For each patient, putative driver mutations (in APC, CTNNB1,
KRAS or TP53) detected in PT were also detected in LN and LM. In LM of
6/16 patients (38%) an average of 4 private mutations were observed.
Mutations in other genes, empirically classified as passenger mutations,
were also frequently found in this series. However, these mutations were
heterogeneously distributed in the different lesions of the same patient.
In most patients treated with chemotherapy before liver metastasectomy,
additional private mutations were detected in the LM.Contrary to what was
previously described, CRC presents a high level of homogeneity concerning
well-established driver mutations, since all were present in every tissue
of each patient. Conversely, a higher level of heterogeneity was detected
between different lesions of the same patient for passenger mutations.
Relapse after chemotherapy seems to associate with the emergence of new
mutations, reflecting its influence in the dynamics of tumor cell
populations.

