Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNAs are key mediators of crosstalk between estrogen and
progesterone regulating breast cancer invasiveness


Even though estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast tumors are exquisitely
sensitive to anti-estrogen therapy, the disease is virtually incurable
when it has progressed to ER+ distal metastasis. Therefore a better
understanding of regulatory processes in ER+ breast tumor invasiveness is
important. Invasive ER+ breast tumors frequently express high levels of
the progesterone receptor (PR) isoform A (PR-A), relative to PR-B. We
have previously reported that E2 strongly represses in vitro invasiveness
below concentrations of E2 corresponding to median plasma and breast
tissue levels post-menopause. Progesterone, at concentrations
corresponding to postmenopausal levels, completely abrogates inhibition
of invasiveness by E2. The ability of progestins to rescue invasiveness
from estrogen regulation is exclusively mediated by PR-A. In contrast, at
the high concentrations associated with luteal phase and pregnancy
levels, progesterone induces invasiveness independent of E2 through PR-B.
Interventions that target PR-A are limited by the fact that functional
PR-A is needed to protect against E2-induced uterine dysplasia and
hyperplasia. In order to attenuate PR-A dependent invasiveness, it is
necessary to identify and target mediators of specific cross-talk between
E2/ER and progestin/PR-A in the context of hormonal regulation of
invasiveness. As micro-RNAs (miRs) are known to play a major role in the
actions of E2, we investigated two possible modalities for miRs to
mediate this cross talk: (1) Progesterone/PR-A could induce expression of
critical miRs that attenuate suppressive effects of E2 on invasiveness;
(2) E2-regulated miRs that directly influence invasiveness may be
counter-regulated by progesterone/PR-A. Using microarray analysis and
quantitative PCR in several ER+ cell lines, we identified five miRs
(miR-6805, miR-584, miR-1228, miR-501, and miR-668) that were activated
by progestin exclusively by PR-A, but were not regulated by E2. Whereas
these miRs could serve as a signature of hyperactive PR-A,
loss-of-function studies using miR inhibitors indicated that they did not
play a functional role in the ability of PR-A to regulate invasiveness.
An additional ten miRs were regulated by E2/ER (activated or repressed),
in a manner that was counter-regulated by progestin/PR-A. Two of these
miRs (miR-92a, and miR-26b) were identified using miR inhibitors to have
a direct role in mediating the ability of progesterone to rescue
invasiveness from E2 regulation. In conclusion, this study has provided a
potential diagnostic miR signature of hyper-active PR-A and has also
identified two miRs that could potentially be targeted to attenuate
breast tumor invasiveness supported by progesterone/PR-A.

