Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer stem cells in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is a disease commonly complicated by the presence of
ascites in the abdominal cavity which represents a major clinical
problem. Currently, the treatment for ovarian cancer entails
cytoreductive surgery followed by chemotherapy, mainly cisplatin or
carboplatin combined with paclitaxel. Although this regimen is initially
effective in a high percentage of cases, unfortunately within few months
of initial treatment, tumor relapse occurs because of
platinum-resistance. This is attributed mainly due to the presence of
cancer stem cells (CSCs) present in ascites which are chemo-resistant and
responsible for recurrence of cancer. In our preliminary studies, we show
for the first time that withaferin A (WFA), a bioactive compound isolated
from the plant Withania somnifera targets putative CSCs. Treatment of
nude mice bearing orthotopic ovarian tumors with WFA resulted in a 70% to
80% reduction in tumor growth, complete inhibition of metastasis, and a
significant elimination of the cells expressing CSCs markers - CD44,
CD24, CD34, CD117, ALDH1 and Oct4 and down regulation of Notch1 and its
downstream signaling genes (Hes1 and Hey1) reported to play crucial role
for self-renewal and maintenance of CSCs. In addition, WFA also resulted
in a significant inhibition of securin expression an oncogene important
in ovarian tumorigenesis. In contrast, treatment of mice with CIS alone
had the opposite effects, causing an increase in cells expressing CSC
markers and Notch1 signaling pathway. However, combining of WFA with CIS
showed enhanced effects on suppression of securin as well as elimination
of CSCs. This may explain the development of platinum-resistance and
recurrence of cancer in patients treated with first line chemotherapy.
Based on this information, we hypothesize that a combination of WFA with
CIS should target ovarian cancer cells as well as cancer stem cells by
reducing securin and CSCs thereby reducing CIS resistance and recurrence
of ovarian cancer. In our study, we used cells from ascites from patients
with recurrent ovarian cancer and determine the effect of WFA alone and
in combination with CIS on tumorigenic functions of ascites cells and
CSCs from ascites in vitro and in vivo, and defined the molecular
mechanisms associated with self-renewal, maintenance and recurrence of
cancer in relation to expression of securin. Because the two agents act
synergistically, this combination may minimize side effects as well as
induction of cisplatin resistance and recurrence of cancer. In addition,
this study will justify the initiation of phase I/phase II clinical
trials to assess potential toxicity and efficacy of WFA/CIS combination
in advanced/recurrent ovarian cancer patients.

