Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Runx1 is obligatory for mammary epithelial cell morphology and
phenotype


Introduction: Runx1 belongs to the Runx family of transcription factors.
Translocation of Runx1 is well established as a causative factor of
leukemia. However the recognition of Runx1 expression in epithelial
lining cells of glands suggests that Runx1 functions in maintaining the
integrity of that cell layer. Recent studies have identified Runx1 as one
of the top genes mutated in breast cancers. Further Runx1 levels are
decreased in high-grade primary breast tumors compared to low/mid-grade
tumors. Based on these findings, we raise the hypothesis that Runx1 is a
tumor suppressor that functions to maintain the normal epithelial
phenotype and that loss of Runx1 could promote epithelial to mesenchymal
(EMT). Methods and results: We used two human breast cancer cell models
systems, the MCF10A to MCF7/T47D and to MDA-MB-231 and the MCF10A
progression model from normal-like mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A) to
tumorigenic (MCF10AT1) and to metastatic (MCF10CA1a) cells. We observed
that the level of Runx1 is decreased in tumorigenic cells. To understand
Runx1 function, Runx1 was depleted by shRNA in mammary epithelial cells
that resulting in disrupted/altered cellular morphology and suppressed
expression of the epithelial gene E-cadherin. To reinforce this
observation, EMT was induced by addition of TGFB1 or by growth factor
depletion in MCF10A cells. A striking Runx1 decrease resulted suggesting
that Runx1 has a crucial role in preventing EMT. Furthermore our analysis
of breast tumors and survival data supports the above finding that loss
of Runx1 promotes tumor progression.Conclusion and Impact: Our results
highlight an essential role for Runx1 in maintaining normal epithelial
phenotype and preventing epithelial to mesenchymal transition as well as
tumor progression in breast cancer. Identifying this Runx1 mechanism
provides the basis for a novel strategy to treat early stage breast
cancer.

