Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TIMP-1 and angiogenesis: A role for CDH5 and eNOS


Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP) have emerged as diverse
molecules with novel roles in apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis.
TIMP-1, a well-documented inhibitor of apoptosis, has been shown to
inhibit or promote angiogenesis. In recent years, a strong association
has also been demonstrated between high levels of TIMP-1 and poor
prognosis in many cancers. It has been recognized as a multifunctional
protein affecting cell growth and angiogenesis. Conflicting studies have
shown it to function either as a negative or a positive regulator of
angiogenesis. In earlier studies, we have documented that lung
adenocarcinoma cell line H2009, when transfected to overexpress TIMP-1
and injected into nude mice resulted in larger, more aggressive tumors
with increased microvessel density, which was supported by in vitro
angiogenesis assays whereby enhanced capillary network formation was
seen. We have also shown that TIMP-1 expression levels can be correlated
with KRAS independency in non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell
lines harboring KRAS mutations. The present study was undertaken to
address the role of TIMP-1 in angiogenesis in the context of KRAS in
NSCLC cell lines. KRAS dependent cell line H2009 and its TIMP-1
overexpressing clone HB1 and a KRAS independent cell line A549 and its
TIMP-1 knockdown (KD) clone SH3 were examined by angiogenesis specific
PCR array. Comparison of the angiogenesis associated profiles of these
cell lines identified a marked increase in vascular endothelial cadherin
CDH5 in TIMP-1 over-expressing clone HB1. KRAS independent A549 cells
expressed high level of CDH5, however its TIMP-1 KD clone exhibited a
marked decrease in CDH5 level. A similar profile was identified for
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS/NOS3). CDH5 is an indispensable
element of normal vascular development and maintenance, and any
perturbations of normal levels will impact vessel sprouting and growth.
eNOS is primarily active through production of nitric oxide, maintaining
vascular tone as well as expressing anti-proliferative and antithrombotic
properties. We confirmed our earlier observation that serum free
conditioned media (SFCM) from TIMP-1 overexpressing HBI cells caused
increased and more complex network formation. SFCM from A549 TIMP-1 KD
SH3 clone showed a marked inhibition of endothelial network formation
compared to SFCM from A549 cells. To confirm that TIMP-1 was responsible
for the changes observed we purified secretory TIMP-1 by combined fast
protein liquid chromatography and gel filtration from another high TIMP-1
producing NSCLC cell line (H460) and also observed more capillary network
formation in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Our studies suggest
that TIMP-1 modulates angiogenesis by impacting CDH5 and eNOS positively.
These results define an important function of TIMP-1 in angiogenesis and
provide additional therapeutic targets for managing NSCLC.

