Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High fat diet accelerates MYC-driven prostate cancer through
metabolic and epigenomic rewiring


Introduction: The mechanisms underlying the association between high
dietary fat intake and prostate cancer (PCa) are unknown. Using a
MYC-driven PCa mouse model, we sought to identify metabolic and
epigenomic alterations driven by high fat diet (HFD) that facilitate PCa
progression. Additionally, we investigated whether these alterations were
relevant to PCa progression and lethality in humans.Material and Methods:
Wild-type (WT) and transgenic Hi-MYC (MYC) mice were assigned either a
HFD or control diet and were sacrificed at 12, 24, and 36 weeks of age
for histologic and phenotypic characterization. Metabolic and epigenomic
analyses were carried on the ventral prostates of 12-week old mice. Human
PCa gene expression profiling data were obtained from 319 men with PCa
and well-annotated post-diagnostic saturated fat intake (SFI) data from
the Physicians Health Study and Health Professionals Follow-up Study
prospective cohorts.Results: HFD does not affect the incidence of
MYC-induced murine prostate intraepithelial neoplasia (mPIN) at 12 weeks,
but increases mPIN proliferative index (Ki-67) at 24 weeks and tumor
burden at 36 weeks.MYC overexpression, as expected, induces a significant
metabolic reprogramming and HFD further enhances this rewiring to provide
additional anabolic metabolites to sustain the increased proliferation of
MYC prostate while having little effect on the WT prostate. Moreover, MYC
altered key metabolites of the methionine cycle in a direction suggestive
of a global hypomethylation, again amplified by HFD. Targeted
quantitative histone mass spectrometry revealed a robust MYC-driven
signature, including a global demethylation of H3K27 and H4K20 marks, the
latter enhanced by HFD. Moreover, ChIP-seq revealed an intricate
crosstalk between MYC and the H4K20me1 demethylase PHF8, resulting in
enhanced genomic instability in the context of HFD. Finally, RNA-seq and
ATAC-seq analyses showed that HFD rewires MYC-driven PCa through the
alteration of genes implicated in chromatin function and remodeling. In
humans, SFI was associated with enrichment in genes associated with
increased MYC transcriptional activity in the prostate. Furthermore, this
MYC transcriptional signature was associated with PCa lethality overall
(OR = 3.21; 95% CI = 1.47, 7.35 comparing extreme score tertiles), and
the association was stronger among men with high post-diagnostic SFI (OR
= 1.32; 95%CI = 1.11, 1.66) than those with low SFI (OR = 1.05; 95%CI =
0.98, 1.12).Conclusions: HFD supports a coordinated metabolomic and
epigenomic rewiring to increase epigenomic plasticity and MYC
transcriptional activity prior to the appearance of phenotypic
alterations in the prostate. Importantly, HFD requires MYC-mediated
transformation to trigger its deleterious effects. In humans, SFI also
enhances MYC transcriptional activity, which is associated with increased
PCa lethality.

