Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell dual adherent-suspension co-culture microenvironment
for studying tumor-stromal interactions in breast cancer stem cells


Considerable evidence suggests that cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) are
critical in tumor pathogenesis. Though functional CSCs can be identified
using dish-based tumorsphere assays, it is difficult to handle and
monitor single cells in a dish-based format. Tumor-stromal interaction is
another key regulator of cancer micro-environments, affecting
tumorigenesis and metastasis. To enable tumorsphere assays that
incorporate interaction with stromal cells, we developed a microfluidic
dual adherent/suspension co-culture device. This device combined a
suspension environment for single-cell tumorsphere assay and an adherent
environment for co-culture of stromal cells in close proximity by
selectively patterning polyHEMA in indented microwells. By minimizing
dead volume and improving cell capture efficiency, the presented platform
allowed the use of small samples (Considerable evidence suggests that
cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) are critical in tumor pathogenesis. Though
functional CSCs can be identified using dish-based tumorsphere assays, it
is difficult to handle and monitor single cells in a dish-based format.
Tumor-stromal interaction is another key regulator of cancer
micro-environments, affecting tumorigenesis and metastasis. To enable
tumorsphere assays that incorporate interaction with stromal cells, we
developed a microfluidic dual adherent/suspension co-culture device. This
device combined a suspension environment for single-cell tumorsphere
assay and an adherent environment for co-culture of stromal cells in
close proximity by selectively patterning polyHEMA in indented
microwells. By minimizing dead volume and improving cell capture
efficiency, the presented platform allowed the use of small samples (<100
cells), affording the potential to study rare cells such as circulating
tumor cells (CTCs). As a proof-of-concept, we co-cultured single T47D
breast cancer cells and primary cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF)
on-chip for 14 days to monitor sphere formation and growth. Compared to
mono-cultured T47D cells, co-cultured T47D have significantly higher
tumorigenic potential (sphere formation rate) by three times and
proliferation rates (larger sphere size). In addition to the phenotypic
observation, the platform allows the retrieval of mono-cultured and
co-cultured spheres for downstream analyses. Multiplexed single-cell gene
expression analyses using C1 and BioMark HD platforms were performed to
compare the expression of 96 target genes in co-cultured and
mono-cultured T47D cells. Co-cultured cells expressed significantly
higher MKI67, which suggests a possible mechanism for the elevated
proliferation rate. Additionally, lower BAX (pro-apoptotic marker)
expression matches well with higher sphere formation rate in the
co-cultured cells. Interestingly, we noticed the down-regulation of CDH1,
KRT8, and KRT18 in the co-cultured cells, indicating possible
epithelial-mesenchymal transition induced by CAF. Single cell resolution,
while to comparing between groups, also allows examination of cellular
heterogeneity within one population. While cells in the mono-cultured
group were more homogeneous co-cultured cells displayed clear bimodal
gene expression distribution including, ANXA3, MTOR, MKI67, BAX, and PGR.
This is suggestive of variable responses to the same stimuli at the
single cell level. Combining the dual adherent/suspension co-culture
platform presented here with the single cell gene expression analysis, we
may successfully identify functional CSCs, investigate the phenotypic and
transcriptional effects induced by tumor-stromal interactions, and study
cellular heterogeneity in greater detail.

