Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of epithelial cell-specific deletion of mPGES-1 on colon
carcinogenesis


Activation of the COX-2/mPGES-1/PGE2 signaling axis is a hallmark of many
cancers, including colorectal cancer (CRC), prompting the implementation
of cancer prevention strategies targeting COX-2 activity. We have shown
that targeting the downstream terminal PGE2 synthase, mPGES-1,
specifically reduces inducible PGE2 formation without disrupting
synthesis of other essential prostanoids. Additionally, global deletion
of mPGES-1 (gKO) confers dramatic protection against intestinal cancer
development in several mouse models, including the AOM+DSS
inflammation-associated colon cancer model. Understanding the role of
PGE2 under inflammatory conditions, however, is complicated by the
diverse cellular sources and context-dependence of inducible PGE2. To
clarify the relative contribution of inducible PGE2 synthesis within
distinct cell compartments in colon, we have recently created an mPGES-1
conditional knockout mouse (cKO), where exon 3 of the mPGES-1 gene
(mPtges) is floxed for tissue-specific Cre-mediated deletion. To test the
role of epithelial-derived PGE2 synthesis on inflammation-associated
cancer, we crossed the cKO mice with carbonic anhydrase 1
(Car1)-controlled Cre mice (cKO:Car1), thereby inactivating mPGES-1
function specifically within colonic epithelial cells. Based on our
recent observation that global inactivation mPGES-1 sensitizes the
colonic mucosa to direct environmental injury, we first examined the
sensitivity of the cKO:Car1 mice to DSS-induced acute colitis. Two days
after a five-day treatment with 0, 0.5 or 1% DSS, clinical signs of
colitis, including the extent of colonic ulceration were determined. Both
cKO:Car1 and cKO:WT control mice showed a comparable extent of colonic
ulceration, covering 60% of the epithelial surface. We next examined the
impact of epithelial-specific deletion of mPGES-1 on DSS-induced colon
carcinogenesis. KO:Car1 and cKO:WT control mice were treated with a
single injection of AOM (10 mg/kg bw) followed by five days of 0, 0.5 or
1% DSS, and colons were examined five weeks after the end of DSS
treatment. Surprisingly, epithelial deletion of mPGES-1 in the cKO:Car1
mice failed to provide against cancer development in comparison to the
cKO:WT mice. This is the first study to show that genetic inactivation of
inducible PGE2 formation within a specific cell lineage (e.g. epithelial
cells) does not affect both the extent of acute colonic inflammation nor
subsequent inflammation-associated carcinogenesis.

