Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New NCI experimental therapeutics program (NExT) small molecule
libraries for academic investigator hts projects


The NCI Experimental Therapeutics Program (NExT) is making available two
new smaller (3.5K) screening libraries suitable for academic investigator
HTS drug discovery programs. The NExT program is a partnership between
NCI's Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD) and the Center
for Cancer Research (CCR). NExT consolidates NCI's anticancer drug
discovery and development resources with the goal of maintaining a robust
and balanced therapeutics pipeline. It encompasses tasks from new target
validation through Phase III clinical trial evaluation. The Program is
designed to streamline development and testing of promising new
anticancer drugs and to expedite their delivery to the bedside. As part
of the Program to support HTS drug discovery, NCI has previously offered
academic oncology investigators access to our full 83K NExT Diversity
Library in single-use, 384-well plate format. The set was designed to
identify lead small molecules for drug discovery programs. We are now
making available 2 smaller pre-plated subsets of this library, the NExT
Diversity 3500 and NExT Diversity 3500 SAR, for when screening the full
set is not appropriate. Each library contains 3,500 compounds: NExT
Diversity 3500 is a diverse sampling across the entire 83K library while
the NExT Diversity 3500 SAR is designed to facilitate rapid SAR follow-up
by sampling only those compounds that have at least 5 close neighbors in
the 83K library. The new libraries were designed by initially filtering
the full NExT Diversity Library for undesirable compounds such as PAINS.
Both atom-pair based 2D pharmacophore fingerprints and ECFP6 topological
fingerprints from ChemAxon were then employed to generate the two
non-overlapping subset libraries. The NExT screening libraries are
provided as a resource to academic oncology investigators through the
NExT Program (see NExT Resources: http://next.cancer.gov/). The design
details and physiochemical characteristics of the two new sets, NExT
Diversity 3500 and NExT 3500 SAR, and procedures and criteria for
accessing this resource are presented along with several other screening
sets available through the Developmental Therapeutics Program (DTP).

