Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A discovery on splicing variant patterns of leucine-tRNA
synthetase gene based on targeted RNA sequencing


A leucine-tRNA synthetase, which belongs to the class I aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase family, is encoded by LARS gene. LARS gene functions as an
intracellular leucine sensor for mTORC1, mammalian target of rapamycin C1
signaling pathway. This cytosolic gene has a catalytic role of ligating
leucine amino acid to its cognate tRNA, in ATP-dependent manner.
Accordingly, the protein synthesis regulation, protein translation, cell
size, and autophagy are known to be reported by this gene. Therefore, a
comprehensive study on LARS gene is necessary for the sake of advanced
drug research and precise personalized cancer therapy, in relation to
mTOR pathway, which is the root cause of cancer genesis.We discovered the
differently expressed splicing patterns in 16 transcripts in LARS gene.
Alternative splicing variants of LARS gene were sequenced of 12 cancer
cell lines using targeted RNA sequencing to verify their possibilities as
a drug target; 12 cancer cell lines are consist of 8 hematologic cell
lines and 4 solid cancer cell lines. Sequencing data of LARS gene is
aligned by TopHat, and consequently transcript assembly and coverage
percentage calculation are processed by Cufflinks, afterwards.Our data,
observed from the integrated analysis of these values, shows outstanding
features on three transcripts: known protein coding transcript LARS-001
(ENST00000394434, known processed transcript LARS-013 (ENST00000511505),
and transcript LARS-015 (ENST00000508709), which is known to retain
intron sequences. First of all, the coverage percentage value of
transcript LARS-001 in a multiple myeloma cell line, KMS-12-BM, was
substantially different from the other cell lines. Secondly, an
exceptionally high coverage percent value of the transcript LARS-013 in
HL-60, an acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line, was shown. Lastly, the
transcript LARS-015 showed a considerably high coverage percent value in
SK-MES-1, which is a lung squamous cell carcinoma cell line.Three
distinct features of LARS transcripts, transcript LARS-001 in KMS-12-BM,
transcript LARS-013 in HL-60, and transcript LARS-015 in SK-MES-1, were
characterized. Interestingly, transcript LARS-001 is transcribed with no
exon skipping and is only highly expressed in KMS-12-BM. On the other
hand, the serial exon skipping from exon 14 to exon 26 in major
transcript LARS-201 has shown commonly in 12 cell lines. This implies
that LARS gene has unique patterns of alternative splicing variants,
which can be consider of taking a significant role in carcinogenesis
across diverse cancer types. Hence, additional analysis on exploring the
biologically functional correlation between LARS gene and cancer,
including cohort validation is to be demonstrated in the future research.

