Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) reverses aggressive breast
cancer in the radiation chimera model


CAPE is the major active component of propolis, a widely available, safe,
honeybee natural product with anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and
antitumor properties. We have previously shown diverse effects of CAPE in
breast cancer. We postulated that CAPE may be useful in chemoprevention
for women at high risk for triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) and
evaluated this in a radiation chimera mouse model in which the tumor
spectrum is shifted to TNBC.The radiation chimera model consists of
surgically clearing the mammary epithelium from the inguinal glands of
3-week old BALB/c mice, the mice were irradiated with 1 Gy or sham
irradiated at 10-12 weeks of age, and bilaterally transplanted 3 days
later with syngeneic Trp53 null mammary fragments. Mice were placed on a
CAPE diet or a control diet at 1 month post transplantation that was
maintained for the course of the experiment. Mammary tumor development
was monitored by palpation for up to 18 months. The first tumor was
resected at 1cm3 and mice monitored for tumor recurrence or second tumor
formation. Tumors were immunostained for estrogen receptor (ER) status
and ER negative tumors were selected from all the groups for RNA
sequencing.No difference in body weight or tumor incidence was observed
between mice on the CAPE versus control diet. Host irradiation
significantly accelerated tumor growth rate compared to the control sham
irradiated mice. CAPE treatment blocked this effect, but did not affect
the control tumor growth rate. Resected tumors in CAPE treated mice
recurred at significantly longer intervals (average of 40 days in the
control group versus 90 days with CAPE treatment) and much less
frequently than tumors from mice on a control diet. Mean expression
analysis showed that CAPE induces a distinct gene expression pattern in
ER negative tumors from irradiated mice. As previously described, the
transcriptional profile of ER negative tumors was enriched in immune
response genes in tumors from irradiated mice on a control diet.
Interestingly, this difference was abrogated in mice on the CAPE
diet.These findings support the potential use of CAPE to modify the
aggressive behavior of TNBC. This may be due to effects on the immune
system in which CAPE acts to re-establish anti tumor immunity. Thus, CAPE
may be useful in chemoprevention both for women at high risk for TNBC and
to prevent or delay TNBC breast cancer recurrence.

