Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intravital imaging of endogenous BRAFV600E melanoma reveals
plasticity of tumor response and resistance to trametinib over time


Although the number of therapies entering clinical trials continues to
increase, the success rate for targeted therapy studies is quite low due,
in part, to a lack of relevant preclinical models. The use of targeted
therapy has become a popular method for cancer treatment against mutant
BRAF melanoma, as studies show that clinical use of selective inhibitors
against MEK and BRAF extend life expectancy. However, melanoma becomes
refractory to treatment. Since the tumor and stromal factors that
contribute to drug resistance remain poorly understood, our ability to
treat patients with advanced disease remains limited. Current genetically
engineered murine (GEM) models in melanoma research have enhanced our
understanding of tumor biology and therapeutic response, but fail to
mimic tumor progression in clinical settings as most lack spatial and
temporal control of endogenous tumor initiation. To better mimic human
disease, we have developed a novel tamoxifen application method that
reproducibly induces local tumor formation on the mouse ear, and we have
incorporated a tdTomato fluorescent reporter allele (tdTomatoLSL) into an
existing tamoxifen-inducible GEM model of BRAFV600E/PTEN-null melanoma.
The tdTomato allele serves as a visual marker of Cre recombination in
endogenous melanocytes and allows disease progression to be followed
through macroscopic and multiphoton intravital imaging.To investigate
therapeutic effects at the cell level, we have performed imaging studies
of primary tumors before and after treatment with a selective MEK1/2
inhibitor (MEKi), Trametinib, which is a FDA approved therapy for
malignant melanoma. Our melanoma induction method enables longitudinal
studies of drug response that ultimately give rise to fully resistant
tumors (up to 90 days on MEKi). Our studies show that this treatment
causes a striking morphological change of the tumor cells as early as 3
days post-treatment. After several weeks of continuous treatment, the
remaining tumor cells are highly spatially correlated with bundled
collagen structures detected by second harmonic signal, suggesting that
cellular milieu strongly influences drug response. Interestingly, our
current studies with MEKi suggest that association of tumor cells with
collagen fibrils initially provides a protective effect against this
drug, however once true resistance emerges, this dependency on
extracellular matrix in the tumor stroma diminishes. Furthermore, in
parallel with our imaging studies, we have performed molecular analysis
of tumor response using Mib/MS and mRNA-seq. By coupling our imaging
studies with transcriptome and kinome reprogramming analysis, we hope to
identify properties that promote resistance. Using these novel
approaches, we have developed a model that enables direct observation of
endogenous tumor development, plasticity, and resistance to targeted
therapy at the cell level in situ for the first time.

