Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming the breast cancer microenvironment using microRNAs
that target DNA repair


Preclinical and clinical studies have revealed that tumor endothelium is
abnormal, resistant to genotoxic stress, and as such, functions as a key
determinant of therapeutic responses to radiation and chemotherapy. While
it is well established that radiation and chemotherapy cause DNA damage
in tumor vasculature, the molecular mechanisms leading to subsequent cell
cycle arrest, apoptosis or senescence in vascular cells are poorly
understood. Therefore, identifying and understanding factor(s) that
mediate DNA damage responses in tumor endothelial cells will provide
potential targets for sensitizing tumor vasculature to radiation and
other DNA damaging agents and improve their therapeutic efficacy in
cancer.Recent data indicates that microRNAs (miRs) are potent regulators
of DNA damage responses in the tumor microenvironment. miRs are short
20-22 nucleotide (nt) RNA molecules that regulate gene expression by
binding to partially complementary sites in target mRNAs. Since miRs
mediate several physiological processes in endothelial cells, we
hypothesized that miRs regulate endothelial (EC) DNA damage responses. We
used an expression screen to identify miRs induced by radiation,
cisplatin or hydrogen peroxide in human ECs and identified seven specific
miRs unique to intrinsic EC apoptosis pathways regulated by genotoxic
stress. In vitro gain-of-function assays show that three of them, miR-21,
miR-99b and miR-494 lead to endothelial senescence by impairing
telomerase function and inhibit sprouting angiogenesis in vitro, in a 3D
assay. Strikingly, we observed that these three miRs each target every
member of the MRN (Mre11a-Rad50 and NBS1) complex, a critical part of the
cellular DNA repair machinery. MRN complex plays a vital role in DNA ds
break repair, replication, and telomere maintenance. Pulldown of a mutant
RNA Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) from cells transfected the miR
mimics enriched for the MRN mRNAs suggesting direct miRNA-MRN complex
mRNA binding. Consistent with these results, knockdown of the MRN complex
recapitulated the effects of the miRs, reproducing the senescence
phenotype, angiogenesis inhibition and also impaired telomerase
activity.Since MRE-11a is upregulated in human breast cancer patients, we
asked if there was any differential expression of miR-494 in either the
tumor ECs or tumor cells. Interestingly, ISH of a breast cancer tissue
array revealed a significant reduction in tumor miR-494 levels compared
with the adjacent normal tissue. Furthermore, ectopic expression of
miR-494 diminished breast cancer cell proliferation in 2D and 3D.Our
observations indicate that miR-494 behaves as a tumor suppressor microRNA
by targeting the MRN complex, inducing senescence, cell cycle arrest and
decreases angiogenesis. Therefore, we propose that restoration of these
miRs targeting the MRN complex in breast cancer is likely to synergize
with DNA damaging agents and decrease tumor burden.

