Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel anti-CD24 monoclonal antibody, humanized and affinity
maturated for targeting gastrointestinal cancers


Background: CD24 is a cell-surface heavily glycosylated GPI-anchored
protein. We had previously shown that CD24 in an important player in the
multistep process of GI carcinogenesis (Gastro 2006, Clin Can Res 2007,
Can Res 2008). The creation of chimeric, humanized or fully human
antibodies was a major breakthrough and led to a wave of US FDA-approved
antibodies.Aim: To further improve the efficacy of the humanized
anti-CD24 mAb by increasing its binding strength and thereby generating a
novel therapy tool for GI malignancyMethods: From murine to humanized,
unarmed and conjugated, small derivatives and full IgG antibodies were
recombinantly engineered. The antibody genes were recovered, amplified
and cloned into appropriate vectors. Then the vectors were introduced
into a host (mammalian and E.coli) and adequate amounts of functional
antibody were achieved. Sequence analysis of the CDR loops was the base
for library designing. Affinity maturation was performed in two-steps
selection (CDR walking) and by using phage display technique. The binding
of the different derivatives were evaluated on full Glycan array in which
more than 70 sugar moieties were printed.Results: In vivo antibody
targeting and accumulation within a CD24 positive tumor and its excess
clearance was clearly demonstrated using live imaging device (Maestro Cri
device). High-affinity antibodies were selected and created from
combinatorial phage-displayed antibody libraries that contain varying
degrees of diversity at randomized positions. A chosen matured clone was
isolated and showed higher binding strength (1.810-8), compared to the
parental murine and humanized Abs. The matured antibody showed selective
recognition and binding to the CD24 antigen which proves that the genetic
manipulations carried out did not affect its properties. Its stability
was enhanced following the maturation process,as well as its
pharmacokinetics parameters which showed a long serum half-life.The
matured antibody mediates ADCC (antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity),
75% of target cell lysis was demonstrated. Combined treatment with
standard chemotherapy and natural products, such as monoterpenes
(terpinen-4-ol), showed significant reduction in cell viability (90% cell
death). Binding of anti-CD24 Ab to glycan microarray could not be
detected while high binding intensities were observed where the whole
CD24 protein was printed, indicating that the antibodies bind to the core
peptide and not to its sugar residues.Conclusion: Targeting CD24 may be a
promising treatment for GI malignancies in combination with chemotherapy
and natural agents. The resulted matured humanized anti-CD24 mAb proved
to be more effective than the murine parental Ab. The long serum
half-life is desirable as it would decrease the need for repetitive
injections.

