Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC and MCL1 cooperatively promote chemotherapy-resistant cancer
stem cells through regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative
phosphorylation


Triple negative breast cancer is the most virulent subtype of this
malignancy. Although initially responsive to cytotoxic chemotherapy, most
patients with TNBC eventually develop drug-resistant disease. We
previously reported co-amplification of MYC and MCL1 in a cohort of TNBCs
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (Balko et al. Cancer Discov. 2014). In
addition, MYC and MCL1 are overexpressed in paclitaxel-resistant compared
to paclitaxel-sensitive TNBC cells. We hypothesized that MYC and MCL1
play a role in chemotherapy resistance. TNBC cell lines with claudin-low
gene expression exhibited the highest levels of MYC and MCL1 mRNAs. This
molecular subtype of breast cancer is enriched for cancer stem cells
(CSCs) and exhibits resistance to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Knockdown of
both MYC and MCL1 by siRNA in SUM159PT and MDA-MB-436 TNBC cells
significantly reduced mammosphere formation and CSC markers such as ALDH
and CD44high/CD24low. Conversely, overexpression of ectopic MYC and MCL1
in MDA-MB-468 cells increased mammosphere formation and CSC markers. It
has been reported that mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
is enhanced in CSCs. Thus, we investigated a role for MYC and MCL1 in
mitochondrial OXPHOS using Seahorse XFe extracellular flux analyzer. CSCs
with high expression of MYC and MCL1 sorted by flow cytometry exhibited
increased mitochondrial OXPHOS compared to non-CSCs. Transfection of MYC
and MCL1 expression vectors into MDA-MB-468 cells enhanced mitochondrial
OXPHOS activity. Conversely, knockdown of MYC and MCL1 in SUM159PT and
MDA-MB-436 cells reduced mitochondrial OXPHOS activity. MYC mediated
these effects by promoting mitochondrial biogenesis whereas MCL1
potentiated mitochondrial OXPHOS via localization into the mitochondrial
matrix, independent of its ability to associate with BH3-domain
containing anti-apoptotic proteins (BAD, BCL2, BCL-XL). Deletion of the
mitochondrial target sequence (MTS) of MCL1 impaired its ability to
increase mitochondrial OXPHOS and mammosphere formation. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which are produced in CSCs as a by-product of activated
mitochondrial OXPHOS, were abrogated by MYC and MCL1 siRNA. To determine
the effect of ROS on CSCs, we treated SUM159PT and MDA-MB-436 cells with
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Treatment with H2O2 enriched CSCs, which showed
up-regulation of several cancer stem cell genes such as Nanog and IL-8.
Enrichment of CSCs by H2O2 was diminished by n-acetylcysteine (NAC), an
antioxidant. These data suggest that MYC and MCL1 co-amplification
confers drug resistance to TNBC via mitochondrial OXPHOS-mediated
enrichment of CSCs. Moreover, MYC and MCL1 stimulate H2O2 production,
which potentiates CSCs. Thus, targeting mitochondrial OXPHOS and H2O2 may
be an effect strategy to delay or reverse resistance to chemotherapy in
MYC and MCL1 amplified TNBC.

