Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic change of differentiation in spheroids derived from mixed
small cell carcinoma/adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix


Small cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix (SCCC) occurs mainly in young
women with poor prognosis. Clear treatment algorithm remains difficult to
develop for its rarity. Herein, we report a case of SCCC with
adenocarcinoma component, and analyzed the mechanism of differentiation
using a spheroid culture method.CTOS (cancer tissue-originated spheroid)
is a primary culture system by which highly purified and viable cancer
cells are cultivated. The principle of this method is maintaining
cell-cell contact throughout the preparation and culture process. CTOS
preserves characters of original tumors, especially their differentiation
status.We generated a panel of CTOSs from 9 SCCCs. The success rate of
CTOS preparation in SCCC was 100%, indicating SCCC is one of the most
suitable cancers for CTOS method.We focused on SCCCs with adenocarcinoma
component. These admixed tumors have been reported in other organs, such
as lung, ovary, stomach, and so on. However, the mechanism underlying
mixed tumor remains unclear. One of the CTOSs retained the
characteristics of mixed tumor in original tumor.Immunostaining revealed
that CD99 was positive in the region of small cell carcinoma region, and
CK7 in that of adenocarcinoma. CTOSs were sorted by CD99 and EpCAM (a
possible stem cell marker) expression levels, and transplanted into
NOD-Scid mice. Xenotumors derived from both CD99lowEpCAMlow cells and
CD99lowEpCAMhigh cells showed mixed cell type in H&E staining.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that CD99 was positive in the region of
small cell carcinoma, and CK7 in that of adenocarcinoma. On the other
hand, CD99highEpCAMhigh cells-derived xenotumor consisted of only small
cell carcinoma. The tumors were positive for CD99, but negative for
CK7.Next, we searched for the key factor of differentiation. It has been
reported that hypoxia induced adenocarcinoma in lung adenosquamous cell
carcinoma. When CTOSs were incubated in hypoxia (3%O2), FACS analysis
revealed that proportion of CD99low cells increased (20.6% in normoxia,
40.2% in hypoxia). Immunostaining of CTOSs showed similar results. Thus
differentiation status of a mixed type SCCC showed dynamic change of
differentiation in spheroids depending on culture conditions.The research
can provide insight into the origin of mixed tumor of SCCC, and may be
useful for developing treatment strategy.

