Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of CD44 and CD24 markers discriminates the
epithelioid from fibroblastoid subset in a sarcomatoid renal cell
carcinoma cell line: evidence of the existence of cancer stem cells in
both subsets


The co-existence of epithelioid and fibroblastoid subsets in the human
sarcomatoid renal carcinoma cell line, RCC52, has been demonstrated
previously based on clonal studies, in which only the epithelioid subset
was found to be tumorigenic in NOD/SCID mice. Since only few clonal
isolates were used to analyze in that study, we argued that the
tumorigenicity results might not be truly reflective of this tumor line.
We therefore in this study determined to use cytofluorometrically sorted
cells to re-evaluate certain biological parameters including
xenotransplantation. Using two monoclonal antibodies to CD44 and CD24
markers, we succeeded in identification and isolation of the two
populations, and showed the CD44bright/CD24dim and CD44bright/CD24bright
phenotypes corresponding to the epithelioid and fibroblastoid subsets,
respectively. At variance with the results of clonal studies, both
cytofluorometrically sorted subsets displayed different but significant
degrees of tumorigenicities, indicating that each subset harbored its own
cancer stem cells (CSCs). In consistence with the tumorigenicity
findings, both sorted subsets showed in vitro migratory/invasive
potential with greater ability exhibited by the CD44bright/CD24bright
subset which was associated with higher expression of MMP-7, -8 and
TIMP-1 transcripts. On the other hand, the CD44bright/CD24dim subset was
found to be associated with higher expression of MMP-2, -9 and TIMP-2
transcripts. Furthermore, both sorted subsets expressed the RCC stem cell
marker CD105 in a small proportion of cells (4-5%), and were able to
covert to PAX2+ clear cells in areas in the xenografts to a greater
extent by the CD44bright/CD24dim subset, highlighting high plasticity of
each subset in different ways. Collectively, our findings confirm the
co-existence of two morphologically and phenotypically distinct subsets,
and document the presence of CSCs in both subsets for the first time in
sarcomatoid RCC. The CSCs/mCSCs in the two subsets should therefore be
considered as emerging therapeutic targets in the design of future
treatment strategies for this subtype of renal cancer.

