Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB324, a selective small molecule inhibitor of the receptor
tyrosine kinase AXL, enhances immune checkpoint inhibitor efficacy


Signaling via the AXL receptor tyrosine kinase is a key suppressor of the
anti-tumor innate immune response. AXL is expressed on several cells
associated with the tumor immune microenvironment including natural
killer cells, dendritic cells and tumor-associated macrophages. AXL is
also an important regulator of tumor plasticity related to
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that drives tumor immune
evasion and resistance to cytotoxic T cell-mediated cell killing. Hence
AXL signaling contributes uniquely to both tumor cell intrinsic and
microenvironmental anti-tumor immune suppression mechanisms. We therefore
evaluated whether blocking AXL signaling with BGB324, a selective
clinical-stage small molecule Axl kinase inhibitor, enhances the effect
of immune checkpoint blockade in syngeneic cancer mouse models that
display limited immunogenicity.We conducted studies in the aggressive
mammary adenocarcinoma (4T1) syngeneic (Balb/C) mouse model. We found
that AXL expression increased in 4T1 tumors treated with
anti-CTLA-4/anti-PD-1 and correlated with lack of response to immune
therapy. Combination with BGB324 (50 mg/kg bid) significantly enhanced
responsiveness to anti-CTLA-4/anti-PD-1 treatment (10 mg/kg of each, 4
doses) in Balb/C mice bearing established 4T1 tumors. The combination of
BGB324 + anti-CTLA-4/anti-PD-1 resulted in durable primary tumor
clearance in 23% of treated mice versus 5.6% obtained with
anti-CTLA-4/anti-PD-1 alone (p = 0.0157). In a separate study, BGB324 +
anti-CTLA-4 treated resulted in 22% long-term primary tumor clearance
while no response was observed with anti-CTLA4 treatment alone. The
extensive metastasis to the lung, liver and spleen characteristic of this
model were concomitantly abrogated in the animals responding to the
combination treatment. In addition, BGB324 + anti-CTLA-4/anti-PD-1
treated tumors displayed enhanced infiltration of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Importantly, responding animals rejected orthotopic 4T1
tumor cell re-challenge, demonstrating sustained tumor immunity.In
conclusion, targeting AXL signaling represents a unique opportunity to
address multiple tumor immune suppression mechanisms. Our results support
combining the clinical-stage AXL inhibitor, BGB324, with immune
checkpoint inhibitors to improve treatment of human cancers.

