Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How K-Ras4B attaches to the membrane and forms a dimer: A new
paradigm


Ras is a small GTPase, controlling signal transduction pathways and
promoting cell proliferation and survival. KRAS is frequently mutated in
cancer. Ras consists of highly homologous catalytic domains (G-domains)
and flexible C-terminal hypervariable regions (HVRs) that differ
significantly across Ras isoforms. Recent nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations discovered that the HVR of
K-Ras4B in the GDP-bound state extensively interacts with the catalytic
domain. However, it weakly interacts with the catalytic domain in the
GTP-bound state. Here, using MD simulations we modeled K-Ras4B membrane
interaction and dimerization. Membrane binding of K-Ras4B through the
anchoring of the positively charged HVR is thought to be critical to its
function as an oncogene and initiates signaling events. At the membrane,
the catalytic domain takes on multiple orientations, including
perpendicular and parallel alignments of the allosteric helices with
respect to the membrane normal. In the autoinhibited state, the HVR is
sandwiched between the effector lobe and the membrane; in the active
state, with the farnesyl anchored into the membrane and the HVR
unrestrained, the catalytic domain fluctuates reinlessly, exposing its
effector binding site. Notably, we also observe HVR-autoinhibited
K-Ras4B-GTP states that display GDP-bound-like orientations of the
helices. We thus propose that GDP/GTP nucleotide exchange may not be
sufficient for K-Ras4B activation; composite mechanisms including HVR
sequestration, farnesyl insertion, and orientation/localization of the
catalytic domain on the membrane can determine the functional state of
K-Ras4B. Remarkably, K-Ras4B-GTP, but not GDP-bound, is able to form
stable homodimers with different dimer interfaces, suggesting that the
nucleotide-dependent dimerization with various dimer interfaces can
resolve nanoclustering and cluster reorganization accomplishment with
Raf's activation. Ras was believed to function as a monomer; however,
since Raf dimerizes, it has been suspected that Ras can also dimerize.
Dimerization and clustering could rein the fluctuations producing more
productive pre-organized conformations. Funded by Frederick National
Laboratory for Cancer Research, National Institutes of Health, under
contract HHSN261200800001E.

