Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An automated 5-plex fluorescent immunohistochemistry enabled
characterization of PD-L1 expression and tumor infiltrating immune cells
in lung and bladder cancer specimens


Cancers may escape immune surveillance and eradication through the
expression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) on tumor cells and in the
tumor microenvironment. PD-L1 expression has been reported in various
cell populations within the tumor, and its expression associated with
prognosis for various tumors. Further, clinical studies have shown that
this pathway is an important target for immunotherapy and PD-L1
expression on tumor cells and in the tumor microenvironment has been
associated with enhanced response. Understanding PD-L1's complex
biological function not only on tumor cells but also within the tumor
microenvironment requires simultaneous interrogation of multiple
biomarkers, ranging from cancer immunology checkpoint markers, tumor
infiltrating immune cell markers, and tumor specific markers, etc.
Multiplex immunohistochemistry (IHC) allows simultaneous detection of
multiple markers to explore the potential cellular composition of
immune/stromal/cancer cells in tumor microenvironment. Development of a
multiplex IHC assay remains challenging due to antibody species
similarity and cross reactivity, stability of fluorophores through
multiple rounds of processing, balancing high and low signals and
measurement of weakly expressed markers. We present here the development
of a fully automated multiplex IHC assay (PD-L1, CD3, CD8, CD68 and
FoxP3) using rabbit primary antibodies with a heat deactivation process
between each antigen staining cycles on the BenchMark ULTRA automated
slide stainer. As part of the technology validation, we compared the
5-plex IHC to the respective single-plex chromogenic IHC assays. Using
the automated 5-plex fluorescent IHC assay, we tested a cohort of
non-small cell lung (NSCLC) and bladder cancer tissue specimens and
characterized PD-L1 and immune marker expression in both tumor and
infiltrate immune cells. To provide an objective and reliable readout of
the assay, image analysis tools are being developed for automated
identification and quantification of the labelled biomarkers and their
co-expression on a cell-by-cell basis. This automated multiplex PD-L1
5-Plex IHC assay could be utilized as a tool for further characterizing
tumors and its microenvironment and gain a better understanding of which
patients may benefit from immune-therapies.

