Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a humanized ROR1 x CD3 bispecific DART molecule for
the treatment of solid and liquid tumors


Introduction: The receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1)
is overexpressed in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and a subset of solid
tumors, including lung, breast, ovarian, colon, and pancreatic cancers,
as well as sarcoma. Limited adult tissue expression and its absence in
normal leukocytes makes ROR1 a promising cancer therapeutic target. We
have developed a Dual-Affinity Re-Targeting (DART) protein for
redirecting T lymphocytes to lyse tumor cells via monovalent recognition
of ROR1 on tumors and CD3 on T cells. ROR1 x CD3 DART protein was
engineered for improved half-life with the incorporation of a modified Fc
domain, lacking effector function.Methods: The ROR1 x CD3 DART protein
was stably expressed in CHO cells and purified to homogeneity by a
standard antibody platform. Bispecific binding was evaluated by ELISA and
SPR analysis. In vitro functional studies were performed with lymphoma
and solid tumor cell lines in the presence of primary human T cells.
Tumor growth inhibition was evaluated in NOD/SCID/IL-2 gamma chain KO
(NOG) mice coimplanted with human T cells and either mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL) or lung cancer cell lines (5:1 effector : target cell ratio)
followed by treatment with ROR1 x CD3 DART protein by intravenous (IV)
administration. In vivo activity was also evaluated in human
PBMC-reconstituted NOG/B2m deficient mice bearing established intradermal
tumor xenografts following IV treatment with ROR1 x CD3 DART molecule.
Pharmacokinetic analysis of the DART molecule was performed in human
neonatal Fc receptor (hFcRn) transgenic mice.Results: The ROR1 x CD3 DART
protein displayed the expected bispecific binding for ROR1 and CD3
antigens and retained the affinity and specificity of the parent mAbs.
The DART molecule mediated dose-dependent lysis of ROR1-positive MCL and
solid tumor (breast, lung, and osteosarcoma) cell lines through
recruitment of human T cells. DART molecule-mediated killing of
ROR1-expressing target cells was accompanied by target-dependent T-cell
activation and cytokine release; however, no activity was observed in the
absence of target cells and no cytokine release was observed with human
PBMCs alone. The ROR1 x CD3 DART protein displayed extended circulating
half-life after administration to hFcRn-transgenic mice. In mouse
efficacy studies, the growth of HBL-2 (MCL), HOP-92 (lung cancer), or
NIH-1975 (a lung cancer line resistant to erlotinib) cells co-implanted
with human T cells in NOG mice was inhibited by treatment with the ROR1 x
CD3 DART protein at doses in the mcg/kg range. The ROR1 x CD3 DART
molecule also demonstrated antitumor activity with high complete response
rates in human PBMC-reconstituted mice bearing established HBL-2 cell
xenografts.Conclusion: The promising in vitro and in vivo activity of the
Fc-bearing ROR1 x CD3 DART molecule supports further investigation as a
potential candidate for the cancer treatment.

