Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic vulnerabilities in ovarian cancer


Background: Histone acetylation regulates gene expression in cancer and
can be exploited for therapeutic targeting. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACi) increase histone acetylation, promoting transcription
of genes involved in growth arrest and apoptosis and have been used as
anti-cancer agents. BRCA mutations are the best characterized genetic
alteration associated with ovarian cancer and can be targeted
therapeutically by recently approved PARP inhibitors. We hypothesized
that the epigenetic landscape of ovarian cancer is altered by the
presence of BRCA mutations and can be manipulated by HDACi for
therapeutic benefit.Materials and Methods: We utilized isogenic cell
lines carrying mutated/functional BRCA 1 (UWB1.289; UWB1.289-BRCA), and
respectively BRCA 2 genes (PE01/PEO4). We measured HDAC expression and
activity by western blotting and an enzymatic assay and characterized
globally chromatin marked by H3K9ac (active chromatin) and H3K27ac
(poised chromatin) by using ChIP sequencing. To determine whether HDAC
inhibitors increase susceptibility to PARP inhibitors, cellular
proliferation was measured in ovarian cancer cells expressing mutated and
wild type (WT) BRCA.Results: HDAC1 expression and activity were decreased
in cell lines carrying defective BRCA proteins. ChIP sequencing
identified chromatin regions differentially marked by H3K9ac (178
promoters in BRCA1-null compared to BRCA WT cells) and H3K27ac (131
promoters in BRCA WT compared to BRCA null cells) suggesting differences
in gene transcription dependent on histone acetylation in BRCA mutated vs
BRCA functional cancer cells. A subset of genes differentially marked by
H3K9ac were validated at mRNA level by RT PCR confirming BRCA dependent
regulation (TGM2, Wnt7a, DKK1, MET, FLI1, AXL, TG2, PMEPA1, TWIST2
upregulated) and (E2F2, NID2 downregulated) in BRCA1-null ovarian cancer
cells. HDAC1 inhibition with trichostatin A (TSA) and entinostat (MS-275)
increased H3K9ac and was associated with an increase in TGM2, FLI1, DKK1
and E2F2, and a decrease in TWIST2 gene expression in both BRCA1-wt and
-null cell lines confirming epigenetic regulation of this subset of
genes. Functionally, HDACi synergized with PARP inhibitors in BRCA null
ovarian cancer cells (combination index 0.63), consistent with the
altered gene expression changes induced by differences in chromatin
marks.Conclusions: In conclusion, the chromatin landscape in BRCA null
ovarian cancer cells is altered and can be targeted by HDAC inhibitors.
Identifying pathways and specific genes altered by histone acetylation
may enable future rational targeted combination therapies.

