Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRLX101, an investigational nanoparticle-drug conjugate of
camptothecin, demonstrates synergy with immunotherapy agents in
preclinical models


CRLX101, an investigational nanoparticle-drug conjugate (NDC) containing
the payload camptothecin, is currently being clinically evaluated in
multiple treatment-refractory solid tumors. CRLX101 has been shown
preclinically to be active in many different tumor types as a dual
inhibitor of topoisomerase 1 and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). It
has a long circulation half-life and has been shown pre-clinically to
release camptothecin in a slow and prolonged manner in tumors.
Camptothecin itself was identified as an active anti-tumor agent
preclinically but was not developed clinically due to its poor
tolerability in patients. The development of CRLX101, which has not shown
significant toxicity in over 300 patients to date, offers a unique
opportunity to improve cancer treatment in a meaningful way.Recent
publications have suggested that tumor expression of the
immune-suppressive molecule PD-L1 is controlled by HIF-1. Since CRLX101
is a potent inhibitor of HIF-1, it is possible that CRLX101 behaves as an
inhibitor of the PD-1/PD-L1 axis in vivo. We therefore hypothesized that
a combination of CRLX101 with agents that are being investigated in
combination with the anti PD-1 antibody would lead to increased efficacy.
Indole diamine oxygenase (IDO) inhibitors are a new class of drugs that
decrease tumor-induced immune suppression and are currently being
evaluated in the clinic with anti-PD-1 antibodies. Using syngeneic tumor
models, we tested the combination of CRLX101 with three different IDO
inhibitors. Treatment of the B16.F10 melanoma model with IDO inhibitors
NLG919, INCB024360 or indoximod had no effect on tumor growth while
CRLX101 as monotherapy showed moderate anti-tumor activity. When CRLX101
was combined with any of the three IDO inhibitors, the anti-tumor
activity was greatly improved compared to monotherapy. Similar results
were noted in other syngeneic tumor models. This improved combination
response was not observed in IDO inhibitor combinations with the
clinically approved topoisomerase inhibitor irinotecan, suggesting that
CRLX101 provides a unique advantage in this context. Interestingly,
CRLX101/IDO inhibitor combination was also superior to the combination of
anti-PD-1 antibody and IDO inhibitor. These data suggest that CRLX101 in
combination with IDO inhibitors can successfully block host-mediated
immune-suppression to enhance anti-tumor immunity, and this combination
may therefore show improved therapeutic activity in the clinic. We
therefore plan to explore the immune-specific effects of CRLX101 as well
as the mechanistic basis for the observed combination response, and use
that information to guide CRLX101 clinical strategy in the setting of
chemo-immunotherapy regimens.

