Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-human PD-1 antibody BGB-A317 exhibits potent immune cell
activation


Background: PD-1 is a check point inhibitory receptor, which is primarily
expressed in activated and/or exhausted T cells. Engagement of PD-1
receptor by its ligand PD-L1 or PD-L2 (expressed on APCs and some tumor
cells), leads to negative regulatory signaling in T-cells, promoting
functional exhaustion of tumor-infiltrating T-lymphocytes. BGB-A317 is a
novel humanized IgG4 anti-PD-1 antibody under clinical development. The
immunomodulatory activity of BGB-A317 was evaluated in in vitro assays
and reported here.Materials and methods: BGB-A317 was generated through
hybridoma fusion, humanized by CDR grafting and structural simulation.
The Fc and hinge regions of BGB-A317 were engineered to remove Fc gamma
receptor (FcR) binding and to stabilize the hinge region. The binding
affinity and specificity were studied by ELISA, FACS and SPR (Biacore).
The immunomodulatory functions of BGB-A317 were evaluated using both
T-cell lines and primary immune cells.Results: BGB-A317 binds to the
extracellular domain of human PD-1 with high affinity (KD = 0.15nM) and
specificity. In competition assays, BGB-A317 efficiently blocks the
interactions between PD-1 and its ligands. In vitro cell-based assays,
BGB-A317 significantly enhances cytokine (IL-2 and IFN-) production using
T-cell line or primary T cells cocultured with signal-sending cells in a
dose-dependent manner. BGB-A317 also potently increases NK cell-mediated
IFN- production and cytotoxicity against PD-L1+ tumor cells. As an
important functional attribute, BGB-A317 exhibits no binding to any of
FcRs, including FcRI, FcRIIA, FcRIIB and FcRIIIA. Therefore, no
antibody-dependent cell-mediated (ADCC) or complement-dependent
cytotoxicity (CDC) has been observed in activated T cells treated with
high concentration of BGB-A317 up to 100 g/ml. BGB-A317 is stable as
bivalent antibody unlike the wild type human IgG4 going through dynamic
conformational change, forming bispecific antibody by Fab-arm
exchange.Conclusions: BGB-A317 demonstrated potent immune cell activation
in in vitro assays, supporting its clinical development for the treatment
of human cancers.Keywords: Anti-PD-1, immunotherapy, functional assays

