Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming therapy resistance in SOX2-expressing head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cells by targeting the downstream BCL2-pathway


SOX2 (SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 2) is a transcriptional master
regulator that confers stemness in early embryogenesis and acts as an
oncogene in various cancers. Recently, SOX2 expression has been shown in
several solid tumor types. However, the SOX2 expression pattern and the
correlation with histopathologic status and clinical outcome are highly
variable among tumors, suggesting distinct roles of SOX2 in individual
tumors. In head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we reported
that expression of SOX2 is detectable and associates with high-risk
disease in non-HPV human HNSCC. Functionally, SOX2 overexpression
enhanced apoptosis resistance in response to treatments with cisplatin
and other apoptosis-inducing agents, indicating SOX2 as a mediator of
therapy resistance in human HNSCC. On the molecular level, induction of
the anti-apoptotic protein BCL2 was observed following SOX2-induction.
Here we explore if the anti-apoptotic effects of SOX2 are functionally
mediated through up-regulation of BCL2 expression and explore BCL2 as a
potential direct downstream target of SOX2.We tested SOX2 and BCL2
expression in different human HNSCC cell-lines by qPCR and respectively
immunoblot. To analyse the functional effect of SOX2, SOX2 overexpressing
and control SCC25 cells generated via transduction with lentiviral
particles were analysed in in vitro apoptosis assays after treatments
with staurosporine, TRAIL or cisplatin. Furthermore, to analyse the
influence of BCL2 in SOX2-overexpressing cells, treatment with the BCL2
inhibitor ABT-199 was used.We could confirm the strong inductive effect
of SOX2 overexpression on BCL2 gene and protein levels in the human SCC25
cell line. In line, cells treated with SOX2 overexpressing lentiviruses
showed enhanced apoptotic resistance as compared to control-transduced
cells. Notably, HNSCC cells were less sensitive to ABT-199 as previously
reported for lymphatic leukemic cells (5-10 M versus 0.1-1 M for EC50).
However, ABT-199 treatment in low dosage (1 M) was indeed able to
sensitize SOX2-overexpressing human HNSCC cells to apoptosis, indicating
up-regulation of BCL2 as an important mechanism by which SOX2 confers
treatment resistance in these cells. Moreover, analysis of the BCL2
promoter revealed a potential SOX2-binding site, and a direct association
of SOX2 protein with this site could be confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays (CHIP). We are currently further exploring the
effect of ABT-199 on the therapy resistance of SOX2-overexpressing cells
using in vivo models.Taken together, our findings indicate that, in human
HNSCC cells, SOX2 plays an important role in drug resistance by elevating
BCL2 expression. In patients with SOX2-expressing HNSCC, combinatorial
treatment with ABT-199 may enhance response to conventional
chemotherapies by re-sensitizing cells to apoptosis induction.

