Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptive operations and technology platform for nation-scale
precision oncology


Precision oncology requires predictive models for therapy selection using
variety of biomarkers and clinical features as input. Building and
validating these models requires analysis of large numbers of diverse
cases in order to relate markers and treatments to positive outcomes. The
-omics technologies provide a rich source of genetic and epigenetic
markers but demand large compute and storage systems to process the data.
Thus, there is an urgent need for scalable and reliable information
systems to support nation-scale research and delivery of precision
oncology.At Lockheed Martin, we deliver operational solutions to complex
problems. Here, we present our vision for a precision oncology platform.
This solution integrates best-in-class capabilities from multiple
sources/vendors to support innovation, research and clinical care for a
whole nation. We not only thought about the basic -omics based data
collection, but also an infrastructure to collect and store data within a
compliant privacy and security framework that also facilitates
collaborative analytics and data sharing for deeper insight.Taking a
systems engineering approach, we have examined some of the challenges to
implement such a platform. For instance, running the basic genomic data
processing pipelines to yield variant calls, which in turn will feed the
variant store, should be a single scalable workflow. Accounting for
multiple data sources, various use cases and selections of tools are at
the core of an adaptable workflow. A variant store design that can scale
and support a national cohort with an overlaying cohort selection tool
are all part of this intricate design.It is our vision that a systems
engineering and integration approach can deliver a unified solution for
the national precision oncology roadmap. It is paramount that all the
individual pieces should be well tuned to deliver scalability and
reliability and simultaneously work in complete harmony. Only then we can
process data at-scale needed for finding actionable mutations, designing
effective treatments and implementing prevention strategies, affordably
and reliably.

