Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of ZNF185 intracellular localization in
pancreatic ductal carcinoma


Pancreatic cancer is one of the most aggressive human tumors because of
the challenges associated with detecting it at an early stage and its
high potential for dissemination and distant metastasis. Therefore,
clarifying the biological mechanisms underlying distant metastasis from
pancreatic cancer and accelerating the development of new treatment
strategies are needed. We previously isolated ZNF185, a
metastasis-related protein, using a global quantitative proteome
analysis. ZNF185 contains two zinc-finger motifs in the C-terminus that
fit the consensus pattern of the LIM domains inducing tumor formation and
cytoskeleton organization. In the present study, we investigated the
expression of ZNF185 in human pancreatic cancer in vivo and in clinical
cases, and also evaluated its prognostic significance.
Immunohistochemical staining of resected specimens and a xenograft model
of liver metastasis was used to examine the relationship between distant
metastasis in and the prognosis of pancreatic cancer and the expression
of ZNF185. Cells expressing ZNF185 in the plasma membrane were detected
in 71 (39.0%) out of 182 patients with resected pancreatic cancer.
Patients not expressing ZNF185 in the plasma membrane had a median
survival of 30.2 months, whereas those expressing ZNF185 in the plasma
membrane had a median survival of 21.3 months. A multivariate analysis
indicated that the expression of ZNF185 in the plasma membrane was an
independent poor prognostic factor (p = 0.016). A multivariate analysis
indicated that patients with cells expressing ZNF185 in the plasma
membrane were more likely to develop hematogenous metastasis (p = 0.081).
NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rnull(NOG) mice were used to compare the expression of
ZNF185 in the subcutaneous tumors of the parent cell line BxPC-3 and
liver metastatic tumors of the highly liver-metastatic subline LM-BxPC-3
established in our laboratory. Cells expressing ZNF185 in the plasma
membrane were more prevalent in metastatic disease in the liver than in
subcutaneous tumors, and these cells were often located at the tumor
margins rather than in the center of the tumor. In conclusion, ZNF185 is
a protein related to hematogenous metastasis, the expression of which in
the plasma membrane was identified as an independent prognostic factor
for pancreatic cancer.

