Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiclonal invasion in breast cancer identified by single cell
DNA sequencing


Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is the most common form of early stage
breast cancer and is frequently detected by mammography. Only 10% of
low-grade and 30% of high-grade DCIS patients will later present with an
invasive carcinoma, making it difficult to determine which patients to
treat aggressively. Although DCIS is often considered a precursor to
invasive breast carcinoma, a major question in the field is whether
invasive subpopulations evolve directly from the in situ populations or
independently. We hypothesize that early tumor cells evolve over an
extended period of time in the ducts, generating multiple subpopulations
that migrate out of the ducts together. To test this hypothesis, we
developed an approach that combines laser-capture microdissection (LCM)
with single cell sequencing to perform DNA copy number profiling while
preserving the topographic location of cells. We applied this method to
10 high-grade breast cancer patients with defined in situ, invasive, and
normal regions. Using these data, we delineated the clonal substructure
and location of the in situ and invasive subpopulations. We found that
most high-grade tumors are composed of 1-4 major clonal subpopulations
that are intermixed in both the in situ and invasive regions. These
subpopulations share a common evolutionary lineage or cell of origin. We
also performed deep-exome sequencing (100X) of matched microdissected
regions of in situ, invasive and adjacent normal tissue from these breast
cancer patients. In each tumor we identified a large number of shared
somatic mutations between the in situ and invasive regions, further
supporting our direct genomic lineage hypothesis. We also identified a
few mutations confined to the invasive tumor regions that may play an
important role in the invasive phenotype. These data support a
multiclonal invasion model in which distinct clones evolve in the ducts
and subsequently migrate into the adjacent tissues to establish invasive
tumors. This model has important implications for the diagnosis and
therapeutic treatment of DCIS breast cancer patients since multiple
clones may need to be targeted to inhibit invasion.

