Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel strategy for diagnosis of solid tumors by visualization of
fusion transcripts


The discovery of chromosomal translocations as one major cause of cancers
has led to the introduction of numerous diagnostic techniques to detect
these chromosomal abnormalities. Chromosomal banding, DNA fluorescence in
situ hybridization (DNA FISH), and RT PCR are all techniques used for the
diagnosis of cancers. Despite the advancement these techniques have
brought to the field, they are primarily optimized for the detection of
blood cancers and are not very efficient for the detection of solid
tumors which are very heterogeneous. One such cancer, Ewing's sarcoma
(ES), is a prevalent pediatric, bone and soft tissue tumor that is caused
by a chromosomal translocation between Ewing's sarcoma breakpoint region
1 (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 and various members of the ETS protein family.
The most common fusion partner, in 85% of cases, is Friend leukemia
integration 1 (FLI1) on chromosome 11 which leads to the formation of the
fused EWS/FLI1 gene that codes for an aberrant transcription factor.
However, even within this single translocation there are multiple
breakpoint-fusion scenarios that can occur which results in heterogeneity
and increases the chances of a faulty diagnosis with standard techniques.
Considering the diversity that exists within the molecular abnormalities
that result in Ewing's sarcoma and other solid tumors, there is a need
for an alternative and more robust method of detection. The technique of
single molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smFISH) has been
modified by our group to target the EWS/FLI1 transcript that results from
the chromosomal fusion; this new technique is referred to as Fusion FISH.
In Fusion FISH, two differently labeled probe sets are designed to target
each half of the EWS/FLI1 fusion transcript. A co-localization of the two
probe sets indicates the presence of the EWS/FLI1 translocation and a
positive test for Ewing's sarcoma. Preliminary data has established the
success of Fusion FISH in detecting both type 1 and type 2 translocations
in several Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. The fusion transcript is expressed
at similar levels in all cell lines and clearly distinct from the signal
of wild type EWS and FLI1 mRNA. Additional studies will examine this new
technique in other solid cancers, patient tumor samples, and for
validation of additional relevant mRNA biomarkers.

