Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NQO1's role in maintaining the cancer stem cell phenotype in NSCLC


NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) is a phase II detoxifying enzyme
responsible for quinone reduction, where it scavenges quinone induced
reactive oxygen species. In recent studies, NQO1 has been investigated as
a possible drug target due to its overexpression in a number of solid
tumors. To this end, treatment with the quinone-analog drug, -lapachone
(ARQ-761), has progressed to Phase II clinical trials. In an effort to
better understand the necessity of NQO1 in the overall lifecycle of
cancer, our earlier work demonstrated that NQO1 played a vital role in a
number of tumorigenic processes including anoikis resistance, and most
interestingly alteration of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity. Given
that ALDH is a widely reported cancer stem cell marker, and loss of NQO1
leads to a decrease in ALDH activity, we have begun to investigate the
effect of NQO1 expression on the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) stem
cell population. Here, we present data that demonstrates NQO1 is vital to
tumorsphere formation as demonstrated by decreased spheroid formation
following NQO1 knocked down with shRNA. We also show that NQO1 appears to
be necessary for cancer stem cell renewal as illustrated by decreased
serial tumorsphere formation. In addition to these aforementioned data,
in extreme limited dilution assays we demonstrate a reduced cancer stem
cell frequency in NQO1 knockdown cells as compared to controls.
Interestingly, in NQO1 knockdown populations, those cells that do form
spheres show a remarkable re-expression of NQO1 as well as a rescue of
ALDH activity, further supporting NQO1's role in tumorsphere formation
and stem cell maintenance. Future work on this project will involve use
of the CRISPR-Cas9 system to generate NQO1 knockout cell lines, drug
resistance studies, cancer stem cell marker validation, and in vivo
limited dilution assays to definitively demonstrate NQO1's necessity in
maintaining the NSCLC stem cell population.

