Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDB-seq screening of muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma revealed
unpredicted novel tumor suppressor genes


Bladder cancer (BC) is among the most frequent cancers in the United
States. More than 70% patients suffer from superficial disease called
non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) which, after the first
successful surgery, has favorable survival but high risk of recurrence;
on the other hand, muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma (MIBC) is less
prevalent but typically associated with a relatively poor prognosis.
Since BC has been largely described as a multifactorial disease, with
some DNA mutational component and strong evidence supporting an important
role performed by the exposure to environmental factors, mainly derived
from tobacco smoking and occupational hazards, consequent epigenetic DNA
alterations could play important pathological role and also be used as
markers for detection and stratification of the disease. In order to
discover new methylated genes we performed novel sequential high
throughput Methyl-DNA Binding (MDB) proteins Pull-down followed by large
genome sequencing of 5 primary MIBC (not subject to previous therapy nor
BCG) versus their normal counterparts.After Bioinformatic cross-analysis
between the enriched sequences in our MDBseq experiment (corresponfing to
85 genes) and publicly available database (BC TCGA), we have come up to a
list containing 16 hypermethylated genes in BC (our consensus genes).
From the first unbiased analysis of this list, we have found some genes
already found as important and/or hypermethylated in BC (as for example,
CDKN2A, Sall3, Nkx6-2, CDO1), confirming the validity of our approach.
Interestingly, we have observed high presence of transcription factors
(homeobox, Paired, Zn fingers) and proteins involved in fundamental
developmental processes. Among the newly hypermethylated genes in BC, we
have chosen VIPR2 for further characterization. VIPR2 encodes the
vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor VPAC2, a G-protein-coupled
receptor that is expressed in a variety of tissues (expressed throughout
the central nervous system and the periphery); it binds VIP14, activates
cyclic AMP (cAMP)-signaling and PKA. The VIP-VPAC2 signaling pathway has
been implicated in several neural and behavioral processes and is known
to influence circadian rhythms and cognition. We first confirmed inverse
correlation between diminished expression and promoter methylation in 11
BC cell lines (5637, HT-1376, J82, SW780, UM-UC-3, BFTC-905, BFTC-909,
Scaber, RT4, T24) and a normal human urinary tract epithelium
immortalized cell line SV-HUC-1 (HUC-1). Next, we determined that
pharmacological unmasking with DNA methylation transferases (DNMTs)
inhibitors (5-Aza-deoxycytidine) re-expressed the transcript in the cells
analyzed. We are in the process of analyzing VIPR2 expression and
promoter methylation in primary BC samples. After confirming in primary
BC samples, we will further characterize the role of VIPR2 in bladder
cancer pathogenesis.

