Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-treating fields (TTFields) intensity in the gross tumor
volume and peritumoral brain zone: implications for local recurrence in
glioblastoma


The purpose of this study was to simulate the intensity of TTFields
delivered to the brain during the course of glioblastoma (GBM) treatment
and to determine whether therapeutic intensities are delivered to the
proximal peri-tumoral brain zone (PBZ). Background: TTFields are
low-intensity (1-3 V/cm), intermediate frequency (200kHz), alternating
electric fields delivered orthogonally in a localized manner during the
course of GBM therapy. A recent phase 3 randomized, controlled trial
conducted in patients newly diagnosed with GBM was stopped early for
efficacy when the end points for progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) were met at the interim analysis. Patients
receiving TTFields in combination with temozolomide (TMZ) had a
significantly longer PFS and OS compared with patients receiving TMZ
alone. More than 90% of GBM recur at the margin of a resection cavity or
within the PBZ where the presence of infiltrating tumor cells,
inflammatory cells and tumorigenic stromal cells are thought to promote
recurrence. Phantom model simulation studies suggest that field
intensities >1V/cm are delivered to the brain in a non-uniform
distribution, however the field distribution to the gross tumor volume
(GTV) and PBZ have not been previously evaluated. Methods: Two MRI cases
(frontal and posterior-parietal tumors) were used to generate TTFields
treatment array layout maps using NovoTAL(TM) System planning software,
targeting areas of contrast enhancement on T1 sequences. Simulations for
the respective array layouts were created for solid tumors, resection
cavities and for tumors with a necrotic core (modified Colin27 model,
meshed and solved using the Sim4Life software solver package). Two
orthogonal fields (left-right and antero-posterior) at a field frequency
of 200 kHz were employed for all simulations. Field intensity was
determined in the GTV, tumor margin(TM) and proximal PBZ (20mm) for all
models. Results: Transducer array layout maps generated by the NovoTAL
software deliver therapeutic intensities of TTFields in both L-R and A-P
directions. Bi-directional intensities exceed therapeutic levels (>1
V/cm) in the GTV (median 1.84 V/cm), TM (median 1.9 V/cm) and PBZ (median
2.09 V/cm) in all solid tumors and in the PBZ (median 1.83 V/cm)
surrounding a gross total resection (GTR) cavity. The highest areas of
field intensity are observed directly adjacent to resection cavities and
the ventricles. Conclusions: The delivery of therapeutic intensities of
TTFields to patients who have undergone a GTR, subtotal resection or who
have inoperable GBM, targets therapy to the area of active disease and
importantly, to the PBZ. TTFields target residual tumor cells in the GTV
and may also disrupt infiltrating tumor cells in the PBZ. Clinically,
this may decrease local GBM recurrence rates and prospective clinical
studies are warranted to explore this further.

