Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the carcinoma and immune cells in the breast
cancer by single-cell RNA sequencing


Summary: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous type of cancer accompanying
extensive immune cell infiltration. Although its mortality rate has been
decreasing with early diagnosis and introduction of molecular targeted
therapies, it is still one of the world leading cause of cancer death in
women. In breast cancer, molecular subtyping is used for the patient
stratification and treatment decisions, emphasizing the importance of
inter-patient tumoral heterogeneity in the tumor cell behavior. Tumor
cells within a patient may also manifest intra-tumoral heterogeneity,
which may cause treatment resistance. Single cell gene expression
profiling would reveal both inter- and intra-tumoral heterogeneity in
breast cancer encompassing tumor cells and associated stromal and immune
cells.Experimental Process: From 4 different subtype primary breast
cancer and 2 lymph node metastases, single cells were captured and
amplified through C1Single-cell Auto Prep System (Fluidigm) with the
SMARTer Ultra Low RNA Kit. Sequencing libraries were constructed with the
Nextera XT DNA sample Prep Kit and sequenced through a Hiseq2500
(Illumina) as 100-bp paired end mode of the TruSeq Rapid PE Cluster kit
and Truseq Rapid SBS kit.Computational Process: RNA sequencing reads were
aligned to the modified human genome reference using 2-pass mode of
STAR_2.4.0b, and transcript per million (TPM) values were obtained as the
relative gene expression levels of single cells through RSEM
v1.2.17.Results: As most breast cancers originate from the mammary
epithelium, we distinguished carcinoma cells from associated non-tumor
cells by epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM) signature genes. We
validated the distinction with chromosomal gene expression patterns and
gene set enrichment analyses using tumor, stromal, or immune genesets.
With or without removal of non-tumor cells, TNBC tumor cells showed the
highest gene expression heterogeneity, recapitulating the known
inter-patient heterogeneity. TNBC tumor cells from a single patient were
categorized into 6 different TNBC-subtypes, further demonstrating
intra-tumoral heterogeneity. In addition, immune cells identified in the
TNBC tumor were nave B cells and regulatory T cells, suggesting
non-activated status of the immune system.Conclusions: The high
resolution gene expression profiling revealed features of breast cancer
transcriptome which may provide clues for molecular directed therapies
targeting the tumor or the immune compartment.

