Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relationships between necroptosis, apoptosis, and inflammation
in human colorectal tissue


Background: Formerly, apoptosis was considered the only form of regulated
cell death and evading apoptosis was considered a hallmark of cancer.
However, in recent years, necroptosis has been discovered as a new
pathway of regulated cell death. Animal studies revealed very critical
roles of necroptosis in many human inflammatory diseases and tumors.
Early studies examining apoptosis by using TdT-mediated dUTP nick end
labelling (TUNEL) assays cannot distinguish between apoptotic and
necroptotic cells. Bax, which is a pro-apoptoic member of Bcl-2 family,
is essential for mitochondrion-mediated apoptosis. Very recently, mixed
lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) is identified to be necessary for the
execution of necroptosis. Cyclooxygenase (Cox), including Cox-1 and
Cox-2, are the key enzymes responsible for the conversion of arachidonic
acid to prostaglandins, which are important mediators of human physiology
and pathophysiology, particularly inflammation. High expression of Cox-2
plays a critical role in the development of colorectal neoplasms. No
study has examined how necroptosis biomarker (i.e. MLKL) and
pro-apoptosis biomarker (i.e. Bax) are related to inflammation biomarker
(Cox-2), TUNEL and cell proliferation biomarker (Ki-67). Methods: In our
ongoing randomized trial (R01CA149633) Personalized Prevention of
Colorectal Cancer Trial (PPCCT) conducted among colorectal polyp patients
or those at high risk of colorectal cancer, we newly investigated the
relationships between markers in these pathways using rectal biopsies (n
= 110) collected prior to intervention in the trial. The formalin-fixed
and paraffin-embedded tissue from colorectal biopsy was serially
sectioned, and three levels of the serial sections spaced 50 m apart.
were mounted on to one slide for each tissue block. The protein
expression levels of Cox-2, Bax, pMLKL, and Ki-67 were detected
immunohistochemically following EnVision+ System-HRP (DAB) rabbit or
mouse kit (DAKO). Apoptotic cells in situ were detected with DeadEnd
Colorimetric TUNEL System (Promega). Results: Cox-2 expression in both
epithelium and stroma had strong positive correlation with Bax expression
in the same zone (p-trend = 0.00186 and 0.00004, respectively) but was
not significantly correlated with pMLKL. The positive associations were
stronger in the upper zone than the bottom of the crypts. The upper zone
also showed more TUNEL positive cells than the bottom zone, and had
significant positive correlation with pMLKL intensity (r = 0.458, p =
0.005). Bax expression was not significantly related to MLKL expression.
Conclusion: Cox-2 expression in non-tumoral colonic tissue may activate
apoptotic pathway through Bax upregulation, but is not correlated with
necroptotic pathway marker MLKL. In the epithelium, the necroptotic
pathway may be more common in the upper zone of colonic cryps than the
bottom zone,and may more strongly contribute to TUNEL than apoptosis
pathway.

