Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free collection of prostate circulating tumor cells using
microfluidic Vortex technology


BACKGROUNDProstate cancer is among the most common cancers in men
worldwide. Better markers than Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) are still
needed for the detection and monitoring of disease progression.
Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) are shed into the blood stream from
primary tumor(s) and may play key roles in the metastatic process. Liquid
biopsies have emerged as a promising approach, with a correlation between
the CTC numbers and patient prognosis for prostate cancer. CTCs have also
been shown to enable early detection of recurrence, and could be
potential candidates for guiding cancer therapy in real-time [1]. Current
CTC enrichment technologies, including immuno-affinity and size-based
filtration methods, have focused on high capture efficiency with
sometimes tedious sample preparation and overall low purity.METHODHere,
we describe the use of the microfluidic Vortex Chip [2] for rapid and
size-based isolation of CTCs from the blood of 23 patients with advanced
prostate cancer, and 10 healthy donors; 5 being BACKGROUNDProstate cancer
is among the most common cancers in men worldwide. Better markers than
Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) are still needed for the detection and
monitoring of disease progression. Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) are
shed into the blood stream from primary tumor(s) and may play key roles
in the metastatic process. Liquid biopsies have emerged as a promising
approach, with a correlation between the CTC numbers and patient
prognosis for prostate cancer. CTCs have also been shown to enable early
detection of recurrence, and could be potential candidates for guiding
cancer therapy in real-time [1]. Current CTC enrichment technologies,
including immuno-affinity and size-based filtration methods, have focused
on high capture efficiency with sometimes tedious sample preparation and
overall low purity.METHODHere, we describe the use of the microfluidic
Vortex Chip [2] for rapid and size-based isolation of CTCs from the blood
of 23 patients with advanced prostate cancer, and 10 healthy donors; 5
being <30 years old, 5 age-matched with the patient cohort. Requiring no
upstream sample preparation, blood was diluted 10-fold and processed
through the highly parallelized Vortex Chip at 8 mL/min (800 L/min whole
blood). Larger cells (predominantly CTCs) were captured in microscale
vortices produced on the Chip, released into a small volume and collected
off-chip for CK, PSA, CD45 and DAPI immunostaining and
enumeration.RESULTSPreliminary work with LNCaP prostate cancer cells
spiked in blood showed a 29% capture efficiency and 50% purity. In vitro
cell assays confirmed that cells enriched with Vortex chip were alive and
proliferating for up to 7 days. For 23 patient samples, CTCs were
captured (0.5 - 20 CTCs/mL) with high purity (3.6 - 72.3%), in less than
1H, without prior sample preparation. 11.5% of the cells collected were
CK and PSA-negative, but some were identified as undergoing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) following staining for vimentin
and N-cadherin. Few atypical cells were also isolated from age-matched
healthy donors (0.7 - 2.8 CTCs/mL), while none was detected in younger
healthy donors. Using a threshold calculated from the age-matched healthy
donors (3.31 CTCs/mL = mean + 2CV), 70% of the patients were
characterized as positive for CTCs. No correlation was found between CTC
counts and elevated PSA level.CONCLUSIONThese results demonstrate the
ability to rapidly collect pure populations of CTCs in metastatic
prostate cancer, independent of surface marker expression, without prior
sample preparation. Future studies will use chips with optimized capture
performance, sample recycling, and will include CTC molecular analysis by
targeted panel sequencing. A larger cohort of healthy donors is also
being examined to determine a statistically-robust CTC baseline for this
size-based capture approach.[1] Scher Hi, et al., J. Clin. Oncol. 2015[2]
Sollier E, et al., Lab Chip 2014

