Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EpCAM-positive cancer stem cells acquired chemoresistance in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Introduction: Recurrence of Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) after
definitive tumor treatment occurs in over 70% of patients within 14
months of initial treatment. The recurrent HCC cells demonstrate a more
aggressive tumor growth pattern when compared with the initial HCC cells.
Recurrent HCC attains resistance to chemotherapy which accounts for most
of the therapeutic failures and is one of the major factors for poor
overall survival (OS) in this disease. Underlying molecular mechanism(s)
responsible for acquired chemotherapy resistance and tumor recurrence has
not been well defined. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a sub-population of
cells that bear stem-like properties, and are believed to contribute in
tumor initiation and recurrence in tumor microenvironment. We hypothesize
that in HCC, Wnt/-catenin mediated CSC activation is responsible for
acquired chemoresistance. Here, we aimed to study that enriched culture
of EpCAM positive HCC cells with cancer stem-cell like properties could
become resistant to anti-cancer drugs. Methods: In vitro CSC enrichment
was achieved by treating murine (Hepa1-6) and human (HepG2, Hep3B) HCC
cells in serum-free condition. To confirm CSCs, we analyzed CSC
biomarkers (EpCAM, CD90, CD44, CD133) using flow-cytometry and
Immunocytochemistry (ICC), and functional markers using Aldeflour assay
and Hoechst-33342 efflux. Drug resistance property of CSCs was studied
using Doxorubicin (anthracycline antibiotic) and Sorafenib (multikinase
inhibitor) by MTT assay. Tumorigenic potential of enriched CSCs was
studied in orthotopic HCC mouse models. Wnt/-catenin signaling was
studied by analyzing expression of -catenin, GSK3, p-GSK3, EpCAM, ABCG2;
and downstream targets i.e. C-Myc, Cyclin-D1, TCF1. Lentivirus mediated
overexpression and knockdown of Wnt/-catenin signaling components
confirmed effect of Wnt/-catenin signaling on activation of CSCs and drug
resistance. Total 24 paired human HCC specimens were obtained and
analyzed to confirm in vitro and in vivo findings. Results: Spheroid
forming HCC-CSCs showed significant higher EpCAM expression (EpCAM+) and
significant higher chemoresistance compared with control HCC cells. ABCG2
expression (and its efflux activity) was found to be increased in CSCs,
which further supports acquired chemoresistance. EpCAM+ CSCs have shown
significant higher tumor proliferation rate in the mouse models compared
with control. Wnt/-catenin signaling activity was found to be increased
in EpCAM+ CSCs compared with control, and associated with
chemoresistance. Human HCC specimens confirmed concomitant
increase/decrease in EpCAM and -catenin expression. Conclusions:
Subpopulation of EpCAM+ CSCs, (1) contribute to acquired chemoresistance
in HCC, and (2) showing increased Wnt/-catenin signaling. We believe,
this EpCAM+ CSCs population is primarily responsible for HCC recurrence
and therapeutic failure.

