Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innovative and predictive models against cancer: an IMODI
integrative approach


Many reports support that xenografts from patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs) in mice or rats well recapitulate the molecular diversity,
cellular heterogeneity, and histology seen in patient tumors. However,
shortcomings including limited clinical diversity of the PDXs, absence of
influence of human microbiome, absence of drug human metabolism and
reduced immune system restrain the predictive values of these PDX models.
To set-up a holistic integration of these criticisms, we have associated
efforts from public hospitals, academic groups, biotechs and private
pharmaceutical companies with the financial support of the French
Ministry of Industry.First, to improve the clinical cancer diversity,
surgical specimens from patients obtained from 8 different tumor
locations (lung, breast, ovary, pancreas, liver, prostate, AML, myelome)
are collected to establish large collections of PDXs in mice. In
addition, in vitro primary cultures of cells from these samples are
conducted to establish a collection of cell lines from the stromal and
the tumoral compartments. The established models are evaluated for ex
vivo and in vivo sensitivities to relevant anticancer drugs, histological
and molecular characteristics. All model characteristics are being
compiled in a web-based database for efficient features search and
interconnection. These tumor collection and model characterization were
performed under specific procedures that are followed by all partners
within the consortium, which allows to have harmonized results and high
quality material. Second, to improve our knowledge on the role of the
human gut microbiota, stools are collected from patients with cancer and
from mice bearing PDXs before and after chemotherapeutic treatments
allowing a comparison of the microbiota profiles. In order to increase
the predictability of the models, we are generating mice with humanized
liver showing distinct drug pharmacokinetic profiles as compared with
parental mice. Finally, the humanization of the immune system in mice is
developed by several approaches including the use of induced pluripotent
stem cells from cancer patients.We will present the first characterized
models and will discuss their usefulness and chance to bring benefit to
patients via this holistic strategy developed within the IMODI initiative.

