Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide methylation analysis reveals methylator subtypes of
Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma


Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) arises from Barrett's Esophagus (BE)
through a progression sequence driven by the accumulation of epi/genetic
alterations. Genetic alterations and aberrantly methylated genes/loci,
the best-characterized epigenetic alteration, vary among individual BE
and EAC cases. To better understand the molecular heterogeneity in BE/
EAC, we analyzed genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in BE (N = 98), EAC
(N = 23), and normal esophagus and stomach (N = 78) collected via
Esophagus Translational Research Network (BETRNet) using Human
Methylation 450K (HM450K) arrays. We identified methylation-based
subtypes using a model-based recursively partitioned mixture model and
unsupervised resampling-based hierarchical cluster analysis with the most
variable probes based on standard deviation. All analyses were performed
in R. Four methylator subtypes were identified in the BE/EAC dataset
using our clustering approach: high (HM); intermediate (IM); low (LM);
and minimal (MM). The clusters showed widespread methylation differences
in CpGs primarily located in CpG islands (72% of 414 total probes). Each
methylation subtype showed distinct genetic and clinical features
suggesting underlying biological differences (Table 1). HM exhibited
methylation patterns reminiscent of a CpG Island Methylator Phenotype
(CIMP). Among BE/EAC cases with known TP53 mutation status, the majority
of mutants were among HM and IM clusters (15/19, 78.9%), Finally,
identification of methylation subtypes in an independent HM450K dataset
of EAC samples (N = 89) from the Cancer Genome Atlas validated the
existence of the BE/EAC methylation subtypes. In summary, our data
suggest genome wide alterations in DNA methylation occur in the BE stage
of the BE-to-EAC progression. We also identified four distinct
methylation subtypes of BE/EAC, including a CIMP-like HM subtype, and
found more TP53 mutants in the HM and IM subtypes, revealing molecular
heterogeneity in different methylation subtypes.
Characteristics of primary BE/EAC dataset and subtypes from cluster
analyses.

