Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining low dose microtubule targeting agents with belinostat
potentiates cytotoxic response in HDACi resistant diffuse large b-cell
lymphoma


Patients diagnosed with Diffuse Large B-cell lymphoma have an overall 60%
five-year survival rate. New therapeutic approaches are needed to
effectively treat aggressive forms of DLBCL that are refractory to the
standard treatment or that relapse within two years of treatment. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are novel therapeutics that are well
tolerated in humans and are being extensively evaluated in combination
with other therapeutics against hematologic malignancies. Rational
selection of companion therapeutics has been difficult due to the cell
type-specific mechanisms of HDACi action. In order to address this, we
have developed a pre-clinical model system of sensitivity and resistance
to HDACi-induced cytotoxicity in DLBCL cell lines that share
characteristics with aggressive DLBCL tumors. We previously reported that
HDACi resistance is associated with reversible arrest in G1 that involves
sustained up-regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors. In the
current study we demonstrate that HDACi-sensitive cell lines undergo
mitotic arrest prior to anaphase in response to treatment with the
approved HDACi, belinostat, consistent with activation of the spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC). In contrast, HDACi-resistant cell lines are
capable of completing mitosis in the presence of belinostat. To force SAC
activation in HDACi resistant cell lines, we used low dose microtubule
targeting agents (MTA) vincristine and paclitaxel to induce maximal
mitotic arrest with minimal cytotoxicity. The combination of these low
dose MTAs and belinostat efficiently caused SAC failure, mitotic
slippage, and apoptosis in a synergistic manner. A key mechanism
associated with resistance to MTAs is their ability to induce aneuploid
cell populations that survive and undergo endoreduplication. The addition
of belinostat eliminated the accumulation of a vincristine-induced
aneuploid population. Pan-caspase inhibition in conjunction with
belinostat and vincristine co-treatment resulted in a sustained survival
of the aneuploid population. Thus belinostat triggers apoptosis in the
aneuploid cells to enhance the cytotoxic effects of vincristine. Our
study identifies the use of low dose MTA/HDACi combination as a potential
therapeutic strategy for treatment of relapsed or refractory DLBCL.

