Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective killing of cancer cells by the styryl lactone (R)-
goniothalamin is mediated through glutathione conjugation, oxidative
stress and a marked reactivation of the R175H mutant p53 protein


Goniothalamin (GTN) is a secondary metabolite styryl lactone isolated
from several species of the tropical medicinal tree Goniothalamus. GTN
has been shown to be cytotoxic and induce apoptosis in many cancer cell
lines. This study sought to define the molecular basis underlying the
antiproliferative actions of GTN. We synthesized the R and S enantiomers
of GTN and found the R form to be more cytotoxic against a panel of
breast cancer and lung cancer cell lines. The IC50 of GTN against breast
cancer cell lines was in the range of 10-20 M and interestingly, the
SKBR3 cells, which harbor a R175H mutation in p53 were more sensitive to
the drug. In contrast, the normal breast epithelial MCF10A cells were not
killed by GTN, and N-acetylcysteine prevented cell-killing, indicating
the ROS involvement. Indeed, the flow cytometry and cell staining with
DCF-DA showed high levels of ROS generation, and this was accompanied by
significant S-glutathionylation of bulk proteins. Other studies showed
that GTN forms conjugate with glutathione with ease and deplete GSH
levels in cells. Because p53 is a redox-sensitive protein, we
hypothesized that the redox imbalance induced by GTN may affect the
structure of the R175H mutant p53 protein, and account for greater
cytotoxicity. We also engineered the p53-null H1299 lung cancer cells to
stably express the R175H mutant protein by lentiviral technology as an
isogenic model. The conformation-specific antibodies for p53, namely
Pab1620 that recognize the wt-p53 and pab420 that detects the mutant p53
were used for validating the p53 restoration. Immunoprecipitation and
immunostaining using confocal microscopy showed that GTN treatment of
R175H p53-containing cells results in a reciprocal loss of mutant protein
and increase of wt-like protein. Further, the EMSA revealed a
time-dependent restoration of DNA-binding for the mutant p53, which was
accompanied by the induction of p53 target genes. The changes were
associated with a G2/M arrest and significant apoptosis. Increased levels
of apoptotic markers suggested a priming action of GTN on cell death
pathways. GTN also suppressed the SKBR3 cell migration and invasion at
5-10 M. In SKBR3 xenografts developed in nude mice, there was a marked
tumor growth delay with either GTN alone or in combination with
cisplatin. Our results shed light on the multiple mechanisms, including
glutathione depletion, generation of redox imbalance, protein
glutathionylation and p53 reactivation in the GTN cytotoxicity. We
suggest that GTN-induced oxidative milieu facilitates a functional
restoration of the mutant p53 through a thiolation of the redox-sensitive
cysteines present in the DNA-binding domain. Our study will help to
establish redox-perturbation as a paradigm for reactivation of the
defective tumor suppressor (supported by a CPRIT grant [RP130266] to KSS).

