Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-omic profiling of gliomas reveals distinct DNA methylation
changes at tumor recurrence


Varying possibilities of tumor relapse for lower grade glioma (LGG, WHO
grade II and III) and glioblastoma (GBM, WHO grade IV) have led to
heterogenous clinical outcomes for patients. Our current study aims to
establish a molecular profile of recurrence of matched primary and
recurrent LGG (n = 28) and recurrent GBM (n = 24) tumor samples. The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) has comprehensively profiled these matched
primary/recurrent tumor sets; whole genomes, coding exomes, methylomes,
and transcriptomes have been sequenced, and the samples have undergone
targeted profiling of the proteome. While unsupervised analysis
techniques have not led to a clear recurrence signature, supervised
analysis methods have revealed interesting patterns. Protein profiling
has shown that recurrent gliomas retain the overall molecular signature
of their primary counterpart, but the DNA damage response, apoptosis and
RTK pathways are downregulated in the recurrent gliomas, in contrast to
RAS/MAPK, PI3K/AKT, and EMT pathways, which are upregulated. Whole genome
sequencing and rearrangement analysis have revealed increased genomic
complexity among most recurrent gliomas as well as new fusions of
interest in recurrent LGG samples (PTPRZ1-MET and involving ATRX). Using
genome-wide Illumina HumanMethylation 450K data we observed that 78.6% of
LGGs showed depletion of DNA methylation at recurrence and 50% of GBM
tumors showed an enrichment of DNA methylation at recurrence. Patient
centric enrichment analysis allowed us to discover a candidate biological
subgroup characterized by a subset of LGG recurrences (50%) exhibiting an
aberrant CpG methylation loss at inintergenic opensea regions when
compared with canonical CpG islands and shores (fold > 1.3 and confidence
intervals of 99%). Importantly, inspection of CpG sites significantly
hypomethylated at openseas showed that this pronounced epigenetic
signature maps to candidate TSS distal and hypomethylated enhancers. The
gene-targets of these hypomethylated CpG sites show a corresponding
up-regulation of expression. Pathway analysis has demonstrated that these
upregulated genes are involved in cellular growth and proliferation,
cellular function and maintenance, and cell cycle regulation. Our results
provide evidence that DNA methylation may represent a stable signature of
glioma recurrence and that the crosstalk between DNA hypomethylation at
openseas and chromosomal instability may be involved in glioma
recurrence. We plan to further integrate our findings between data types
and correlate with treatment and patient clinical outcome.

