Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the expression of EGFR, p53, cyclin D1, Bcl-2 and p16
in a cohort of 178 primary locally advanced oral squamous cell carcinoma
cases: the prognostic implication


Background: Oral Squamous Cell Carcinomas comprise of a heterogeneous
tumor cell population with of varied molecular characteristics; which
makes prognostication of these tumors a complex and challenging issue.
Thus, molecular profiling of these tumors is advantageous for an accurate
prognostication and treatment planning.Study design: A retrospective
study on a cohort of primary locally advanced oral squamous cell
carcinomas (n = 178) of an Indian rural populationAim: To evaluate the
expression of EGFR, p53, cyclin D1, Bcl-2 and p16 in a cohort of primary
locally advanced oral squamous cell carcinomas. To assess the reliability
of this panel of biomarkers for prognostication and treatment planning of
locally advanced oral squamous cell carcinomas To identify a potential
biomarker that can predict the tumor response to treatment.Patient
Selection: All patients who were diagnosed with locally advanced oral
squamous cell carcinomas cases between the year 2009 and 2013 were
reviewed. These patients were treated with radiotherapy and adjuvant
chemotherapy. The maximum duration of follow-up was 5 years and the
minimum follow-up time is 1 years.Material and Methods: Formalin fixed
paraffin embedded tumor blocks of (n = 178) of histopathologically
diagnosed cases locally advanced oral squamous cell carcinomas were
selected. The areas where the tumor cells appeared most aggressive were
identified in the Hematoxylin and Eosin stained tissue sections of these
cases. The corresponding areas were identified in the tumor blocks and
two cores of 2 mm diameter for each case were obtained and tissue
microarray blocks were constructed. Four microns thick sections were cut
from these tissue microarray blocks. These tissue microarray sections
were immunohistochemically stained for EGFR, p53 and Bcl-2 and cyclin D1
and p16. The expression of these markers by the tumor cells was evaluated
in a semi quantitatively. The datResults:In this cohort, EGFR was the
most expressed in 150/178 (84%) of the cases. The expression of EGFR was
significantly associated with p53 (p = .012), and with cyclin D1 (p =
.011). Kaplan Meier analysis showed a significant association (p = .038)
between expression of p53 and a poor prognosis. A Poisson regression
analysis showed that tumors that expressed p53 had a two times greater
chance of recurrence (Unadjusted IRR -95% CI 2.08 (1.03, 4.5), Adjusted
IRR- 2.29 (1.08, 4.8) compared with the tumors that did not express this
biomarker.Conclusion:Molecular profiling of oral squamous cell carcinomas
will enable us to categorize our patients into more realistic risk
groups. With biologically guided tumor characterization, personalized
treatment protocols can be designed for individual patients, which will
improve the quality of life of these patients.

