Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of TGF signaling leads to increased susceptibility to HCC in
mice: Evidences of lncRNA H19's effects in HCC promotion


The output of a TGF- response is highly contextual depending on specific
tissue types and diseases. This is especially true in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) initiation and progression, where the tumor-initialing
and malignant cells are highly influenced by the background liver
environments. To delineate the role of TGF- in the process of
hepatocarcinogenesis, we employed a novel tumor-initiating cell
transplantation system that avoids the possible effects incurred from
genetic manipulation of the background liver. Specifically, TGF- receptor
II (Tgfbr2) flox/flox mice at 14 days of age were given one dose (25g/g
bodyweight) of the hepatic carcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DEN) via
intraperitoneal injection. Three months later, the initiated hepatocytes
from Tgfbr2 flox/flox mice were isolated and transplanted to the same
strain (C57Bl/6) wild type recipient mice. Four weeks after
transplantation, the recipient mice received one does of Cre recombinase
adenovirus (Ad-Cre) through tail vein injection to delete Tgfbr2 in the
transplanted tumor-initiating hepatocytes; separate group of the
recipient mice were injected with the control adenovirus (Ad-GFP). The
recipient mice were closely monitored for liver tumor burden. We observed
that deletion of Tgfbr2 in tumor-initiating hepatocytes by tail vein
injection of Ad-Cre led to formation of more and bigger liver tumors
(compared to Ad-GFP group). This finding suggests that TGF- inhibits the
malignant potential of tumor-initiating hepatocytes. In parallel, we
further analyzed the effect of TGF- in tumor initiating hepatocytes in
vitro. Specifically, tumor-initiating hepatocytes isolated from
DEN-treated Tgfbr2 flox/flox mice were infected with Ad-Cre or Ad-GFP
prior to TGF-1 treatment in vitro; RNAs were then isolated for
transcriptome sequencing analysis. We identified a group of lncRNAs that
were noticeably regulated by TGF-, including the lncRNA H19. We found
that deletion of Tgfbr2 by Ad-Cre in tumor initiating hepatocytes led to
a 5-fold increase of H19 expression. We observed that deletion of H19 by
siRNA decreased the tumor-initiating cell property, whereas forced
overexpression of H19 enhanced it. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
showed that SOX2 bound to the promoter region of H19 gene. While SOX2
overexpression in tumor-initiating hepatocytes enhanced H19
transcription, SOX2 knockdown reduced it. Furthermore, TGF- treatment
reduced the protein level of SOX2 in tumor-initiating hepatocytes. Taken
together, our findings disclose a novel mechanism that importantly
regulates hepatocarcinogenesis TGF- inhibits H19 expression via SOX2 in
tumor-initiating hepatocytes and this effect leads to inhibition of HCC
development.

