Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation and immune profiles in early-stage lung squamous cell
carcinoma


PURPOSE: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) accounts for 20-30% of
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). There are limited treatment
strategies for LUSC in part due to our inadequate understanding of the
molecular underpinnings of the disease. We sought to perform whole-exome
sequencing (WES), comprehensive immune profiling and clinicopathological
analysis of early-stage LUSCs to increase our understanding of the
pathobiology of this malignancy.METHODS: Matched pairs of surgically
resected stage I-III LUSCs and normal lung tissues (n = 108) were
analyzed by WES. Immunohistochemistry and image analysis-based profiling
of 10 immune markers was done on a subset of LUSCs (n = 91). Associations
among mutations, immune markers and clinicopathological variables were
statistically examined using ANOVA and Fisher tests. Cox proportional
hazards regression models were used for statistical analysis of clinical
outcome.RESULTS: This early-stage LUSC cohort displayed an average of 209
exonic mutations per tumor. Fourteen genes exhibited significant
enrichment for mutation: TP53, MLL2, PIK3CA, NFE2L2, CDH8, KEAP1, PTEN,
ADCY8, PTPRT, CALCR, GRM8, FBXW7, RB1 and CDKN2A. Among mutated genes
associated with poor recurrence-free survival, MLL2 mutations predicted
poor prognosis in both TP53 mutant and wild type LUSCs. We also found
that in treated patients, FBXW7 and KEAP1 mutations were associated with
poor response to adjuvant therapy, particularly in TP53-mutant tumors.
Analysis of mutations with immune markers revealed that ADCY8 and PIK3CA
mutations were associated with markedly decreased tumoral PD-L1
expression, LUSCs with PIK3CA mutations exhibited elevated CD45ro levels
and CDKN2A-mutant tumors displayed an up-regulated immune
response.CONCLUSION: Our findings pinpoint mutated genes that may impact
clinical outcome as well as personalized strategies for targeted
immunotherapies in early-stage LUSC.

