Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long noncoding RNAs generated from the BRCA1 pseudogene regulate
genomic instability and homologous recombination repair


Background: Genomic instability is frequently associated with cancer and
can be indicative of a poor prognosis for breast cancer. While the
significant role of BRCA1 in regulating DNA damage repair and checkpoint
activation is well defined, little is known about the biological
properties of the BRCA1 pseudogene (BRCA1P1) in neoplastic processes. The
BRCA1P1 pseudogene was created by a recent evolutionary event, in which a
partial duplication of the BRCA1 gene was followed by an insertion of a
processed pseudogene of RPLP1P4.Methods: To functionally annotate
BRCA1P1, we conducted DNA-FISH, RNA-FISH, a luciferase reporter gene
assay, bisulfite sequencing, microarray analysis, radiation-induced foci
by immunofluorescence, I-SceI-induced double strand break repair assay,
Caspase 3/7 assay, flow cytometry, qRT-PCR, and Western blot analysis.
Depletion of BRCA1P1-lncRNA was achieved using LNA-antisense
oligonucleotides (ASO), while overexpression of BRCA1P1 was attained
using the CRISPR-On activation system.Results: BRCA1P1 pseudogene is
transcribed as a 1.6 kb unspliced and nucleus-retained long non-coding
RNA (lncRNA) using a bidirectional promoter between BRCA1P1 and the
neighbor of BRCA1 gene 1 (NBR1). In contrast to the BRCA1 promoter, which
is sensitive to hypoxia and subject to CpG island methylation, the
pseudogene promoter did not respond to hypoxia nor did it undergo
epigenetic modification. Expression of the BRCA1P1 pseudogene varies
among 16 breast cell lines with higher expression in some lines, due in
part to chromosome 17 polysomy. Interference of BRCA1P1-lncRNA expression
with ASO increased genomic instability and spontaneous DNA damage as
indicated by an increased spontaneous 53BP1 and RAD51 foci. Breast cancer
cells with BRCA1P1 depletion exhibited a defect in DNA damage repair and
increased apoptosis in response to irradiation and DNA damaging drugs,
respectively. I-SceI-based assays confirmed a decrease in homologous
recombination (HR) repair in cells with BRCA1P1 silencing. Interestingly,
inhibition of BRCA1P1-lncRNA increased mRNA and protein expression of
BRCA1, perhaps to compensate for the HR defect in the cells. The effects
of BRCA1P1 overexpression on regulating DNA repair processes are
currently under investigation in cells with BRCA1 mutations.Conclusion:
These findings suggest a novel role for the BRCA1P1 pseudogene in
regulation of DNA damage repair in human breast cancer cells. It's
potential role as a therapeutic target remains to be explored.

