Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated PDEF and Twist1 expression distinguishes lethal
prostate cancer from an indolent disease


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the third most commonly diagnosed
cancer in the world. Advanced genomic studies have characterized it as a
molecularly heterogeneous disease with a multiple clinical spectrum
ranging from indolent to highly aggressive. Conventional therapies
produce a high rate of cure for patients with localized PCa, but there is
no effective treatment for metastatic PCa. These facts underline the
urgent, yet unmet, need for identification and characterization of new
targets that can help distinguish metastatic PCa from an indolent
disease, and pave a way for novel mechanism based anti-metastasis
therapies against PCa. Our previous studies have shown that loss of PDEF,
a putative tumor suppressor, could lead to more invasive phenotype in PCa
cell lines through promoting Epithelial to Mesenchymal transition (EMT).
In this study, we evaluate the role of PDEF and Twist1 in PCa through
NCBI omnibus and The Cancer Genome Atlas. We also evaluated the mechanism
by which PDEF is regulated epigenetically.Methods: PDEF expression was
monitored by immunohistochemistry using tissue microarray. Western blot
was employed to measure the PDEF level in PCa cell lines. PDEF and Twist1
gene expression was measured by real time PCR. The PDEF promoter was
cloned and methylation specific PCR was performed. PDEF methylation in
clinical samples was extracted from TCGA database and PDEF/Twist1
microarray data was extracted from GSE16560 in NCBI gene expression
omnibus with R language. GraphPad prism was used to generate figure and
statistical analysis. P Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the third
most commonly diagnosed cancer in the world. Advanced genomic studies
have characterized it as a molecularly heterogeneous disease with a
multiple clinical spectrum ranging from indolent to highly aggressive.
Conventional therapies produce a high rate of cure for patients with
localized PCa, but there is no effective treatment for metastatic PCa.
These facts underline the urgent, yet unmet, need for identification and
characterization of new targets that can help distinguish metastatic PCa
from an indolent disease, and pave a way for novel mechanism based
anti-metastasis therapies against PCa. Our previous studies have shown
that loss of PDEF, a putative tumor suppressor, could lead to more
invasive phenotype in PCa cell lines through promoting Epithelial to
Mesenchymal transition (EMT). In this study, we evaluate the role of PDEF
and Twist1 in PCa through NCBI omnibus and The Cancer Genome Atlas. We
also evaluated the mechanism by which PDEF is regulated
epigenetically.Methods: PDEF expression was monitored by
immunohistochemistry using tissue microarray. Western blot was employed
to measure the PDEF level in PCa cell lines. PDEF and Twist1 gene
expression was measured by real time PCR. The PDEF promoter was cloned
and methylation specific PCR was performed. PDEF methylation in clinical
samples was extracted from TCGA database and PDEF/Twist1 microarray data
was extracted from GSE16560 in NCBI gene expression omnibus with R
language. GraphPad prism was used to generate figure and statistical
analysis. P < 0.05 is considered significantResults: IHC staining of PDEF
on PCa patient samples and in commonly used PCa cell lines suggested an
inverse correlation between the level of PDEF and Twist1. Over-expression
of PDEF in PC3 cells inhibits Twist1 expression. DNA Methylation status
near the promoter region of PDEF was negatively associated with the
expression levels of PDEF in established PCa cells. These results suggest
that PDEF levels are regulated in part by promoter methylation. Using
TCGA data we identified 12 methylation site and the methylation level of
multiple site correlates with the increased of Gleason Score (GS).
Analysis of gene expression data from GSE16560 revealed that low
expression of PDEF and high expression of Twist1 were independently
associated with poor survival in PCa patients. Integrated PDEF and Twist1
expression can distinguished a high-risk group of people for hormone
refractory PCa along with short median survival time.Conclusions: Loss of
PDEF combined with gain of Twist1 expression can serve as a potential
biomarker set for distinguishing aggressive PCa from an indolent disease.
PDEF expression is epigenetically regulated in part by promoter
hyper-methylation.Acknowledgement: Carroll W. Feist Endowed Chair Funds.

