Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying high quality, potent and selective inhibitors of ATM
kinase: Discovery of AZD0156


Ataxia telangiectasia mutant (ATM) is a serine/threonine protein kinase
from the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family of
protein kinases (also comprising ATR, DNA-PKcs, mTOR etc.) and plays a
crucial role in the cellular DNA damage response signalling activated by
DNA double strand breaks (DSB). Activated ATM promotes DNA repair and
S/G1-cell cycle checkpoints to prevent premature mitosis, maintain
genomic integrity and promote appropriate cell survival or death
pathways. DSBs arise intrinsically through the collapse of stalled
replication forks, which are induced by a wide range of chemotherapies,
or extrinsically through exposure to ionizing radiation. Therefore, ATM
inhibition represents an exciting clinical opportunity as a target to
hyper-sensitize tumors to chemo/radiotherapy.Herein, we describe our
efforts to identify multiple, novel series of ATM inhibitors. We will
describe our optimization efforts with particular attention given to
improving the potency of the compounds in cellular systems and the
selectivity of the compounds over other closely related proteins (e.g.
ATR, mTOR etc.). We will also describe our efforts to optimize both the
physicochemical properties of the molecules as well as the
pharmacokinetic profile to enable low dose, oral administration in the
clinic. These efforts culminated in the discovery of the clinical
candidate AZD0156, a first in class orally available ATM inhibitor.
AZD0156 shows sub-nanomolar potency in cell based assays of ATM
inhibition with selectivities of greater than 1000 fold over other
members of the PIKK family of enzymes. AZD0156 is a permeable, highly
soluble compound with excellent preclinical pharmacokinetic properties
including oral bioavailability. AZD0156 shows robust efficacy in mouse
xenograft models after oral administration when combined with DSB
inducing agents. AZD0156 is currently undergoing early clinical
assessment.

