Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mir-145 based magnetic nanoformulation for pancreatic cancer
therapy


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer related deaths in the USA, with a 5-year survival rate of less
than 5%. MicroRNAs have been identified as attractive targets for
therapeutic intervention. The functional significance of lost microRNAs
have been reported in several human malignancies, including PanCa.
Therefore, restoring lost miRNA function can provide a potential
therapeutic benefit. Prior work has identified microRNA-145 (miR-145) as
a tumor suppressor miRNA in pancreatic cancer. The restoration of miR-145
downregulates a number of oncogenes including mucin MUC13, a glycoprotein
that is aberrantly expressed in PanCa, and efficiently inhibits tumor
growth in mice. The main challenge for successful translation of
microRNAs into clinical practice remains an effective in vivo delivery
system. The focus of this study was to develop and assess the efficacy of
a miR-145 based nanoparticle formulation for PanCa treatment.Methods:
Magnetic nanoparticle (MNP) based nanoformulation of miR-145
(miR-145-MNPF) was developed for the intracellular delivery and sustained
release of miR-145. The positively charged polyethyleneimine molecules
were used to increase the loading efficiency of miR-145. MUC13 expressing
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines (HPAF-II and AsPC-1) were
used for the study. Following transfection of miR-145-MNPF, Western
blotting and immunofluorescence techniques were used to investigate the
effects of miR-145 restoration on number of proteins including MUC13.
Additionally, functional studies of the effects of miR-145 restitution
using miR-145-MNPF included cell proliferation, colony formation, cell
migration, and cell invasion assays.Results: miR-145 expression was
progressively suppressed over the course of development from PanIN I-III
to late stage poorly differentiated PDAC. Treatment of cells with
miR-145-MNPF led to efficient intracellular delivery of miR-145 mimics as
observed through prussian blue staining. This led to the simultaneous
upregulation of miR-145 levels in cells as confirmed by qRT-PCR. miR-145
restitution resulted in significant downregulation of target oncogenes
including MUC13, HER2, P-AKT and p53 as observed through Western blotting
and immunofluorescence techniques. miR-145-MNPF inhibited cell
proliferation, clonogenicity, migration, and invasion of PanCa cells.
MNPF mediated restitution of miR-145 effectively sensitizes PanCa cells
for paclitaxel and TRAIL therapy.Conclusions: 1) MNP based delivery
systems can be efficiently used for microRNA replacement therapy in order
to restore lost microRNAs in cancer. 2) miR-145-MNPF efficiently restores
miR-145 in pancreatic cancer cells and inhibits growth and invasion of
PanCa. 3) miR-145 restitution using miR-145-MNPF may offer a potential
therapeutic strategy for pancreatic cancer treatment alone or in
combination with other therapies.

