Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for Wnt/-catenin signaling in mediating resistance of
colorectal cancer to chemoradiotherapy


Background: Preoperative chemoradiotherapy represents the standard
treatment for patients with rectal cancer. However, the clinical response
of individual tumors to multimodal treatment is not uniform, and ranges
from complete response to complete resistance. Therefore, the
identification of novel therapeutic targets whose modification could be
harnessed to sensitize a priori resistant tumors is exceedingly
important. Previously, we demonstrated that the Wnt transcription factor
TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4) was overexpressed in primary rectal cancers
that were resistant to chemoradiotherapy (CRT), and that TCF7L2
functionally mediates resistance of CRC cells to clinically relevant
doses of ionizing radiation (IR).Methods: Using siRNAs we silenced CTNNB1
(-catenin), another key-component of canonical Wnt-signaling, in
colorectal cancer cell lines LS1034, SW480, and SW837. To asses influence
on CRT, cells were exposed to 0, 1, 2, 4, 6 and 8 Gy of X-rays and 5-FU.
Wnt- signaling was stimulated in retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE)
either by adding Wnt-3A, or overexpressing non degradable -catenin
(S33Y-mutated) and analyzed changes in CRT. Finally we repetitively
irradiated SW1463 (68Gy) to establish an isogenic radio-resistant cell
line and examined changes in protein expression.Results: Silencing of
CTNNB1 resulted in (chemo-) radiation-sensitization of all three CRC-cell
lines. To further investigate the potential role of Wnt/-catenin
signaling in controlling therapeutic responsiveness, non-tumorigenic RPE
cells were stimulated with Wnt-3A, which significantly increased
resistance to CRT. This effect could be recapitulated by overexpression
of -catenin (S33Y-mutated), resulting in a significantly increased
resistance to CRT. The effect could be rescued by siRNA mediated
knockdown of -catenin. Consistent with these findings, we observed higher
expression levels of active (unphosphorylated) -catenin as well as
increased TCF reporter activity in SW1463 cells that were rendered
radiation-resistant due to repeated IR treatment.Conclusion: Together,
these findings strongly support the interpretation that Wnt/-catenin
signaling plays a central role in mediating resistance of CRC cells to
CRT. Hence, pathway inhibition may represent a promising strategy to
increase therapeutic responsiveness to CRT, which represents the standard
treatment for locally advanced rectal cancers. This would have
considerable clinical implications.

