Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulindac decreases basal-like mammary tumor burden and
proinflammatory mediators in obese mice


Background: A hallmark of the metabolic dysregulation associated with
obesity is a pro-inflammatory environment perpetuated by pro-inflammatory
mediators including adipokines and growth factor signaling. We previously
showed that inflammation and basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) growth are
increased in chronically obese mice and persist following weight
normalization.Purpose: We tested the hypothesis that Sulindac, a
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), can reduce chronic
obesity-related inflammation and subsequent BLBC growth.Methods: Mice
were administered a control diet (10 kcal% fat) or diet-induced obesity
regimen (DIO, 60 kcal% fat). After 15 weeks on diet, DIO mice either
continued on DIO diet or were switched to the low fat control diet to
induce gradual weight loss, resulting in Formerly Obese (FOb) mice. Half
of the mice in all three groups (Control, FOb, DIO, n = 17/group) were
randomized to receive Sulindac supplementation at 160 ppm in the diet,
which remained constant across diets. Twelve weeks after initiating
Sulindac supplementation and weight loss in the FOb groups, all mice were
orthopically injected with E0771 cells, a model of basal-like breast
cancer. Five mice/group were killed, and their tissue collected and
stored at a 4-week intermediate time-point after injection, while 12
mice/group continued in a survival study; these mice were killed when
tumor size reached 1.2 cm in diameter in any direction.Results: Sulindac
supplementation in DIO mice significantly reduced serum insulin and
leptin to levels statistically equivalent to both control and FOb mice.
Interestingly, body weight, body fat percentage, and ex vivo visceral
white adipose weight were unchanged between all supplemented and
non-supplemented counterparts (i.e. DIO vs. DIO+Sulindac). At the 4-week
intermediate time point, Sulindac supplementation in DIO mice (but not in
control or FOb mice) significantly reduced mean tumor weight relative to
their non-supplemented counterparts. In the survival arm of the study,
Sulindac significantly increased tumor latency in DIO and FOb groups (but
not controls) in comparison to their non-supplemented
counterparts.Conclusions: Sulindac supplementation significantly reduced
pro-inflammatory mediators insulin and leptin in DIO mice, and increased
tumor latency in DIO and FOb mice. Furthermore, Sulindac supplementation
did not modulate body weight or fat depots, suggesting that Sulindac
indeed offsets some of the pro-tumorigeneic effects of obesity rather
than targeting obesity directly. Ongoing analyses of inflammatory
surrogates, including circulating cytokines and prostaglandins, mammary
gland crown-like structures and cyclooxygenase-2 levels, will help to
determine if Sulindac's effects are mediated through its
anti-inflammatory activity.

