Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of selective small-molecule inhibitors of cellular
MALT1 protease activity


Background: The aim of this study was to develop potent, selective and
cell-permeable inhibitors of MALT1 protease activity. MALT1 is an
Arg-specific protease that cleaves multiple substrates, acting as a key
component in T- and B-cell receptor signaling in lymphocytes. MALT1
protease activity is reported to mediate normal and disease-associated
lymphocyte proliferation and survival as part of the CARMA-1/BCL-10/MALT1
(CBM) signaling complex, making MALT1 an attractive therapeutic target.
Constitutive MALT1 activity is a hallmark of Diffuse Large B Cell
Lymphoma of the activated B cell type (ABC-DLBCL). This aberrant
activation is observed as a consequence of mutations in CARMA-1/CARD11,
and in multiple regulatory proteins upstream of the CBM complex.Methods:
MALT1 enzyme assay with Ac-Leu-Arg-Ser-Arg-AMC as substrate was used to
measure Ki. Selectivity towards other Arg-specific proteases was measured
by inhibition of Trypsin and Thrombin. For determination of cellular
potency the ABC-DLBCL cell line OCI-LY3, carrying the L251P mutation of
CARMA-1/CARD11, was used. A MALT1 cell assay to measure A20 substrate
cleavage was adapted to capillary electrophoresis and quantification.
MALT1 down-stream signaling was measured by inhibition of IL-6
expression.Results: Published inhibitors of MALT1 were profiled for
potency, selectivity, DMPK properties and activity in cell-based assays,
and showed several drawbacks such as low MALT1 activity, low cell
permeability and/or selectivity. We developed several novel reversible
small molecule inhibitors of MALT1 with Ki Background: The aim of this
study was to develop potent, selective and cell-permeable inhibitors of
MALT1 protease activity. MALT1 is an Arg-specific protease that cleaves
multiple substrates, acting as a key component in T- and B-cell receptor
signaling in lymphocytes. MALT1 protease activity is reported to mediate
normal and disease-associated lymphocyte proliferation and survival as
part of the CARMA-1/BCL-10/MALT1 (CBM) signaling complex, making MALT1 an
attractive therapeutic target. Constitutive MALT1 activity is a hallmark
of Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma of the activated B cell type
(ABC-DLBCL). This aberrant activation is observed as a consequence of
mutations in CARMA-1/CARD11, and in multiple regulatory proteins upstream
of the CBM complex.Methods: MALT1 enzyme assay with
Ac-Leu-Arg-Ser-Arg-AMC as substrate was used to measure Ki. Selectivity
towards other Arg-specific proteases was measured by inhibition of
Trypsin and Thrombin. For determination of cellular potency the ABC-DLBCL
cell line OCI-LY3, carrying the L251P mutation of CARMA-1/CARD11, was
used. A MALT1 cell assay to measure A20 substrate cleavage was adapted to
capillary electrophoresis and quantification. MALT1 down-stream signaling
was measured by inhibition of IL-6 expression.Results: Published
inhibitors of MALT1 were profiled for potency, selectivity, DMPK
properties and activity in cell-based assays, and showed several
drawbacks such as low MALT1 activity, low cell permeability and/or
selectivity. We developed several novel reversible small molecule
inhibitors of MALT1 with Ki <20 nM and high selectivity against Trypsin
and Thrombin. Compounds show inhibition of intracellular MALT1 activity
with potencies 100M, Thrombin Ki>100M, and Caco-2 Papp = 1106cm/s shows
intracellular A20 cleavage IC50 = 1100nM, whereas compound B with MALT1
Ki = 47nM and Caco-2 Papp = 5.6106cm/s, displays intracellular A20
cleavage IC50 = 600nM. We observe a clear dissociation between
intracellular inhibition of MALT1 and inhibition of cell proliferation of
DLBCL cell lines of ABC-type with constitutive MALT1 activity, e.g.
compound C (MALT1 Ki = 35nM, Trypsin Ki>100M, Thrombin Ki>100M and
intracellular A20 cleavage IC50 = 260nM) inhibits the proliferation of
OCI-LY3 cells and TMD8 cells with CC50 values of 73M and 96M
respectively, after 5 days exposure.Conclusion: Inhibition of MALT1
protease activity did not translate into significant anti-proliferative
effects in DLBCL cell lines. These new MALT1 inhibitors provide
theopportunity to test other therapeutic hypotheses involving the
targeting of MALT1 protease activity.

