Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cytosine deaminase APOBEC3B affects responses to therapy in
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cells


Endocrine therapy, chemotherapy, or both represent the mainstay of
therapy for estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer. However,
acquired (secondary) drug resistance is a major clinical problem. We
identified APOBEC3B (A3B), a DNA cytosine deaminase, as a source of DNA
mutagenesis driving tumor evolution and contributing to poor clinical
outcomes in several cancers by catalyzing genetic changes required for
drug resistance and metastasis. A3B accounts for up to half of the
mutational load in breast carcinomas expressing this enzyme. High levels
of A3B correlate with poor clinical outcomes in tamoxifen treated
patients. To evaluate the role for A3B in resistance to therapy, we used
the ER+ MCF-7L breast cancer cell line. These cells have modestly
elevated levels of endogenous A3B and we suppressed A3B levels by shRNA
and enhanced levels by transduction. In vitro, alterations in A3B levels
do not affect monolayer growth or cell doubling times. However, in vitro
response to tamoxifen was prolonged in MCF-7L cells with suppressed A3B.
In a xenograft model, MCF-7 cells with suppressed A3B remained responsive
to tamoxifen for a longer period of time compared to wild type cells.
Cells with overexpression of A3B had a very short period of tamoxifen
suppression compared to wild-type cells. These data suggest high A3B
levels are associated with a shorter period of response to tamoxifen. To
evaluate the role for A3B in chemotherapy resistance, we treated cells
with 5-fluorouracil. In contrast to tamoxifen therapy, cells with
elevated A3B levels remained responsive to fluorouracil for longer
periods of time compared to wild-type cells. Since A3B converts cytosine
to uracil (C-to-U), we speculate that A3B enzymatic activity might
enhance sensitivity to a fluoropyrimidine. Thus, the ability of A3B to
affect therapeutic resistance in breast cancer may be dependent on the
type and mechanism of drug treatment.

