Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of BMP4 on breast cancer metastasis in an in vivo
xenograft mouse model


Background. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women worldwide.
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), members of the transforming growth
factor superfamily, are known to regulate cell proliferation,
differentiation and motility, and have also been shown to be involved in
cancer pathogenesis, also in breast cancer. We have previously
demonstrated that BMP4 is able to consistently reduce breast cancer cell
proliferation through G1 cell cycle arrest and to simultaneously induce
migration and invasion in a subset of breast cancer cell lines.
Similarly, our clinical data revealed a correlation between elevated BMP4
expression in primary breast tumors and reduced proliferation as well as
increased risk of recurrence. The growth inhibitory effects of BMP4 have
also been demonstrated in vivo but its possible metastasis promoting
functions are less well characterized. Here we set out to investigate
this topic using a xenograft mouse model.Methods. MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells were transduced with a luciferase-expressing vector to allow
monitoring of the metastasis formation using bioluminescence imaging.
Cells (2 105) were injected into the mice intracardially and BMP4 (100
ng/g, 10 animals) or vehicle control (11 animals) was administered
through tail vein three times a week. After seven weeks, the mice were
sacrificed and metastases collected for histological analyses.Results.
The overall amount of metastases was similar in both groups (13 in
BMP4-treatment group vs. 12 in control group). There was a slight but
non-significant trend of metastases developing earlier in the BMP4 group
compared to controls. Most of the metastases occurred in bone and adrenal
glands. There were somewhat more metastases in bone in the BMP4-treated
mice (10 vs. 7) and more adrenal gland metastases in vehicle-treated
animals (5 vs. 1). To assess the contribution of BMP4 to the
characteristics of the metastases, the tumors were stained for pSMAD1/5/9
(BMP signaling activation), Ki67 (proliferation), MECA32 (blood vessels),
mesenchymal marker vimentin, -SMA (cancer-associated fibroblasts) and
basal markers K5 and K14. No major dissimilarities were observed between
the BMP4 and vehicle tumor groups in the staining patterns.
Interestingly, the osteoclast marker Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
(TRAP) was expressed in both groups in the cancer cells whereas Toluidine
Blue staining revealed that the bone morphology was not detrimentally
affected by BMP4 treatment.Conclusions. Despite its ability to enhance
breast cancer cell migration and invasion in vitro, BMP4 does not seem to
have a dramatic impact on in vivo metastasis formation, although a small
acceleration in appearance of the metastases was observed. However, the
limitations of the xenograft model do not allow us to exclude the
possible long-term effects of BMP4 that might be more applicable to human
situation.

