Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the PARP inhibitor niraparib and
cytotoxic chemotherapy alone or in combination in a panel of 25
triple-negative breast cancer PDX models: Relevance of BRCA mutations,
HRD status and other biomarkers


Poly-ADP-ribose polymerase 1 (PARP) inhibitors are therapeutically
effective in a subset of breast and high-grade ovarian cancers harboring
deleterious BRCA1/2 mutations. Recently, several studies have tried to
identify other molecular markers of HRD in BRCA1/2 wild-type (wt) breast
and ovarian cancers to identify patients that could benefit from PARP
inhibitor treatment. Most clinical studies of single-agent PARP
inhibitors are therefore focused on breast or ovarian cancer with BRCA1/2
mutations and/or identified as HRD. Preclinical evidence also indicates
that PARP inhibitors have therapeutic potential in combination with
genotoxic chemotherapy. However, the toxicity associated with such
combinations has generally imposed dose reduction of the chemotherapy,
possibly explaining why the clinical activity observed with the
combinations has in general not been superior to that of the
corresponding single agents given at full dose.In a panel of 25 triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) PDX models, we investigated the antitumor
efficacy of the PARP inhibitor niraparib used alone or in combination
with cyclophosphamide, a backbone genotoxic drug of TNBC standard
chemotherapy. Responses were correlated with both BRCA1/2 mutations and
HRD status as defined by the myChoice HRD test from Myriad Genetics and
with other HRD markers.Responses to cyclophosphamide ranged from
progression to partial or complete tumor regression. Responses to
niraparib were also variable and occurred only in tumors with BRCA
mutations or a high HRD score. High sensitivities to niraparib and
cyclophosphamide were tightly associated, suggesting that they may both
be a result of a defect in a BRCA1/2-related pathway. We tested if
niraparib could potentiate the efficacy of cyclophosphamide in TNBC
models that initially regressed on cyclophosphamide but eventually
relapsed. We chose a gapped sequential design in which treatment with
niraparib was initiated 14 days after a full dose of cyclophosphamide, to
avoid toxicity associated with concomitant administration. Potentiation
with inhibition of tumor relapse was observed in tumors sensitive to
single-agent niraparib, but not in tumors refractory to single-agent
niraparib. In responder tumors, the cyclophosphamide-niraparib sequential
combination was superior to sequential cycles of cyclophosphamide in
preventing tumor relapse.These results show that a gapped sequential
combination of full dose cyclophosphamide and niraparib is well tolerated
and demonstrates remarkable efficacy in a subset of TNBCs. The data will
be discussed with regard to potential adjuvant treatment strategies with
PARP inhibitors in TNBC and the value of myChoice HRD as a biomarker in
predicting response to PARP inhibition alone and in combination with
chemotherapy.

