Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of the oncolytic peptide LTX-315 in syngeneic
tumor models


Cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAPs) are naturally occurring molecules
found in a number of species as a defense mechanism for eukaryotic cells
against pathogens and are an integral part of the innate immune system.
CAPs have a broad spectrum of activities including antimicrobial and
anticancer while being less cytotoxic toward non-malignant cells. The
potential therapeutic application against cancer has spawned an interest
in developing oncolytic agents that display a new mode of action to
overcome the potential drug resistance associated with other current
therapeutics. The anticancer effects of CAPs are still under
investigation, but several peptides have already exhibited a promising
potential with cytotoxic activities against a broad spectrum of tumor
cells. Oncolytic peptides exert their activity through either a
membranolytic mode of action or an interaction with intracellular
targets, or a combination of both.LTX-315 (K-K-W-W-K-K-W-Dip-K-NH2), a
novel oncolytic peptide developed by Lytix Biopharma AS has the potential
to adopt an amphipathic helical coil structure. In vitro studies have
demonstrated that it was highly effective against both drug-resistant and
drug-sensitive cancer cells from several organ origins, with lower
toxicity toward normal cells. LTX-315 was designed for intratumoral
treatment of transdermal lesions. Previously, LTX-315 has been shown to
induce complete regression of B16 melanomas and long lasting antitumor
immune responses. Histological analyses of treated tumors revealed
extensive hemorrhagic necrosis and infiltration of CD3+ T cells.
Moreover, mRNA levels of inflammatory cytokines such as IL1, IL6 and IL18
were found to be increased in the tumor tissue after LTX-315 treatment.
The treatment did also prevent lung metastasis in mice re-challenged with
B16F1 cells intravenously. Due to its oncolytic mode of action, LTX-315
induces immunogenic cell death through the release of danger-associated
molecular pattern molecules and tumor antigens.Recently, we have
demonstrated that when subcutaneously established EMT-6 tumors
(inoculated into both flanks of the animal) were treated intratumorally
with LTX-315, an antitumor response was observed with a T/C ratio of 17%
19 days post start of treatment. Furthermore, an abscopal effect of
LTX-315 on the untreated tumor was also reported but only when it was
combined with anti-PD-L1 antibody. At the end of study, 50% of mice that
had received the combination therapy were still alive vs 30% and 40% in
the groups treated with LTX-315 or anti-PD-L1 antibody alone,
respectively. In conclusion, LTX-315 seems to be an ideal combinations
partner for immune checkpoint inhibitors.

