Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IFN- induced PD-L1 on tumor and host cells co-operatively prevents
tumor immune elimination after cancer immunoediting


Tumor cells can escape immune destruction via engaging the PD-1/PD-L1
inhibitory pathway. However since PD-L1 is induced on many different cell
types by IFN-, the importance of PD-L1 on tumor versus host cells in
mediating immune escape remains unclear. In this study, we assessed the
role of PD-L1 expression on two closely-related but distinct clones
derived from the same d42m1 methylcholanthrene (MCA)-induced sarcoma
line. Edited d42m1-T3 sarcoma cells grow progressively in wild type (WT)
mice but are rejected in mice treated with anti-PD-L1. Upregulation of
PD-L1 was observed on both immune and tumor cells in vivo. To assess the
role of PD-L1 specifically on tumor cells, we generated d42m1-T3 cells
lacking PD-L1 (T3PDL1) using CRISPR-Cas9. T3PDL1 cells were spontaneously
rejected in nave syngeneic WT mice but formed progressively growing
tumors in Rag2-/- mice. To explore the role of host-cell expressed PD-L1,
we challenged WT mice with 3-fold higher numbers of T3PDL1 cells and
found that the tumor cells formed progressively growing tumors in WT
mice. However, when tumor bearing mice injected with the high dose of
T3PDL1 cells were treated with blocking PD-L1 mAb, they all rejected
their tumors. Thus, PD-L1 expression on both tumor and host cells plays a
critical role in preventing immune elimination of edited MCA sarcoma
cells. Alternatively highly immunogenic, unedited d42m1-T9 sarcoma cells
were spontaneously rejected in WT mice due to the presence of the strong
rejection antigen, mutant Spectrin-2. Enforced expression of PD-L1 on
unedited d42m1-T9 cells to levels similar to those induced under
physiologic in vivo conditions did not alter the regressor phenotype of
these cells. In contrast, enforced overexpression of PD-L1 on d42m-T9
cells to levels that were 20 fold higher than physiologic led to
formation of progressively growing tumors in WT mice. Thus, physiologic
levels of PD-L1 expression on highly immunogenic unedited tumor cells are
not sufficient to counteract immune effector mechanisms driven by strong
tumor antigens. This result shows that adaptive immune resistance occurs
only on tumor cells that have undergone immunoediting.

