Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue stiffness regulates multinucleation in mammary epithelial
cells


This study investigates how increased stiffness of the tumor
microenvironment (TME) can facilitate cellular
multinucleation.Multinucleation is an easily observable marker for
polyploidy, facilitating the quantification of this phenotype. Polyploidy
is commonly an intermediate to aneuploidy, defined as an abnormal number
of chromosomes, a phenotype found in 85% of solid cancers that can drive
tumorigenesis. Up to 37% percent of tumors exhibit whole-genome doubling,
which typically precedes other somatic copy number alterations.
Additionally, induction of tetraploidy in human cells promoted increased
tolerance for mutation, resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs, and
transformation in culture.Tumors are inherently stiffer than normal
tissue, and this property has been shown to affect cell growth and
proliferation. Similarly, cell cycle errors have long been linked to
chromosomal abnormalities. Here, we used engineered two-dimensional
substrata that mimic tumor and normal microenvironments to investigate
how matrix stiffness regulates multinucleation in mammary epithelial
cells.Cells cultured on stiff substrata, representing tumor tissue,
showed a nearly 14-fold increase in multinucleation compared to cells
cultured on soft substrata, representing normal tissue. We found that
multinucleation was regulated in part by signaling downstream of MMP3, a
protease commonly upregulated in cancer. This signaling depended on
expression of the Rac1 splice variant, Rac1b, production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), and expression of Snail. Under all conditions,
cells cultured on soft substrata maintained a low frequency of
multinucleation.We also investigated biochemical effectors downstream of
Snail. Aurora A kinase (Aurora A) is a mitotic regulator commonly
elevated in cancer that has been shown to induce multinucleation in
mammary epithelial cells and increase tumor incidence in mice. We found
using microarray analysis that MMP3 increases the levels of Aurora A in
mammary epithelial cells. We further discovered that upregulation of
Aurora A in response to MMP3 signaling was limited to one transcript
variant.These data suggest that an increase in multinucleation is driven
by the stiffening of the tissue during tumorigenesis, in part by
MMP3-induced signaling and regulation of Aurora A splicing. More broadly,
these data suggest a key role for the mechanical properties of the tumor
microenvironment in cancer progression.

