Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of a human CIC-DUX4 fusion is sufficient to induce
malignant small round blue cell tumors in zebrafish: a new model of
CIC-DUX4 sarcoma for translational research


CIC-DUX4 sarcomas are aggressive soft-tissue malignancies characterized
by frequent metastases and uniformly poor survival. Histologically,
CIC-DUX4 sarcomas resemble Ewing sarcomas but do not express EWS-FLI1 or
other FET-ETS fusion genes typical of Ewing sarcoma. The molecular
origins of these tumors began to be clarified with the discovery that
they harbor characteristic t(4; 19) or t(10; 19) chromosomal
translocations that fuse the transcriptional repressor CIC with the
homeodomain-containing protein DUX4. The resulting CIC-DUX4 fusion
protein acts as an aberrant transcription factor. However, the critical
targets of CIC-DUX4 have been only partly described, the cell of origin
and mechanism of transformation are unknown and animal models of the
disease are lacking. Owing to this lack of biologic understanding,
patients with CIC-DUX4 sarcomas are treated with the same regimens used
for classical Ewing sarcoma, despite generally poor outcomes.To
comprehensively address these problems we are taking a cross-species
comparative oncology approach via analysis of human CIC-DUX4 sarcomas and
genetically engineered in vivo zebrafish models. To study in vivo effects
of CIC-DUX4, we used highly efficient Tol2 transposon-based transgenesis
techniques to induce tumors in the zebrafish. In the absence of a known
cell of origin for CIC-DUX4 sarcoma, we used a variety of ubiquitous
promoters to induce mosaic expression of human CIC-DUX4 in zebrafish,
along with GFP or mCherry fluorophores to mark transgenic cells. CIC-DUX4
exerted stong effects on zebrafish embryonic development. In particular,
expression of CIC-DUX4 was prominent in the developing vasculature
including hemogenic endothelium, indicating that the endothelial
environment is favorable to the expression of CIC-DUX4. Beginning at 5
weeks of age, almost 40% of injected animals developed invasive,
rapidly-growing tumors. Similar to human CIC-DUX4 sarcomas, tumors in the
zebrafish occurred in soft tissues including the trunk musculature, the
ventral abdominal tissue and the head and neck. The tumors exhibited
histologic features of small round blue cells, identical to the
appearance of human CIC-DUX4 sarcomas. Zebrafish CIC-DUX4 sarcomas were
readily transplantable as allografts into recipient zebrafish. To further
understand the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis, and to establish
aspects of CIC-DUX4 function common to human and zebrafish tumors, we are
carrying out detailed molecular analysis of the zebrafish tumors
including RNASeq and whole-exome sequencing. Taken together these
findings demonstrate that CIC-DUX4 expression is sufficient to promote
the development of SRBCT, give insight into the cellular origins of
CIC-DUX4 sarcomas and provide a valuable new animal model for
translational research in this disease.

