Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The program for cancer detection, diagnosis, and treatment
technologies for global health: Translating affordable, minimally
invasive point-of-care technologies to less-resourced settings


Cancer kills more people worldwide than HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and
malaria combined, and low-and-middle income countries (LMICs) bear the
majority of this burden. Success in detection, diagnosis and treatment
has been reported in LMICs through the use of low-cost point-of-care
(POC) technologies, and the program presented offers a unique pathway to
this POC market by funding multidisciplinary investigative teams to adapt
and clinically validate existing technologies for cancer detection,
diagnosis and treatment in low-resource settings.Each project consists of
an adaptation phase (2 years: $500k total costs/year) and validation
phase (3 years: $1M total costs/year). Projects are selected through NIH
peer review process by a carefully-selected special emphasis panel
briefed on the goals of the program. Projects are competitively vetted
for Phase II funding based on completion of Phase I milestones.The
program currently supports seven technologies for cancer detection,
diagnosis and treatment, each of which is progressing towards
experimental and clinical validation. The first project is an LED-based
photodynamic therapy device for oral cancer, that has similar efficacy in
vivo and ex vivo as existing laser phototherapy. Another supported
project is an automated high resolution microendoscope for cervical
cancer detection, with an impressive histological concordance in
detecting CIN2/3 (90%+ for CIN3). Two cervical cancer cryotherapy
projects are funded: a cryopen, that can achieve an approximately 4.0 mm
depth of necrosis (>90% of disease) for cervical cancer treatment, and an
efficient cryopop device that consumes less than 10% of CO2, compared to
commercially-available devices and exhibits comparable therapeutic
efficacy in ballistic gel studies. The program is also supporting two POC
tests, a HPV test and a Hepatitis C viral antigen level and viral load
detection. Additionally, a breast cancer triaging device/algorithm, with
95% sensitivity and capabilities to reduce false positive detection rate
by 40%, is also being supported. Each project has its own detailed
outline for Phase I and Phase II studies, which will be highlighting in
our presentation.The program is in the process of adding another six
projects, and it is anticipated that by year seven of the program, at
least nine projects will have progressed through optimization, clinical
validation, and business planning for commercialization and field/clinic
dissemination. Through these process, we will uniquely accelerate these
technologies for success in clinical translation.

