Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ChAcNLS-A14-B105, a novel fluorescence imaging agent for enhanced
detection of muscle invasive bladder cancer


Fluorescence imaging (FI) provides increased sensitivity for the
detection of bladder tumors compared to white light cystoscopy. However,
most advanced dyes used in FI suffer from nonspecific cellular
accumulation resulting in increased false-positives. In addition, these
dyes have not made significant progress in detecting the most aggressive
bladder tumors such as muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). Our
objective is to develop an antibody-conjugate (AC) PDI agent against
interleukin-5 receptor -subunit (IL-5R)-positive MIBC cells. IL-5R is
overexpressed on MIBC cells relative to superficial bladder cancer or
healthy bladder cells. We selected a class of fluorescent dyes termed
BODIPY for its availability, facile coupling to proteins, and easy
chemical modifications to accommodate required absorption and
fluorescence properties. BODIPY was attached to an AC composed of the
antibody A14 functionalized with a moiety termed ChAcNLS, which we have
shown enables it to escape endosome entrapment and redirect its
trafficking to the nucleus. This novel approach results in increased
intracellular accumulation of attached molecular payloads in MIBC cells.
We aim to determine if ChAcNLS-A14 will increase intracellular
accumulation of BODIPY to enhance fluorescence detection of MIBC by
probe-based confocal laser endomicroscopy (pCLE). In addition, we aim to
develop in an improved orthotopic rat bladder tumor model of human MIBC
for testing.MethodsWe have prepared a carboxyl BODIPY derivative (B105)
that allows for facile coupling to A14-ChAcNLS using routine procedures
and reagents. The number of B105 and ChAcNLS per A14 was determined by
fluorescence spectroscopy and SDS-PAGE, respectively. Intracellular
accumulation of B105 was determined by treating HT1376 MIBC cells with
A14-B105 and ChAcNLS-A14-B105. Cells were then imaged by fluorescence
confocal microscopy. For the in vivo model of MIBC, RNU rats were
anesthetized and their bladder washed in mild acid to disrupt the
endothelium. HT1376 cells marked with the fluorescent marker DiL and
instilled in the rat bladder. Intravesical pCLE was performed 2 weeks
later.ResultsChAcNLS-A14-B105 conjugate contained 7 molecules of B105 and
3 ChAcNLS peptides per A14. Confocal microscopy revealed the level of
B105 intracellular accumulation in IL-5R-positive MIBC cells was increase
10-fold with ChAcNLS-A14-B105 relative to A14-B105. pCLE revealed HT1376
cells survived and colonized the rat bladder
urothelium.ConclusionChAcNLS-A14-B105 was successfully constructed and
shown to significantly enhance B105 intracellular accumulation in target
IL-5R-positive MIBC cells. A novel orthotopic rat bladder tumor model of
human MIBC was also generated. Future testing of ChAcNLS-A14-B105
administered intravesically in RNU rat bladders bearing orthotopic tumors
of human MIBC will be performed to determine the potential clinical
translation of this new FI agent.

