Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of ERK3 mutants existing in human
cancers


Extracellular signal-Regulated Kinase 3 (ERK3) is an atypical member of
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family. Recent studies have
shown that ERK3 is highly upregulated in multiple cancers, such as lung
cancer and colon cancer, and plays an important role in promoting cancer
migration and invasion. While the link between ERK3 and cancers has been
recognized, little is known about ERK3 mutations in cancer progression.
In this study, we have investigated ERK3 mutations on R64 and L290 that
have been found in cancers of lung, large intestine and skin (COSMIC
database). Importantly, mutations of R64C, R64H, L290P and L290V all are
located in the kinase domain of ERK3. In order to characterize these
mutations, we generated ERK3 mutants with each of these point mutations,
and then overexpressed them in HeLa cells with or without stable
knockdown of endogenous ERK3. Notably, we found that in comparison with
wild type ERK3, all of these cancer-related mutations lead to reduction
of phosphorylation at S189 within the activation loop (an indicator of
ERK3 kinase activity). While activation loop phosphorylation is well
known to result in activation of the classical MAPKs, its effects on the
activity and functions of ERK3 remain elusive. To study the functional
impact of these ERK3 mutations on cancer cell invasiveness, we performed
trans-well migration assays using HeLa cells overexpressing each of these
mutants or the wild type ERK3. In line with previous finding,
overexpression of ERK3 increased cell migration. Interestingly, both
L290P and L290V mutations significantly increased ERK3's ability in
promoting cell migration, whereas R64C and R64H mutations resulted in a
decrease in cell migration. These results suggest that S189
phosphorylation within the activation loop does not correlate with ERK3's
function in promoting cancer cell motility. To conclude, we report for
the first time the functional characterization of cancer-related ERK3
mutations in modulating cancer cell migratory properties.

