Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural features of novel dimeric quinacrines that have
single-agent antitumor activity determine the mechanism of action:
destabilization of mTORC1/lysosomal interaction versus DNA damage


The safety and preliminary activity of hydroxychloroquine in phase I
cancer clinical trials have established the feasibility and rationale for
targeting the lysosome in cancer. We previously reported a more potent
lysosomal inhibitor Lys05, which is a dimeric chloroquine (CQ) linked
with a triamine linker. Here we report that high throughput screening of
>100 Lys05 derivatives (72-hour viability assay) revealed extending
linker length between the CQ motifs markedly enhanced anti-proliferative
potency (IC50 The safety and preliminary activity of hydroxychloroquine
in phase I cancer clinical trials have established the feasibility and
rationale for targeting the lysosome in cancer. We previously reported a
more potent lysosomal inhibitor Lys05, which is a dimeric chloroquine
(CQ) linked with a triamine linker. Here we report that high throughput
screening of >100 Lys05 derivatives (72-hour viability assay) revealed
extending linker length between the CQ motifs markedly enhanced
anti-proliferative potency (IC50 <500 nM v. 5 M Lys05). Longer linker
dimeric CQs produced significantly greater autophagy inhibition (2-5 fold
improved v. Lys05; mCherry-eGFP-LC3 reporter) and apoptosis (2-8 fold
improved v. Lys05) in human pancreatic cancer, melanoma and in KRAS
mutant P53-/- mouse pancreatic cells. We then substituted the CQ
heterocycle of Lys05 with other antimalarial heterocycles including those
found in mefloquine, primaquine and quinacrine. Dimeric quinacrines (DQs)
were exquisitely cytotoxic to cancer cell lines (IC50 9 - 90nM; 40 fold
improvement v. quinacrine). These agents were renamed DQ221-661, where
the first and second digit of each compound indicates the number of
carbons flanking the central nitrogen and the third digit reflects
whether the central nitrogen in the dimeric molecule is methylated (1) or
not (0). Inherent fluorescence of the DQs uncovered a striking pattern of
subcellular localization dependent on central nitrogen methylation. All
of the methylated DQs localized to the lysosome and inhibited autophagic
flux (bafilomycin clamp assay), while all of the unmethylated DQ's
localized to the nucleus, produced pH2AX-positive DNA damage, and induced
autophagy. Methylated DQs produced lysosomal membrane permeabilization
(LMP; galectin-3 puncta), and equal cytotoxicity in ATG5 WT and ATG5-null
MEFs, indicating their cytotoxicity is not dependent on functional
upstream canonical autophagy. Reverse phase protein array analysis of
dimeric CQs Lys05, Lys75 and DQ661 revealed a signature associated with
inactivation of mTORC1 (decreased phosphorylation of S6K, 4E-BP1,
PRAS40). DQ661 disrupted mTOR/LAMP2 co-localization and induced greater
levels of apoptosis compared to BRAF/MEK inhibition in BRAF-MT melanoma
cells, gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells, or early stage autophagy
inhibitors Spautin-1 and SBI-0206965. Unlike quinacrine, which had no
effect, or DQ660, which produced a modest but significant growth
impairment, DQ661 produced significant tumor regression in a melanoma
xenograft model, establishing the therapeutic potential of this compound
in cancer. Our data identifies a new class of lysosomal inhibitors, the
centrally methylated dimeric quinacrines, devoid of DNA damaging
properties, that are capable of concurrently inhibiting
autophagy-lysosome function and mTORC1 through LMP.

