Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific inhibition of prostaglandin E2 production in
medulloblastoma


Introduction: Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is a key lipid mediator of
inflammation and carcinogenesis. Apart from promoting direct growth of
cancer cells, PGE2 has been shown to be crucial in maintaining the
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. Drugs targeting cyclooxygenase
(COX)-1 and -2, enzymes upstream in the production of PGE2 and other
prostanoids, have successfully reduced tumor growth in many cancer models
but these drugs are all associated with adverse long-term effects. The
aim of this study is to demonstrate an anti-tumor effect in
medulloblastoma by selective inhibition of microsomal prostaglandin E1
(mPGES-1), the enzyme downstream of COX-1/2 specifically required for the
synthesis of PGE2.Experimental procedures: Human medulloblastoma cell
lines (DAOY and D283) were treated with a selective small-molecule
inhibitor against mPGES-1 or COX-2 in the presence or absence of
pro-inflammatory interleukin (IL)-1. Prostaglandins in supernatants were
extracted and quantified with LC-MS/MS. Drug efficacy was determined and
cell toxicity was measured with cell viability assay. Mice with human
medulloblastoma xenograft will function as proof-of-concept for the
anti-tumor activities associated with inhibition of PGE2 production. Key
inflammatory enzymes were quantified with Western blot.Results:
Medulloblastoma cells express high levels of COX-2, mPGES-1, and produce
PGE2. The increased production of PGE2 by IL-1 was completely blocked
when cells were co-treated with inhibitor for mPGES-1 or COX-2. Both
inhibitors showed cell toxicity. We did not observe any shunting towards
other prostanoids.Conclusion: We investigate the effect of selective
inhibition of mPGES-1 or COX-2 on medulloblastoma growth. We aim to
further characterize the mPGES-1 inhibitor and compare to selective COX-2
inhibitor in preclinical medulloblastoma models. Specific inhibition of
PGE2 production, rather than general inhibition of prostanoid production,
would potentially prove useful as a complement to current medulloblastoma
treatments.

