Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free separation and concentration of cancer cells by
acoustophoresis


Introduction: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) is a promising tool for
disease monitoring and for better-targeted therapies for patients with
disseminating tumors. However, isolation of CTCs is challenging due to
their scarcity, variation in size, morphology, and expression profile.
The lack of a universal marker impairs reliable detection and
characterization of CTCs. We are using acoustophoresis, ultrasound
standing wave radiation forces to enable label free separation of cancer
cells from white blood cells (WBC). The cell separation is based on
intrinsic cells properties such as size, density and
compressibility.Materials and Methods: The acoustic setup is a
glass/silicon microchip connected to a pressure driven system. The system
is temperature controlled and has a pre-alignment step for optimal
separation performance. The separation system can process samples up to
10 mL, with a processing speed of 1 mL in 13 minutes without compromising
the cell separation capacity. If required the separation step can be
complemented with a subsequent concentration channel, which allows at
least 20x concentration of the sample, by extracting the cells in a
smaller liquid volume compared to the input sample. The prostate cancer
cell line DU145 and the breast cancer cell line MCF7 spiked in red blood
cell (RBC) lysed blood from healthy donors, are used to evaluate the
model system performance for cancer cell separation.Results and
Discussion: The acoustic separation model system is flexible and can be
amended to suit different requirements and conditions. The cancer cell
recovery after acoustic separation of blood samples spiked with 50 DU145
cells per mL is approximately 80% with a WBC contamination level of less
than 0.3%. At this performance level there is a 100x cancer cell
enrichment in the collected cancer cell fraction compared to input.
However, by changing parameters such as the voltage setting and sample
flow rate it is possible to regulate the cancer cell recovery and WBC
contamination levels after acoustophoresis. Cancer cell recovery well
above 90% is possible with slightly higher WBC contamination levels. If
high cancer cell purity is of importance, a 1000x cancer cell enrichment
can be achieved at the cost of slightly lower cancer cell recovery. RBC
lysing is required before acoustic separation, due to cell crowding in
the separation channel when the cell concentration is too high. We have
identified eosinophils as the major contaminant in our enriched cancer
cell fraction. They constitute 85% of the contaminating WBCs. The
eosinophils have similar acoustic properties as the smaller cancer cells,
and can therefore not be completely isolated from the cancer cells by
acoustophoresis.This work demonstrates the flexibility with
acoustophoresis that allows for integration of three previously
established units: pre-alignment, sorting and concentrating, onto the
same chip. It also serves as a proof of concept for in line rare cell
label free sorting and isolation.

