Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical combinations of ATR and PARP inhibitors: Defining
target patient populations and dose schedule


Defective DNA damage repair, leading to genomic instability, is a common
event during tumorigenesis. Despite enabling the persistence of
mutations, any of which can confer a growth advantage to the nascent
tumor, these defects place an Achilles Heel reliance on remaining repair
pathways for survival from DNA damage. The protein kinases ataxia
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATM and Rad3 related (ATR) are key
mediators of a DNA damage response activated by DNA damage during the S
and G2 phases of cell cycle. Together they signal a series of cellular
responses including activation of checkpoints and repair by homologous
recombination. Loss of ATM pathway function frequently occurs in cancer,
commonly from loss of function mutations in the tumor suppressor, p53, a
substrate of ATM. This leads to a reliance on ATR that can be exploited
for therapeutic benefit. Activation of ATR, by generation of S-phase DNA
damage (replication stress, [RS]), can arise from treatment with DNA
damaging drugs and certain targeted therapies such as inhibitors of poly
ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). PARP is an enzyme involved in several DNA
repair pathways, including base excision repair. Some PARP inhibitors
have been shown to form an irreversible complex with DNA, potentially
generating a direct RS lesion. While initial data indicates that
inhibition of ATR and PARP is synergistic in some cancer cells, a
comprehensive assessment has not been reported.Inhibition of ATR was
cytotoxic in combination with PARP inhibitors against many cancer, but
not non-cancer, cells. This effect was observed with multiple PARP
inhibitors irrespective of their potential to form a DNA complex. In
large cell panels of over 100 cancer cell lines, greater synergy was
observed for the combination of an ATR and PARP inhibitor in cell lines
with mutation of the TP53 gene. This was confirmed in isogenic cell lines
depleted for ATM or p53, and is consistent with the profile of ATR and
DNA damaging drug combinations. Furthermore, a triple combination of a
PARP inhibitor, ATR inhibitor and the DNA damaging drug, cisplatin,
retained cancer cell specific cytotoxic activity. In vitro
dose-scheduling studies with the doublet of a PARP and ATR inhibitor
showed optimal activity was achieved with transient concurrent exposure
to both agents. This schedule contrasts with that for ATR inhibitors in
combination with DNA damaging drugs where sequential dosing was optimal.
In a mouse xenograft model concurrent dosing on a twice-weekly schedule
was effective and well-tolerated.These data demonstrate the potential of
combining ATR and PARP inhibitors in patients with p53 defective tumors.
An optimal dose schedule was defined from cell and mouse studies.
Together the data support clinical evaluation of ATR and PARP inhibitor
combinations.

