Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An angiogenesis gene signature points to active TGF-beta/JAK
signaling pathways in a subset of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
cancer patients that are distinct from pathways in pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors


Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC), which comprises 85% of
pancreatic cancers, is the 4th leading cause of cancer death in the
United States with a 5-year survival of 7%. While human PDACs (hPDACs)
are hypovascular, they also overexpress a number of angiogenic growth
factors and receptors. Additionally, the use of anti-angiogenic agents in
murine models of PDAC leads to reduced tumor volume, tumor spread, and
microvessel density, and improved survival. Nonetheless, clinical trials
using anti-angiogenic therapy have been overwhelmingly unsuccessful in
hPDAC. On the other hand, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs)
account for only 2% of pancreatic tumors, yet they are very vascular and
classically angiogenic, respond to anti-angiogenic therapy, and confer a
better prognosis than PDAC even in the metastatic setting.By analyzing
the recently expanded TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) dataset, we report
here that an angiogenesis gene signature is present in 35% of PDACs and
is mostly distinct from an angiogenesis signature present in PNETs.
Additionally, principal component analysis (PCA) of the entire or
angiogenic PDAC and PNET transcriptomes from TCGA indicates that there
are large differences in gene expression between these two tumor types.
For example, PDACs exhibit a transcriptome that reflects active TGF-
signaling, and up-regulation of several pro-inflammatory genes, including
members of JAK signaling pathways. Functionally, targeting the TGF- type
I receptor (TRI) kinase with SB505124 and JAK1-2 with ruxolitinib blocks
proliferative cross-talk between human pancreatic cancer cells and human
endothelial cells. Tumors from the KRC (oncogenic Kras, deleted Rb1) PDAC
mouse model show superior enrichment and differential expression of the
angiogenic gene signature compared to tumors from the KPC (oncogenic
Kras, mutated Trp53) PDAC mouse model. Moreover, treatment of KRC and KPC
mice with ruxolitinib suppresses murine PDAC progression in KRC mice but
not in KPC mice. These findings suggest that targeting both TGF- and JAK
signaling in the 35% of PDAC patients whose cancers exhibit an
angiogenesis gene signature should be explored in the clinic and that
this could lead to improved responses to anti-angiogenic therapy in PDAC.

