Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of long noncoding RNA TINCR promotes invasion and
metastasis and predicts poor prognosis in tongue squamous cell carcinoma


Background and aim: Recently long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged
as new gene regulators involving in a number of developmental and
tumorigenic processes. However, few lncRNAs have been well characterized
in tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC). The aim of this study is to
determine whether lncRNAs play a role in TSCC progression.Methods: The
expression profiles of lncRNAs and protein-coding genes in TSCC tissues
and paired adjacent non-tumor tissues from 10 patients were compared by
using lncRNA microarrays. TSCC-specific gene co-expression networks were
constructed by differential expression analysis and weighted gene
co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). Levels of these differentially
expressed lncRNAs were verified in TSCC tissues (n = 45) using
Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and further confirmed in another
patient cohort (n = 103) by in situ hybridization (ISH). The effects of
lncRNA on tumor cell invasion and migration were assessed by silencing or
overexpressing the lncRNA in vitro.Results: A total of 815 lncRNAs and
1783 protein-coding genes were differentially expressed between TSCC
tissues and paired adjacent non-tumor tissues. WGCNA showed that one of
the co-expression networks was significantly enriched for biological
process that was relevant to epithelial cell differentiation, among
which, TINCR was significantly down-regulated. Both PCR and ISH analyses
validated that the down-regulation of TINCR in tumor tissues compared
with controls. The expression level of TINCR was associated with tumor
size, differentiation, cervical lymph node metastasis status, clinical
stage and outcomes in patients with TSCC.Patients with TINCR low
expression had a reduced overall survival. COX regression analysis showed
that TINCR can be served as an independent prognostic factor for patients
with TSCC. More, ectopic transfection of TINCR dramatically suppressed
cell invasion and migration in vitro. On the contrary, knockdown of TINCR
led to p63 upregulation, and enhanced cell invasion and
migration.Conclusion: Our study suggests that downregulation of TINCR
plays a role in TSCC progression, at least partially, by regulating
epithelial differentiation-associated genes.

