Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular pathogenesis of an advanced cutaneous T-cell lymphoma


Mycosis fungoides (MF) and Szary syndrome (SS) are the most common
subtypes of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). MF is primarily a benign
disease often confined to skin. MF, in about 10% of cases, can progress
to SS or transform to large-cell histology. SS, the leukemic variant of
CTCL, is defined as erythroderma on 80% of the skin plus 1000/L
circulating malignant T-cells. SS is very aggressive with a median
overall survival of only 2-5 years. So far, effective treatment options
for CTCLs are still very limited and the underlying genetic basis remains
incompletely characterized. Here, we performed integrated genomic
analyses of 105 patients with de novo or transformed SS, using
whole-exome, targeted exon, transcriptome sequencing and SNP
array.Frequent somatic alterations were identified in TP53, CARD11, CCR4,
PLCG1, TNFRSF1B, CDKN2A, ARID1A, RPS6KA1 and ZEB1. Activating CCR4 and
CARD11 mutations were detected in nearly one third of patients. CCR4 is
important for T-cell migration into the skin. All CCR4 mutations were
either nonsense or frameshift and located at the C-terminus. CARD11 is
required for T cell receptor (TCR)-mediated activation of NF-B signaling.
About half of the CARD11 mutations were located in the domain previously
reported in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The remaining
mutations were located at a highly conserved new hotspot. As was
previously suggested in DLBCL, therapies targeting CARD11 signaling could
benefit SS patients. PLCG1 is a key modulator of TCR signaling. In
addition to the recently reported S345F hotspot mutation, we identified a
new hotspot located in the C-terminal of the protein. The mutation
frequency of the new hotspot was significantly higher in patients with
prior history of MF, suggesting the possibility that PLCG1 may play a
role in transformation of MF to SS. Focal deletion of ZEB1 was observed
in over half of the patients. ZEB1 is suggested to be critical for early
T-cell development. ZEB1 downregulation contributes to resistance to
TGF-1-mediated growth suppression in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
derived cell lines. Loss of ZEB1 may play a similar role in SS
pathogenesis. IL32 and IL2RG were strongly upregulated in nearly all
patients. IL32 protein expression is correlated with the mRNA expression
and the density of Szary cells in patients blood. IL32 accelerates the
proliferation of CTCL cell lines through mitogen-activated protein kinase
and NF-B-mediated signaling. IL32 could become a target that is specific
to SS patients. Surprisingly, the UVB mutation signature was detected in
most of the cases, indicating that the malignant clonal population arose
from a cell that spent significant time in the superficial layers of the
skin and challenging the view that SS originated from the circulating
memory T-cell rather than those resident in the skin.Our results showed
profound disruption of key T-cell signaling in SS patients and suggested
potential targets for novel therapies.

