Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive RNA-seq transcriptome interrogation of paired
hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis tissues revealed significant
molecular features of disease evolution and modulation of tumor immunity


First 2 authors contributed equallyHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the
second most common cause of death from cancer worldwide with extremely
poor prognosis. HCC is known to be closely associated with liver
injury-induced cirrhosis caused by various etiologies, including HBV
infection. The prolonged timeline and heterogeneous nature of HCC adds
complexity to dissecting the biology of this disease in humans. While
Sorafenib is approved for the first-line treatment of metastatic HCC,
most patients rapidly progress on treatment with Sorafenib. Consequently,
alternative therapeutic options for HCC are much needed. The
identification of molecular subtypes and reliable biomarkers associated
with disease evolution is critical in facilitating development of new
therapeutic agents in HCC.To understand the manifestation of early
molecular events in HCC disease progression in human, we analyzed
genome-wide RNA-seq data derived from 100 paired samples consisting of
HCC tumors (most with 60-80% tumor content) and adjacent cirrhotic
tissues from early stage patients (TNM system: T1N0M0, T2N0M0, and
T3N0M0; similar to BCLC stage A and B). Differential expression analysis
revealed a cluster of genes that significantly differentiated HCC from
cirrhotic tissues and illustrated a widespread deregulation of cell cycle
machinery modulated by probable molecular abnormalities represented by
Polo-Like Kinase, Checkpoint kinases, G2/M DNA damage checkpoint
regulation, DNA damage-induced 14-3-3 signaling, ATM signaling, and
estrogen-mediated S-phase entry. Prominent down-regulation of FXR/LXR/RXR
activation was also observed in HCC tumors. Strikingly, the unsupervised
hierarchical clustering of both cirrhotic and HCC tissues revealed 3
groups of genes with mRNA expression closely correlating with disease
progression stage-wise from cirrhosis to T1, T2, and T3 stages.
Specifically, we made a novel observation illustrating the stage-wise
activation of Wnt signaling pathway, but de-activation of MAPK pathway.
Upon in-depth analysis, our data also suggests that as HCC progresses,
translation machinery and embryonic morphogenesis are stimulated, while
angiogenesis, negative regulation of apoptosis, and mesenchymal cell
differentiation are possibly impinged. In addition, we found that
components of processes crucial for activating immune response appear to
be impaired as disease progresses from cirrhosis to stage T3. To confirm
the aforementioned finding through focused assessment of
immune-microenvironment by gene expression, we utilized Fluidigm platform
and corroborated the down-regulation of effector T cell signature.In
conclusion, data presented provides a holistic depiction of evolution of
HCC and the associated tumor immunity, thus paving a way for future
detailed subtyping and therapeutics discovery.

