Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYB overexpression is associated with castration-resistance in
prostate cancer


Clinical progression of prostate cancer (PCa) is characterized by a
transition from castration-sensitive (CS) to castration-resistant (CR)
phenotype. We previously demonstrated that MYB overexpression sustained
the growth of PCa cells in androgen-depleted growth environment as well
as promoted aggressive tumor phenotypes. Here, we examined its role in
PCa progression and castration-resistance using appropriate mouse models
and delineated underlying molecular mechanisms. Luciferase-tagged
MYB-overexpressing (LNCaP-MYB) or -silenced (C4-2-shMYB) PCa cell lines
along with their respective control sublines (LNCaP-Neo and C4-2-NTScr)
were orthotopically implanted in nude mice and tumor growth was monitored
by non-invasive bioluminescence imaging using Xenogen-IVIS optical
system. Our data demonstrated significantly enhanced tumor growth in mice
implanted with high MYB expressing (LNCaP-MYB and C4-2-NTScr) PCa cells
as compared to low MYB expressing (LNCaP-Neo and C4-2-shMYB) cells. To
study the role of MYB in castration-resistance, we castrated the mice
after tumors from all groups reached comparable size as determined by in
vivo imaging. Tumors in LNCaP-Neo and C4-2-shMYB groups exhibited drastic
regression following castration. In contrast, only slight initial
reduction in the tumor growth was reported in mice from LNCaP-MYB and
C4-2-NTScr groups following castration, and they later regained tumor
growth. Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that the
median survival of testis-intact (non-castrated) animals of LNCaP-Neo and
C4-2-shMYB groups was significantly lower than that of castrated group
mice. However, castration in high MYB-expressing tumor bearing mice could
barely improve their median survival. Interestingly, MYB expression
levels in orthotopic tumors correlated with serum PSA levels.
Furthermore, castration of mice in LNCaP-Neo and C4-2-shMYB groups
resulted in a rapid reduction in serum PSA levels; while it sustained and
continued to rise in MYB overexpressing groups. In additional studies, we
demonstrated that MYB interacts with androgen-receptor (AR) in prostate
cancer cells, and facilitates the nuclear localization of AR in a
ligand-independent manner. In essence, these results suggest a critical
role of MYB in the CR progression of PCa.

