Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rare deleterious germline mutations of candidate genes associated
with risk of familial esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) by
targeted sequencing


Background and aims:Esophageal cancer (EC) is a deadly disease with poor
survival rates of only 10%. The EC incidence remains highest in the
Shanxi and Henan regions near the Tang Hang Mountain area in Northern
China. In endemic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) regions,
common familial clustering and historical migration patterns suggest an
inherited ESCC genetic susceptibility. We hypothesize that cancer
predisposition gene(s) (CPGs) carrying rare deleterious variants play a
crucial role in ESCC genetic susceptibility and aim to identify the
underlying CPGs of familial ESCC from Henan by applying the targeted
sequencing approach.Methods:Our discovery set utilized NGS technology to
capture a comprehensive gene panel critical for ESCC by targeted
re-sequencing of 1271 selected genes (11 Mb) and sequenced for the
germline variants in the blood DNA from 222 familial ESCC individuals and
124 Henan non-cancer controls. Familial ESCC was defined as at least two
family members developed ESCC. The custom designed panel contains a
cancer panel of 578 gene list (4Mb) and a custom list of 693 (7Mb)
ESCC-specific genes derived from various approaches including microarray
profiling in FH+ ESCC primary tissues, homozygosity-by-descent (HBD), SNP
array-based analysis by both GWAS and candidate gene approaches of our
own set of MassArray SNP association data. The data from 346 individuals
were processed using the analysis pipeline following the GATK guideline.
Briefly, raw fastq reads were mapped using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner
(BWA). PCR duplicates are marked using Picard. The raw variants are
called by GATK HaplotypeCaller using a joint genotyping of all
samples.Results:Preliminary data analysis for the 346 samples resulted in
the final call set comprised of 52328 rare variants. There are 26486 rare
variants present in the 222 FH+ ESCC cases, but absent in the 124
controls. The average sequencing coverage was 88X. Principal component
analysis (PCA) and multidimensional scaling (MDS) indicated a homogenous
population structure between the case and the control populations.
Targeted re-sequencing results of the 1271 selected genes in 222 familial
ESCC individuals identified a recurrent missense variant in AIM1L (Absent
in Melanoma 1-like) in 14/222 (6.3%) of FH+ ESCC patients but absence in
the 124 non-cancer control. Data obtained by a melting curve-based
genotyping platform by LC480 and LightSNiP assay for high throughput
validation of this recurrent SNP in larger sample cohort are underway and
will be presented.Conclusions:A SNP in AIM1L may be associated with
higher risk for ESCC in Henan and validation in larger cohort is
required. The data may provide valuable insight for understanding genetic
susceptibility to this deadly cancer.Acknowledgements:We acknowledge the
Asian Fund for Cancer Research for grant support.

