Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying hereditary gastric cancer predisposition in the
clinical cancer genomics community research network


Genetic Cancer Risk Assessment (GCRA) clinical referral and testing
guidelines are limited for individuals and families with gastric cancer.
In part, this is due to a lack of knowledge regarding hereditary gastric
cancer susceptibility. The Clinical Cancer Genomics Community Research
Network registry includes over 15,000 families seen for GCRA at City of
Hope and 45 other collaborating sites. The purpose of this research was
to identify variants conferring inherited gastric cancer susceptibility
for individuals and families in our registry without previously known
genetic predisposition. Adult research participants from our IRB-approved
registry with a DNA sample and a personal history of gastric cancer were
selected. Those with a previously identified genetic predisposition were
excluded (n = 8). In families with more than one eligible individual, the
individual with earliest onset of disease was selected. All histologies
were included (i.e., intestinal and diffuse adenocarcinomas, as well as,
gastrointestinal stromal tumors). Of 47 eligible participants, 22 had
previously uninformative clinical testing. Germline sequencing was
completed using a novel 706 candidate cancer gene panel, which included
genes involved in DNA damage response, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis,
and the Fanconi anemia, mTOR, JAK-STAT, and RAS-MAPK pathways; known
cancer susceptibility genes; and genes frequently mutated in gastric
tumors (data from the Catalog of Somatic Variants in Cancer database).
Based on 2015 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the
Association for Molecular Pathology Standards and Guidelines, 18 out of
47 research participants had pathogenic or likely pathogenic germline
variants. Of the 18, 11 had a first- or second-degree relative with
gastric cancer. Variants were identified in established cancer
susceptibility genes, such as BRCA2, BRIP1, RAD51C, ATM, FLCN, as well as
in genes from rare autosomal recessive conditions, such as FANCC. In
conclusion, using a 706 gene panel to test a GCRA cohort, we were able to
identify potentially pathogenic variants in 38% of participants with
gastric cancer, with nearly half of these variants in clinically
actionable genes. The variants identified in this study will need to be
further evaluated using segregation studies, tumor studies, and in larger
cohorts to establish causality.

