Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of dPCR versus hybridization capture methods for next
generation sequencing of ctDNA for a SNV, copy number amplification, and
fusion liquid biopsy assay


Circulating tumor DNA can be found in the plasma of cancer patients, and
can be utilized for non-invasive cancer detection and genotyping through
Next Generation Sequencing. However, unique characteristics of ctDNA pose
technical challenges that limit technical sensitivities and robustness.
ctDNA are fragmented, short, rare in abundance, and found in high
background of normal DNA from leukocytes. Cancer variants range as low as
0.1-1% minor allele fractions, within the noise of NGS methods.
Furthermore, clinical interest includes large number of genes and
mutation types including single nucleotide variants, copy number
amplification, and fusions. We compared two popular target enrichment
categories, digital PCR and a hybridization-based capture panel for
target enrichment. We assessed the assay performance and detection
limitations, using a diverse sample set to test the range of input
material that reflects ctDNA found in plasma. We titrated important
cancer mutations (BRAF, EGFR, KRAS, PI3KCA, etc.) testing minor allele
fractions ranging from 33% down to 0.1%, MET amplification ranges of 14x
to 5x, and CCDC6-RET fusions of 50% to 2%. We also assessed input DNA
ranges of 1ng and 10ng, well below manufacturer recommend input of
library prep methods. Testing the performance of a 29kb amplicon panel
and a 114kb hybridization-probes panel, we found superior on-target rates
with digital PCR compared to the hybridization capture method across all
samples. However, despite higher depths of coverage with droplet PCR,
hybridization based methods had superior read mapping, uniformity (1.4x
better), error rate (0.16% vs 0.02%), and greater linearity of SNV
variants. Hybridization methods had greater accuracy of variant detection
and were able to accurately identify the RET fusion. We demonstrated the
feasibility of utilizing target enrichment methods for next generation
sequencing for ctDNA variant detection.

