Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RARRES2 functions as a direct tumor suppressor by promoting
beta-catenin phosphorylation and degradation independent of CMKLR1 and
CMKLR1-mediated antitumor immune response in adrenocortical carcinoma


Tumor suppressors and the immune system are critical players in tumor
suppression. However, little is known about whether a tumor suppressor
can function through both immune-dependent and immune-independent
mechanisms. RARRES2 is a small secreted protein that is down-regulated in
multiple human cancer types such as adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC),
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and melanoma. It has been shown that
RARRES2 can play an indirect tumor-suppressive role by acting as a
chemoattractant to recruit anti-cancer immune cells expressing its
receptor CMKLR1 to sites of tumor. In this study, we show that epigenetic
CpG hypermethylation of RARRES2 in vivo and in vitro in ACC causes
RARRES2 down-regulation. We also found that RARRES2 can function as a
direct tumor suppressor and that its tumor suppressive effect does not
depend on the recruitment of CMKLR1-expressing immune cells. We show that
although exogenous treatment of cultured cells with recombinant human
RARRES2 protein did not show any tumor-suppressive effect, transient
overexpression of RARRES2 significantly inhibited cellular invasion.
Stable overexpression of RARRES2 in ACC cell line NCI-H295R led to
significantly reduced cell proliferation, cell invasion, and
tumorigenecity in a RARRES2 dose-dependent manner. Using xenografts of
stable NCI-H295R cell lines in two immunodeficient mouse models (athymic
nude mice and NSG mice), we found that in the absence of functional
immune cells, stable RARRES2 overexpression can still significantly
suppress tumor growth in vivo. RARRES2 overexpression promoted
beta-catenin phosphorylation and degradation, reduced the phosphorylation
of p38 MAP kinase and inhibited the secretion of matrix metalloprotease
protein 10 (MMP10) from cancer cells in a RARRES2 dose-dependent manner.
Taken into account that CMKLR1 expression is barely detectable in all the
cell lines tested, our results present the first evidence that RARRES2
can function as a direct tumor suppressor independent of CMKLR1 and
CMKLR1-mediated anti-tumor immune response.

