Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-step microRNA control of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
metastatic cascade


MicroRNAs (miRs) are implicated in the pathogenesis of various
malignancies, including pancreatic cancer, and may represent key players
in the metastatic process. In a previous study (Olson et al., 2009), we
identified two unique miR signatures associated with tumour metastasis in
the mouse model of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour (PNET), RIP-Tag2. The
first signature was characteristic of rare liver metastases.
Intriguingly, the second signature, identified in a subset of primary
PNET, had overlap with the liver metastasis signature. This signature was
denoted met-like primary (referred to as MLP-miRs). Bioinformatic
analysis revealed that three MLP-miRs (miR-181, miR-137, and miR-132), as
well as three metastasis-specific miRs (miR-23b, miR-27b, and miR-24-1)
are also upregulated in human PNET MLP samples.To examine the potential
pro-metastatic role of the aforementioned miRs, we generated PNET cancer
cell lines (-TC) that stably express single miRs or combinations. We
first audited their effect using orthotopic studies. MiR-181 caused a
significant delay in the tumor progression, while the rest of the miRs
did not affect tumor growth. Notably, the orthotopic tumors
overexpressing miR-137 and miR-132 were characterized by markedly
enhanced invasion into adjacent normal tissue. Then, using experimental
metastasis assays we examined potential roles in distant metastasis.
Overexpression of the miR-23b cluster (miR-23b, -27b and -24-1) caused a
dramatic increase in the number of liver metastatic foci, indicating that
they play a significant role in seeding distant metastases. The
aforementioned pro-invasive miRs had little activity in this assay. Using
an inducible system we went on to demonstrate that the three miRs
comprising the 23b cluster act together in a synergistic manner during
the early stages of distant colonization.Transcriptome analysis of miRNA
isolated from -TC expressing cell lines revealed enrichment of genes
involved in axonal guidance, actin nucleation and integrin signaling in
the case of miR-137, and of glutamate receptor signaling and EMT in the
case of miR-23b cluster.Overall, our results suggest a multi-step miRNA
control of the PNET metastatic cascade, during which miR-137 and miR-132
enables PNET cancer cells to invade,, while the miR-23b cluster plays an
important role in distant metastasis. Using miR gene target prediction
algorithms applied to mouse and human PNET transcriptome datasets, we are
in the process of identifying and validating possible effector genes
involved in distinctive aspects of the invasion-metastasis cascade,
potentially guiding the design of new therapeutic strategies to target
metastasis.

