Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-1-targeted Probody therapeutics provide anti-tumor efficacy and
a 10-fold dose protection against systemic autoimmunity in preclinical
studies


Immuno-oncology approaches have transformed the treatment of advanced
melanoma, NSCLC and an increasing number of other cancers. Antibodies
targeting the T cell checkpoint molecules CTLA-4 and PD-1 can reverse
tumor suppression of T cell activation that prevents effective anti-tumor
immunity. However, blockade of checkpoint molecules, particularly in
combination, in non-tumor tissues can result in autoimmune side effects
that can limit therapeutic utility. Combination of PD-1 and CTLA-4
blockade provides increased response rates but with concomitant increases
in immune-related adverse events. Here we demonstrate that Probody
therapeutics targeting PD-1 synergize with a CTLA-4 checkpoint inhibitor
to eradicate established tumors in a mouse model while protecting against
PD1-mediated systemic autoimmunity.Probody therapeutics are recombinant,
proteolytically-activated antibody prodrugs that have the potential to
meaningfully widen therapeutic index by minimizing interactions with
normal tissue while retaining anti-tumor activity. Probody therapeutics
take advantage of protease activities that are abundant in tumors but
suppressed in normal tissues. An extension of the antibody light chain
with a masking peptide blocks binding of the antibody to antigen in
normal tissue. Tumor-associated proteases cleave and release the mask,
enabling the active antibody to bind antigen preferentially in the tumor.
The feasibility of the Probody approach to checkpoint targets is
supported by preclinical and clinical studies in which intratumoral
delivery of low dose immune modulators enables anti-tumor responses
despite negligible systemic exposure.For preclinical assessment of PD-1
as a Probody target, a family of Probody therapeutics derived from the
anti-mouse PD-1 antibody J43 was developed. The intact Probody
therapeutics demonstrated reduced binding to mouse PD-1 relative to the
parental antibody that was completely restored following proteolytic
activation. The anti-tumor efficacy of the J43 antibody and Probody
therapeutics was assessed following systemic administration as single
agents or in combination with an anti-CTLA-4 antibody to mice bearing
established MC38 syngeneic tumors. As single agents, the PD-1 antibody
and Probody therapeutics reduced tumor growth relative to an isotype
antibody control and synergized with CTLA-4 blockade. Consistent with
their reduced ability to bind target in the absence of proteolytic
activation, the PD-1 Probody therapeutics were up to 10 times less potent
than the parental anti-PD-1 antibody in inducing autoimmune diabetes in
NOD mice. Our preclinical findings demonstrate that PD-1 Probody
therapeutics retain anti-tumor efficacy with improved safety profiles and
therefore have the promise to enable better tolerated PD-1 combination
immunotherapies.PROBODY is a trademark of CytomX Therapeutics, Inc.

