Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying a predictive biomarker for chemotherapy (taxane) in
patients with metastatic castration resistance prostate cancer


In 2015, American Cancer Society predicts that 220,800 men will be
diagnosed with prostate cancer (PC). Patients diagnosed with metastatic
PC are first treated with androgen deprivation therapies (ADT) in order
to lower testosterone to castration levels. Unfortunately, it is only a
matter of time before becoming metastatic castration resistant prostate
cancer (mCRPC). Subsequent treatments include combined androgen
deprivation therapies such as (abiraterone, enzalutamide),
immunotherapies, investigational drugs, and/or chemotherapy (docetaxel
and cabazitaxel). Individualizing therapy for prostate cancer patients is
an overarching goal of research. Currently, no valid practical biomarkers
exist that can predict resistance to the taxane in PC. Identifying a
marker that predicts taxane sensitivity would delineate patients who
would benefit from taxane regimens from those who would suffer from added
side-effects without any improved response. Previous studies have
confirmed TLE3 is associated with a response to taxane therapy in breast
and ovarian cancers. Preclinical studies have also shown that TLR4, RAGE,
and HMGB1 confers chemo resistance to docetaxel on PC-3 human PC cells.
After obtaining IRB approval (protocol IUCRO-0499), 8 metastatic
castration resistant prostate cancer samples and 6 control samples were
pulled for this study after scrutinous review of the H&E slides from
clinical cases. This study then consisted of investigating the proteins
TLE3, TLR4, RAGE, and HMBG1. Immunostaining was performed using the
automated immunostainer, Dako FLEX System, and the slides were scanned
into the whole slide Aperio Scanscope CS digital imaging system.
Computer-assisted morphometric analysis of digital images was then
performed using the Aperio ImageScope software. Review of the TLE3 and
TLR4 expression in metastatic castration resistance prostate cancer
samples showed a difference between the expressions of these two
proteins. TLR4 positivity was found to be 43.88% higher than the
expression of TLE3. This is suggestive of resistance to docetaxel
treatments. Review of the RAGE and HMGB1 expression in metastatic
castration resistance prostate cancer samples compared to normal prostate
epithelium showed a 32.9% increase in RAGE and 36.6% increase in HMGB1
expression. The findings of this study are suggestive that there is a
possible correlation between the overexpression of these protein
biomarkers and the patient's response to a specific drug treatment.

