Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical implications for m-tyrosine, an isomer of p-tyrosine, for
the treatment of aggressive prostate tumors


Clinical and experimental evidence suggest that primary tumors may exert
a controlling action on its metastases. The phenomenon, by which a
tumor-bearing host is resistant to the growth of secondary tumor implants
and metastasis, is known as concomitant tumor resistance (CR).We have
previously showed in murine T-lymphoma (LB) tumors, that meta-tyrosine
(m-Tyr) an isomer of tyrosine not present in normal proteins, is the main
serum anti-tumoral factor responsible for CR. In this work, we assess for
the first time the CR phenomenon in human prostate cancer (PCa). Athymic
nude mice were inoculated with PC3 cells (primary implant) and after 14
days the animals received a second inoculation (secondary implant).
Strikingly, the growth of the secondary implant was significantly reduced
after 27 days, in animals carrying the primary xenograft. When
phenylalanine (Phe), a protective amino acid highly present in primary
tumors, and precursor of p-tyrosine, was periodically inoculated at the
site of a secondary tumor implant (otherwise inhibited by CR), this
secondary implant grew similarly to controls. On the contrary, when m-Tyr
was inoculated at the site of a primary tumor implant or systemically,
this implant did not grow. Tumor inhibition was associated with low
expression of Ki-67 and STAT3.In vitro analyses demonstrate the higher
inhibitory activity of the serum from tumor-bearing mice on PC3 cell
proliferation, compared to serum from control animals. m-Tyr could
account for most of the growth-inhibitory activity present in the serum.
Furthermore, we observed an increase in the frequency of Gr1+ CD11b+
MDSCs in bone marrow, spleen and lymph nodes from tumor-bearing mice
compared to control mice. This expansion correlated with a significantly
higher production of reactive oxygen species and enhanced suppressor
function upon CD8+ T cell proliferation. Further, in vitro studies also
showed that exposure of PC3 cells to m-Tyr inhibited cell growth, induced
G0/G1 cell cycle arrest, altered the expression levels of survivin, Ki67
and Hes1; impaired the NFB/STAT3 pathway and induced autophagy; effects
reversed by Phe treatment. Strikingly, m-Tyr periodic intravenous
administration provoked a dramatic reduction of experimental lung
metastases generated in mice bearing PC3 human tumors. Altogether, we
demonstrate for the first time that RC occurs in experimental human solid
tumors, that this effect is mediated by m-Tyr, a non-cytotoxic metabolite
with high potential clinical implications for metastatic PCa.

