Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of direct transplantation of colon cancer cells vs.
tumor xenografts using orthotopic mouse model for colon cancer
progression and metastasis


Orthotopic transplantation is the process of implantation of cancer cells
or tumor xenograft tissues into the organ of origin of the cancer. This
procedure enables cells to grow and proliferate in their natural
microenvironment. The orthotopic transplantation model has been observed
to be highly amenable to cancer cells and recapitulates the human disease
with high fidelity. Orthotopic transplantation is very common in clinical
cancer research using athymic nude mouse as a model system. A major
advantage of the orthotopic transplantation model is its ability to study
the development and progression of cancer metastasis. The identification
and therapeutic validation of anti-metastatic agents is of urgent need
since till date there are no effective anti-metastatic therapies
available for colon cancer.The procedure of xenograft transplant is time
consuming and costly because of the involvement of more number of mice.
Popular method for orthotopic transplant is to grow a subcutaneous tumor
injecting human cancer cells and then transplant a small piece of
xenograft to the immune deficient mouse for clinical study. In this
study, we directly injected the tumor cells below the sub-serosal layer
of the caecum to develop colorectal cancer bypassing the formation of
xenograft and its subsequent transplantation. We compared the
effectiveness in tumor progression and metastasis between the cell
transplant and xenograft implant to the caecum.GFP labelled HCT116 cells
were used for this study to develop colorectal cancer. First, we injected
8 million cells subcutaneously to the athymic nude mice to generate
xenograft for further transplant to the caecum. On another set of
experimental animals, a total of 2 million cells were directly injected
below the sub-serosal membrane to develop primary tumor on the colon.
Whole body GFP imaging revealed that within a week of transplantation of
cancer cells or xenografts, primary tumor starts to develop to the colon
and metastasized within 4-5 weeks after implantation. In both the cases,
we record a 100% of primary tumor formation with 50-60% liver and 75-80%
lung metastasis. To confirm the metastasis in liver and lung we studied
GAPDH expression on the tissues and conduct H&E /immunofluorescence
staining. Whole body or organ GFP imaging also reveals that pancreas,
kidney and associated intestinal lymph glands are severely affected by
both the orthotopic transplantation methods.In conclusion, direct
sub-serosal injection of cells to develop colorectal cancer primary and
metastatic deposits is cost effective and time saving and thus seems to
potentially have an advantage over xenograft transplant method.

