Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloid derived suppressor cells-mediated inflammation in
metastasis and cancer cachexia


Despite recent advances and better diagnostics, the major challenge is
that metastatic breast cancer is still incurable and remains leading
cause of cancer related death. Cachexia is considered to be a chronic
inflammatory syndrome which is defined by loss of skeletal muscle mass
(with or without loss of adipose mass), negative energy and metabolic
balance, and systemic inflammation. Cancer patients who develop cachexia
are more susceptible to infections and sepsis. Clinical studies suggest
that cachexia in cancer patients cannot be fully reversed by conventional
nutritional supports, which distinguishes this condition from anorexia.
Due to its complexity and lack of clinical biomarkers, currently there is
no standard treatment for these patients. Therefore cachexia remains a
largely underestimated and untreated condition. Nearly 60-80% of the
advanced/ metastatic cancer patients experience cachexia, a condition
that accounts for 20% of cancer-related deaths.Chronic inflammation has
been recognized as a risk factor contributing to the etiology of many
human malignancies. Accumulating evidence suggest that tumor infiltrating
immune cells (mainly myeloid origin) differentiate into cells that
promote tumor growth and metastasis via inducing a systemic inflammation.
Our preliminary studies suggest that systemic induction and infiltration
(tumor, bone marrow, spleen, liver, and lung) of myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) generate a pro-inflammatory micro-environment and
are a major source of inflammatory cytokines, many of which are
implicated in cancer cachexia. Using a murine breast cancer in a
syngeneic (immunocompetent) mouse model we show that metastatic (4T1)
murine tumor produce significantly higher level of inflammatory cytokines
and is able to induce systemic expansion and infiltration of MDSC
compared to non-metastatic murine tumor (EMT6). Furthermore, injection of
condition media from metastatic 4T1 tumor cells is also able to induce
MDSC expansion in vivo suggesting that tumor-produced factors play role
in this process. Moreover, we demonstrate the involvement of the
inflammatory cytokines in muscle wasting as shown by co-culture
experiments with C2C12 myoepithelial cells and analysed the expression of
cachexia markers such as E3 ubiquitin ligases Trim63 and Fbxo3,
Myh1(myosin heavy chain), Stat3 and NFkB pathway activation, and
elevation of pro-cachexia cytokines.Our preliminary studies demonstrated
that the monocytic MDSC induce EMT phenotype and contribute to the
dissemination of tumor cells while the granulocytic MDSC promote the
metastatic outgrowth, and present higher infiltration in the lungs. We
therefore propose that tumor-induced inflammatory cytokines play role in
induction of MDSC and further elevation of inflammatory markers leading
to metastasis and cancer cachexia.

