Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin mediated apoptosis in human neuroblastoma cells via ROS
and sphingolipid generation


Background:Neuroblastoma is the most common solid tumor of infancy and
third leading cause of cancer death in children. It has one of the lowest
survival rates of all pediatric cancers with less than 50% survival in
high risk disease. Curcumin is the active compound of the yellow spice
turmeric. Curcumin induces apoptosis and inhibits proliferation,
angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis in many human cancer cells. The
mechanism of cytotoxicity in neuroblastoma is unclear.Objectives:In this
study we investigated the effects of curcumin on SMS-KCNR and CHLA-20
human neuroblastoma cells.Methods:SMS-KCNR and CHLA-20 neuroblastoma,
cells were treated with increasing concentrations of curcumin. Cell
viability was determined by Alamar Blue assays. Real-time PCR analysis of
ER stress markers and apoptotic pathway genes was performed. Western
Blotting was also performed to examine the downstream signaling pathways.
Measurement of endogenous sphingolipids was performed by LC/MS.
Sphingolipid pathway enzyme activities were also
determined.Results:Curcumin was cytotoxic to both cell lines at 10 and 20
uM concentrations. PARP cleavage was noted at 24 hours, but cleavage of
caspases 3, 8 and 9 was not observed. Treatment with the pancaspase
inhibitor z-VAD did not reverse the cytotoxicity in curcumin treated
cells, confirming that curcumin induced cell death was
caspase-independent. Since perturbation in complex sphingolipid levels is
associated with apoptosis, LC/MS measurement of endogenous sphingolipids
was performed and showed increases in both dihydroceramides and
ceramides. The increases in endogenous dihydroceramides, indicated that
the dihydroceramide desaturase (DEGS-1) enzyme was inhibited. DEGS-1
activity was inhibited in-situ in a dose dependent manner in SMS-KCNR
cells. There was no change in the mRNA or protein levels of DEGS-1,
supporting that curcumin inhibited this enzyme indirectly. Next, the
mechanism of ceramide generation was investigated by measuring the
activity of sphingomyelin synthase (SMS) glycosylceramide synthase (GCS),
acid ceramidase, neutral ceramidase, acid sphingomyelinase and neutral
sphingomyelinase (SMase). At 6hrs, curcumin downregulated SMS activity by
30% and 54% GCS activity by 40% and 42% at concentrations of 10 and 20uM
respectively. Curcumin has been demonstrated to induce ROS generation.
Pre-treatment with the antioxidants N-acetylcysteine or glutathione
abrogated curcumin mediated apoptosis and sphingolipid generation in
SMS-KNCR cells. Furthermore, curcumin mediated SMS and GCS inhibition was
blocked by these antioxidants.Conclusions:ROS plays a key role in
sphingolopid and curcumin induced-cytotoxicity in neuroblastoma cells.
Modulation of sphingolipid signaling pathways may provide a more
effective and novel approach for the treatment of pediatric solid tumors.
Curcumin is a potential novel therapy for neuroblastoma.

