Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-tumor cell culture medium supports a high take rate and
improves culture growth rate in five tumor types


The efficiency of primary cell line derivation is inadequate, which
presents a substantial hurdle in the study of many solid tumor types. We
examined whether substitution of a novel multi-tumor cell culture medium
into existing cell culture protocols may improve the efficiency of
primary cell culture and cell line derivation.The multi-tumor medium RETM
(Renaissance Essential Tumor Medium) was initially screened for the
ability to achieve primary, extended, and continuous cultures from solid
tumors of the breast, lung, colon, prostate and ovary (serous and
endometrioid). A pan-cytokeratin antibody was then used to confirm
epithelial origin of the expanded cell lines. Performance of RETM was
compared to two established media types (RPMI, and Fallopian Tube Medium)
in extended primary culture of five high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC)
tumor samples isolated from patients ascites. Immunofluorescent staining
of Pax8, an important Mullerian lineage marker, was used to confirm the
purity and the expected lineage identity of the resulting cell lines. To
examine genetic drift, we performed SNP genotyping on the original tumor
and the cultured cells in our extended primary cultures of HGSC and our
continuous cultures from breast, lung, and colon. The resulting genotype
was then compared to the original tumor and the percent matching genotype
was determined.Of the six tumor types screened, five grew as long term
cultures. Without additional optimization of methodology in HGSC, RETM
supported a higher take rate (extended culture in 4 of 5 isolates versus
1 of 5 for established media types) as well as a 10-fold higher average
growth rate in the same four cases (RETM doublings/day: 0.309 versus
0.030 for RPMI [p = 0.004] and 0.023 for FTM [p = 0.001]). In all cases,
fibroblast overgrowth was ruled out by positive cytokeratin staining. The
genetic analysis demonstrated a high degree of fidelity in genotypes
between the patients tumors and the corresponding cell lines as follows:
DF30 (HGSC at 23 doublings) 99.7%; DF68 (HGSC at 25 doublings) 95.5%;
Wood (breast ductal and lobular carcinoma at 150 doublings) 98.3%; Jacket
(lung adenocarcinoma at 150 doublings) 87.2%; and Ferry (colon
adenocarcinoma at 30 doublings) 99.6%.We have shown for the first time
that a single cell culture medium can support establishment of long-term
cell lines established from a number of different tumor types including
breast, lung, colon, endometrioid ovarian, and HGSC. Our results
demonstrate that, compared to the current standard, RETM significantly
improves both culture take rate and growth rate of the extended HGSC
primary cultures. Together with the absence of cell culture crisis, the
maintenance of genotype across a large number of population doublings
indicate these cell lines are genetically stable and may be cultured to
higher passages with reduced concern for genetic drift.

