Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secreted anterior gradient-2 is a potential
tumor-microenvironment-related therapeutic target


The secreted anterior gradient-2 (AGR2) orthologs in amphibians are
critical signaling proteins in anterior specification and limb
regeneration. It is also overexpressed in diverse human cancers
especially adenocarcinomas. Although tumor-related functions of
intracellular AGR2 have been intensively investigated and several
AGR2-related signaling pathways have been identified, the full scope of
secreted AGR2 functions, especially the exact mechanism of actions,
remain insufficiently explored. Here we report that AGR2 induction after
SKOV3 xenograft inoculation is tumor microenvironment (TME) dependent.
This phenomenon can be mimic in vitro through serum deprivation but not
hypoxia treatment. In addition, the secreted AGR2 may in turn influence
the development of TME. It scatters the tumor cells and guides the nearby
vascular endothelial cells and fibroblasts toward the source of AGR2
through various degrees of crosstalk with VEGF and bFGF pathways.
Blocking the AGR2 inhibits the tumor growth and decreases the blood
vessel density in SKOV3 xenograft model. Our results show that exogenous
AGR2 binds specifically with VEGF and bFGF, and promotes their
dimerization. This binding enhances the phosphorylation signals, such as
ERK phosphorylation, induced by VEGF and bFGF, and promotes the VEGF- and
bFGF- dependent angiogenesis. We also find that heparin may reverse the
binding between bFGF and AGR2, indicating that dimerized bFGF that
promoted by AGR2 would be released when it is close to the cell surface
where heparin sulfate is abundant. Taken together, the present results
suggest that tumor-secreted AGR2 may activate the specific growth factors
surrounding the tumor cells to promote the angiogenesis and tumor growth,
and also act as a short-range chemoattractant to guide surrounding
vascular endothelial cells and fibroblasts toward tumor cells in building
the TME. This mechanism of action directly links the secreted AGR2 with
the cell signaling networks well-known in building TME. This may help to
further explain how tumor cells interact with and attract nearby
fibroblasts and blood vessel cells to form their microenvironment and
support their growth, suggesting a potential anti-TME target.

