Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting synthetic lethality with PARP inhibition in colorectal
cancer


Background:Small molecule poly ADP-ribose (PAR) polymerase (PARP)
inhibitors (PARPi) purportedly result in DNA damage and are promising
agents in the treatment of cancer. In a quest to identify best synthetic
lethality for treatment, we have screened various combination therapies
in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines. In addition, we have interrogated
if the presence of microsatellite instability (MSI) status favor
susceptibility of cells to synthetic lethality and thus acts as a
prognostic marker of combination therapy.Methods:Using the SRB assay, the
12 combinations of the PARPi, veliparib (V), rucaparib (R), olaparib (Ol)
and PJ34, and the cytotoxic drugs, irinotecan (I), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
and oxaliplatin (Ox) were screened in HCT116 and LIM2405 cell lines. We
assessed the effect of the combination using the CalcuSyn software for
combination index (CI). We next evaluated the effectiveness and sequence
dependence of combination in an additional 2 cell lines that had MSI
status (RKO and HCT15) and 2 that had microsatellite stable (MSS) status
(HT29 and SW837) and in 7 HCT116 isogenic lines (mutants of Bax, p21,
p53, PTEN, Kras and DNMT and wild type of PIK). The combination of I and
R was confirmed by FACS analysis in HCT116 and LIM2405.Results:Ol and R
showed synergy in combination with I, whereas, V and PJ34 showed
antagonism with Ox, including in Ox-sensitive cells. Single agent
cytotoxicity was observed at 200nM for R, whereas V required more than
30uM. Early PARP-1 protein upregulation was observed upon Ox
administration; but the changes were not reversed with either R or V.
Nevertheless, R at 200nM and V 1uM significantly reduced PAR formation in
Ox-sensitive cell lines. FACS analysis showed S phase arrest in SW837
(MSS) (p = 0.03) whereas G2-M arrest was observed in LIM2405 (MSI)
(non-significant) upon treatment with R 400nM and I 200nM. In addition,
studies using isogenic cell lines revealed the importance of p21, p53 and
PTEN in exerting synergistic effect while combining R and I.
Administration of I prior to R (24h each) was more cytotoxic than vice
versa and simultaneous treatment in MSI cell lines.Conclusion:Among the
various combinations studied, R with I was the most synergistic. The
effect appears to be more pronounced when I precedes R, particularly in
MSI cell lines. Alteration in cell cycle is MSI status dependent. Further
work to identify mechanism of synergy is ongoing.

