Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine-mediated regulation of Sox2 and stemness in non-small
cell lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in both men and women,
and is highly correlated with cigarette smoking. Nicotine, the addictive
component of tobacco smoke, cannot initiate tumors, but can promote
proliferation, migration, and invasion of cells in vitro and promote
growth and metastasis of tumors in vivo. More recently, nicotine has been
implicated in the promoting self-renewal of stem-like side-population
cells from lung cancers. This subpopulation of cancer stem-like cells has
been implicated in tumor initiation, generation of entire heterogeneous
tumor population, metastasis, dormancy, and drug resistance. We have
shown that nicotine promotes the expression of genes that promote
stemness, such as Stem Cell Factor (SCF/c-kit ligand), in a specific
receptor dependent fashion. Here we demonstrate that nicotine can induce
the expression of embryonic stem cell factor Sox2, which is indispensable
for self-renewal and maintenance of stem cell properties in non-small
cell lung adenocarcinoma cells. High level of Sox2 expression also
correlates with poor patient survival outcome in lung cancer, and
metastatic lung adenocarcinoma shows higher levels of Sox2 expression
than primary tumor or normal tissue, implicating Sox2 in this disease.
Nicotine was found to induce Sox2 in A549 cells after 18 and 24 hours of
stimulation, an effect which was diminished by 48 hours. This was seen at
the mRNA and protein level as assessed by transient transfection and
luciferase assay, real-time PCR, western blot, and immunofluorescence
respectively. Experiments were conducted to elucidate the mechanism by
which nicotine induces Sox2; it was found that siRNA mediated depletion
of 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR), the Hippo pathway effector
Yap1, or the transcriptional repressor ID1 could abrogate
nicotine-mediated induction of Sox2. Further, treatment with inhibitors
of Src kinase or PI3K additionally abrogated the effect, suggesting these
proteins play a role in nicotine-mediate induction of Sox2.
Interestingly, nicotine could induce Sox2 expression in human mesenchymal
stem cells (hMSCs) after 24 hours of stimulation as seen by
immunofluorescence and real-time PCR, and this effect was abrogated by
treatment with inhibitors to Src kinase, PI3K, Yap1, or 7 nAChR.
Additionally, studies are under way to elucidate whether e-cigarettes or
flavored tobacco, newer and less studied alternatives to traditional
cigarettes, have similar effects on stemness. These studies can be
expected to have a direct impact on our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms involved in the initiation, growth, and metastasis of
non-small cell lung cancer, especially in smokers and tobacco users.

