Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of catechol moiety-containing natural compounds as
direct ERK2 inhibitors by in vitro kinase assay and co-crystallography


Catechol (pyrocathechol, 1,2-dihydroxybenzene) is a chemical that is used
by industry in the manufacture of certain products. Many natural
compounds contain catechol as a functional group found in various fruits
and vegetables such as apple, apricot, grape, bananas, soybean, peanut,
pear, plum, mango, avocado, and mushroom. Extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 2 (ERK2), a protein kinase that belongs to MAPK family, modulates
many important functions such as cell growth, apoptosis and
transcriptional regulation in cancer. The expression levels of ERK2 mRNA
and protein are reportedly very high in many human cancers, including
leukemia, colon, breast, lung and skin cancer. Previously, we reported
that norathyriol and caffeic acid, which possess the catechol moiety, and
catechol itself directly bind and inhibit ERK2 kinase activity. Those
findings led us to test catechol moiety-containing natural compounds,
luteolin, quercetin, fisetin, 7,3,4-trihydroxyisoflavone, and cyanidin,
against ERK2 kinase activity. We found that all of these compounds
directly bind to ERK2 and inhibit its activity. We further confirmed the
results by resolving a co-crystal structure of ERK2 bound with luteolin
in the ATP binding site. To apply this finding to cancer, the effect of
the compounds was tested on the K562 human myelogenous leukemia cell line
where ERK2 is highly expressed and knock-down of the protein reduced
anchorage-independent growth. Five newly-found ERK2 inhibitors (luteolin,
quercetin, fisetin, 7,3,4-trihydroxyisoflavone and cyanidin) and three
known ERK2 inhibitors (norathyriol, caffeic acid and catechol) decreased
cell viability of K562 at 40 M. When the eight compounds were used at the
same dose in combination (5 M each and 40 M total), the mixture inhibited
ERK2 and reduced cell viability of K562 cells. In summary, using in vitro
kinase assays and co-crystallography, we identified new ERK2 inhibitors
that contain the catechol functional group, and showed anti-cancer
effects of the compounds by cell viability assay and soft agar assay.
This work impacts the cancer prevention community by showing that many
natural compounds can work together targeting ERK2, an important target
in cancer.

