Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of age, sex, colorectal cancer status, and mutation
carrier status on physical activity in families with Lynch syndrome


Lynch syndrome (LS) is due to inherited mutations that impair DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) and predispose mutation carriers to an increased
risk of colorectal (CRC) and other cancers. Physical activity (PA)
reduces risk for sporadic CRC but little is known about the effect of PA
on CRC risk in LS. We examined the influence of demographic and clinical
characteristics on PA in LS mutation carriers and their unaffected
relatives.Self-reported PA data by decades of life: during the 20's
(early), 30-40's (mid), and 50's and older (late) decades, from a
retrospective cohort of LS subjects and their relatives enrolled in the
Colon Cancer Family Registry were analyzed. Metabolic equivalent (MET) PA
values were derived for each activity and standardized to MET hours/week.
Mean PA by decade was compared across 3 groups: MMR mutation carriers
(MMR+) with and without cancer, and non-carrier relatives (MMR-).We
analyzed 3,261 subjects (1,413 MMR-, 1052 MMR+ with no CRC and 796 MMR+
with CRC). PA was inversely associated with age. Men had higher levels of
PA in the early and mid-decades than women. In their 20s, MMR- women had
higher levels of PA on average than MMR+ women but there were no
significant differences by MMR or CRC status in the mid and later
decades. For men, there was no difference in mean PA by MMR+ status in
the early or mid-decades, but in the later decades, MMR- men had higher
PA than MMR+. Furthermore, mean PA in the mid-decades was significantly
higher in MMR+ men with CRC than MMR+ with no CRC.In this descriptive
analysis, men and women had higher levels of PA at younger ages, although
men exercised more than women in the early and mid-decades. Levels of
mean PA were comparable for MMR+ men and women with and without CRC
except in the mid-decades where MMR+ men with CRC had higher levels of PA
than MMR+ men without CRC. Recall bias for higher PA in CRC cases cannot
be ruled out.Comparison of mean physical activity in early, mid and late
decades of life by sex, MMR mutation carrier status, and colorectal
cancer status
*starred pairs indicate a significant (p*starred pairs indicate a
significant (p<0.05) difference in mean MET hours/week of PA between the
groups

