Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of exosomal surface marker derived from Ewing
sarcoma cells


Introduction: Exosomes are small vesicles that are secreted by a
multitude cell types. Recent studies have identified that circulating
exosomes play an important role in tumor develompment and provide
perspectives in novel diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. In this
study, we investigated the surface protein on the tumor-derived exosomes
by proteome analysis to utilize for a new biomarker of Ewing
sarcoma.Methods: Exosomes was collected from the culture medium of two
Ewing sarcoma cells (SKES1, RDES) and human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC)
by gel filtration (EVsecond) and ultracentrifugation. Exosomes extracted
from each cell line were checked by transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and Nanosight, a nanoparticle-tracking system. Global analysis of
exosomal surface proteins were performed by liquid chromatography and
mass spectrometry (LC/MS), then ES specific protein candidates were
validated by immunoblot and ExoScreen for exosomes extracted by
ultracentrifugation, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for
exosomes extracted by EVsecond.Results: Extracellular vesicles from ES
cells were obtained by ultracentrifugation and EVSecond. TEM and
Nanosight showed that the size of extracted exosomes derived from ES
cells were 40-100 nm in diameter. Proteomic analysis detected 287
proteins from SKES-derived exosomes, 256 proteins from RDES-derived
exosomes, and 133 proteins from hMSC-derived exosomes by LC/MS. We
identified CD99 as entrapped protein on the exosomes derived from ES
cells. For validation study, we performed immunoblot analysis that CD9,
CD63, CD81 and CD99 were detected in ES-derived exosomes. Furthermore,
immunogold TEM detected CD81 and CD99 on the exosomal surface. Next, we
performed ELISA to detect the CD9 and CD99 on the surface of ES-derived
exosomes purified by EVsecond. Finally, we identified that ExoScreen,
that has been clinically useful, was able to detect ES-derived exosomes,
which expressed CD9, CD63 and CD99 on their surface.Discussion and
conclusion: Although the EWS-FLI1 oncogenic activity is increased by CD99
in ES, no study, to date, has reported that CD99 is on the tumor-derived
exosomes and circulating in the patients serum. This study demonstrates
that exosomes derived from ES cells can be detected by the CD99 surface
marker, providing the possibility of the exosome as a novel biomarker for
liquid biopsy.

