Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of N-cadherin in connexin 43 mediated gap junctional
formation between dormant breast cancer cells and bone marrow mesenchymal
and stromal cells


Breast cancer (BC) remains a clinical problem. This is partly due to the
existence of dormant BC cells (BCCs) in the bone marrow (BM) that could
resurge decades after cancer remission. Cancer stem cells (CSCs)
establish themselves in cycling quiescence within the BM microenvironment
by forming gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) with
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and the hematopoietic supporting stroma.
MiRNAs can be exchanged between the CSCs and other BM cells through the
gap junction to impart cycling quiescence of the CSCs. Although the CSCs
express several members of the connexin (Cx) family of proteins, GJIC
between CSCs and BM cells requires Cx43. Preventing the formation of GJIC
between CSCs and endogenous BM cells enhanced cycle of the BCCs with
enhanced chemosensitivity. Since Cx43 is also involved in hematopoietic
regulation, in order to identify targets to reverse dormancy, this study
investigated the molecular mechanisms by which Cx43 is regulated,
including the role of N-cadherin as a facilitator of GJIC between CSCs
and BM cells. CSCs are epithelial-mesenchymal cells (EMT) and therefore
express N-cadherin. In other studies Cx43 has been shown to interact with
N-cadherin to facilitate the movement of Cx43 to the cell membrane. To
this end, we hypothesize that the intracellular complex formed by
N-cadherin and Cx43 in CSCs is regulated by the chemokine CXCL-12.
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and T47D were stimulated with different levels of
CXCL12. At different times, the expression of N-cadherin was studied by
real time PCR, confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. The results showed
CXCL12 regulated both N-cadherin and Cx43. However, the outcome on their
expression depended on the invasiveness of the tumor. Direct interaction
between N-cadherin and Cx43 was demonstrated by time-line tracking for
co-localization, molecular modeling and immunoprecipitation. In summary,
this study showed that co-localization of N-cadherin and Cx43 is
controlled by low level of CXC12. Ongoing studies are investigating how
these findings affect GJIC between CSCs and BM stroma/MSCs.

