Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The exosomes derived from BM-hMSCs home to glioma and deliver
synthetic microRNA mimics after systemic administration


Glioblastoma is the most malignant type of glioma (World Health
Organization grade 4) and has a median survival time of only 14.6 months
even after the standard treatment of surgical resection followed by
radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide administration.
Although some novel and promising anti-glioma agents have been developed,
therapeutic advancement has remained disappointing due to the lack of
efficient delivery tools. Here we focused on exosomes derived from
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as carriers to deliver biological
therapeutic agents for the treatment of gliomas. These exosomes are
expected to cross the blood-brain barrier and selectively home to the
glioma tissue, similar to the parental cells (MSCs). Additionally, MSCs
could produce sufficient amounts of exosomes on a clinically applicable
scale. Thus, MSC exosomes present a potentially ideal cell-free delivery
vehicle for glioma therapy.We hypothesized that exosomes derived from
human bone marrow-derived MSCs (BM-hMSCs) can target gliomas and can be
used as delivery vehicles following systemic administration. In this
study, we employed microRNA (miR-128) as the therapeutic cargo, and
exosomes were isolated from a cultured media of BM-hMSCs using
ultracentrifugation. At first, exosomes labeled with fluorescent dye were
incubated with glioma cells, and exosomes taken up by glioma cells were
evaluated by confocal fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. Labeled
exosomes were also systemically injected into a glioma xenograft model
and the ability to home to glioma tissue was evaluated by an in vivo
imaging system and histological study. The results showed that MSC
exosomes can be taken up by glioma cells and can home to glioma tissues.
Next, we cultured miR-128-enriched MSC exosomes with glioma cells. To
check the function of miR-128 delivered to glioma cells by MSC exosomes,
the down-regulation of the BMI-1 target gene of miR128 was evaluated
using real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blot analyses. We
also systemically injected these exosomes into glioma xenograft models
and evaluated the function of miR-128 by analyzing the downregulation of
BMI-1 at the tumor site and the animal survival time in vivo. We
confirmed that miR-128 delivered by MSC exosomes could function at the
target site both in vitro and in vivo.These results indicate that MSC
exosomes may be an ideal delivery vehicle for the treatment of gliomas,
especially for microRNA replacement therapy.

