Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An orally bioavailable and selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1
& 2 inhibitor enhances retinoic acid mediated differentiation of
neuroblastoma


INTRODUCTION: Neuroblastoma (NB) is an extra-cranial solid cancer and is
among the most common cancers in infants less than 1 year of age, with
650 new cases each year in the United States. Half of the children with
NB have high risk disease and 20-50% of those will fail to respond
adequately to current therapies, illustrating an urgent unmet medical
need. Current treatment for high-risk disease is aggressive, including
chemotherapy, surgery, radiation with stem cell transplant,
anti-GD2/cytokine immunotherapy and retinoic acid (RA) treatment. RA is a
pro-differentiation agent that slows growth and promotes cell death. A
gene expression pattern associated with RA-induced NB differentiation was
identified, and chemical inhibition of HDAC1/2 was shown to induce a
similar expression pattern.METHODS: In this work, we examine the activity
of an orally bioavailable HDAC1/2 inhibitor (HDAC1/2i) on NB cell
differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. RA combined with HDAC1/2i
enhances gene expression patterns associated with differentiation, slows
cellular proliferation and more rapidly induces dendrite formation than
RA can achieve alone. The mechanisms leading to the differentiated
phenotype were examined by RT-PCR, gene expression microarray and
retinoic acid receptor (RAR) chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
high-througput sequening (ChIP-Seq).RESULTS: HDAC1/2i and RA together
caused increased localization of the RAR to its own RAR and RAR promoter
regions, and increased in RAR mRNA and protein relative to the RA
treatment condition alone. Additionally, expression of Cyp26, an enzyme
responsible for clearing intercellular RA, was reduced in the combination
setting. Gene set enrichment analysis of the microarray data comparing
the combination setting against RA as a single agent suggested that the
addition of HDAC1/2i enhanced apoptotic pathways and decreased E2F driven
cell cycle signaling.We confirmed enhanced apoptosis in the combination
setting by measuring caspase 3 and PARP cleavage. Consistent with this
finding, we observed reduced proliferation, increased sub-G1 cell
frequency in cell cycle assays and ablation of emergent RA-resistant NB
colonies after combination treatment. Further, combination treatment
reduced the E2F-activators CDK4 and CDK6 at the protein level while the
CDK inhibitor, p21, was dramatically increased. Hypo-phosphorylation of
retinoblastoma protein, directly linked to E2F complex inactivation, was
also observed and consistent with reduced proliferation and the decreased
frequency of S-phase cells observed in EDU incorporation assays.
Xenograft models of NB with RA and HDAC1/2i are in progress, as are
HDAC1, HDAC2, acetylated histone H3K9 ChIP-seq experiments, and will be
discussed. Taken together, these findings support a role for selective
HDAC1/2i in combination with RA for the treatment of patients with high
risk NB.

