Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA decrease oncogenic PGE2 in
medulloblastoma in vitro and in vivo


Background: The embryonic brain tumor medulloblastoma is a highly
malignant tumor of the cerebellum and the most common CNS malignancy of
childhood. By combining neurosurgery, chemotherapy and radiation overall
survival is about 70% but the intensive treatment regimen often leads to
severe neurological sequelae and the risk of resistant relapses is
significant. Hence, there is a need to improve treatment to reduce and
alleviate late side effects.Inflammation plays an important role in the
tumor microenvironment by suppressing immune response, promoting
angiogenesis, facilitating tumor invasion, and metastasis. Prostaglandin
E2 (PGE2) is a pro-inflammatory lipid mediator derived from the omega-6
fatty acid arachidonic acid (AA) through conversion by the key enzymes
COX-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1). Previous work
from our group showed that medulloblastomas express high levels of COX-2
and mPGES-1 as well as all four PGE2 receptors (EP1-4) and most
importantly that PGE2 promotes tumor proliferation.The -3 fatty acids
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) show
anti-inflammatory characteristics in general and exert anti-tumoral
properties in several cancer types. Here we investigate the potential
role of DHA and EPA in treatment of medulloblastoma and their effect on
prostaglandins in vitro and in vivo.Methods: In six medulloblastoma cell
lines the cytotoxic activity of DHA and EPA was analyzed using cell
viability assays. PGE2 levels were assessed in three medulloblastoma cell
supernatants after 24 hrs of DHA treatment by ELISA. The prostaglandins
were evaluated in human medulloblastoma xenografts in nude mice treated
with DHA or a combination of DHA and EPA for 30 days from time of tumor
take. Control mice were fed with normal chow. The levels of
prostaglandins in the tumor tissue were analyzed with LC-MS/MS.
Furthermore, the incorporation of fatty acids in tumors, erythrocytes and
brain tissue was analyzed with GC-MS/MS.Results: Both DHA and EPA exerted
cell toxicity in a dose dependent manner in vitro. DHA reduced the PGE2
production in all three cell lines investigated. In vivo, the treatment
with DHA alone and the combination of DHA and EPA significantly increased
the omega-3 index in tumors, erythrocytes and normal brain. The PGE2, and
prostacyclin was significantly reduced in both treatment groups while
thromboxane levels remained unchanged. The in vivo treatment was
non-toxic.Conclusions: Lowering the pro-inflammatory PGE2 levels could
mitigate the ongoing inflammation in the tumor microenvironment. We show
that the omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA exert toxic effects on
medulloblastoma cells in vitro and reduce PGE2 both in vitro and in vivo.
We propose that DHA and EPA are interesting candidates to improve current
medulloblastoma therapy.

