Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynarrestin, a novel dynein inhibitor that does not block
ciliogenesis


Introduction: Aberrant hedgehog (Hh) pathway activation contributes to
the pathogenesis of multiple cancers. Currently available Hh pathway
inhibitors target Smoothened (Smo) which can acquire mutations causing
drug resistance. Therefore, a major challenge is to identify compounds
that inhibit Hh signaling downstream of Smoothened.Methods: We conducted
a high-throughput screening (HTS) campaign of 337,000 small molecules
using a Hh-dependent differentiation assay of C3H10T1/2 cells into
osteoclasts. Primary active screening hits were validated by a cell-based
assay cascade including motor neuron differentiation from mouse embryonic
stem cells, Gli reporter activation in ShhLight2 cells and proliferation
of heterozygous Patched (PTCH+/-) medulloblastoma (MB) cells. Smo binding
was monitored in membrane-based Cyclopamine competition assays. To
identify the underlying target identification of promising hits, affinity
chromatography was performed followed by label-free quantitative (LFQ)
tandem mass spectrometry. Effects on cytoplasmic dynein were examined in
Smo trafficking and in vitro microtubules motility assays as well as by
live cell imaging of labeled endosome movement.Results: We identified
dynarrestin, a novel aminothiazole that potently blocks Hh signaling and
the proliferation of Hh-dependent PTCH+/- MB tumor cells (IC5070nM).
Dynarrestin does not bind to Smo and is able to suppress the Hh pathway
in the presence of the Smo agonist SAG and following the knockdown of the
Hh pathway suppressor SUFU indicating that dynarrestin inhibits Hh
signaling downstream of both Smo and SUFU. Chemical LFQ proteomics
identified cytoplasmic dynein as the target of dynarrestin. Dyneins
convert energy from ATP hydrolysis into motor activity and are essential
for many cellular processes, including Hh signaling. Unlike other dynein
inhibitory molecules, e.g. Ciliobrevins, dynarrestin inhibits Smoothened
trafficking but not ciliogenesis. We further demonstrate that dynarrestin
reversibly interferes with endosome movement, proper mitotic spindle
orientation, and dynein-based microtubule translocation in vitro without
blocking ATP hydrolysis.Conclusions: Dynarrestin provides a novel dynein
inhibitor with distinct specificity that uniquely facilitates probing
dynein function. Given its multiple contributions to Hh signaling,
mitosis and other cellular events, dynein remains a highly attractive
target for medicinal chemistry programs aimed at exploiting and
modulating its complex, poorly understood chemical cycle to interfere
with different aspects of activity and function. We believe that
unraveling dynein-dependent cellular processes by dynarrestin has great
potential for development into novel anti-cancer drugs controlling Hh
signaling downstream of Smoothened.

