Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor-2-derived from cancer-associated
fibroblasts stimulates proliferation and migration of human breast cancer
cells


Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) constitute a major compartment of
the tumor microenvironment. CAFs produce a variety of cytokines, growth
factors and extracellular matrix proteins, thereby stimulating tumor
progression. CAFs are distinct from normal fibroblasts for their
overexpression of -smooth muscle actin and fibroblast specific protein-1.
Recent studies suggest that CAFs play an important role in proliferation
and migration of cancer cells through crosstalk with them.In the present
study, we investigated the role for CAFs in proliferation and migration
of breast cancer cells and underlying molecular mechanisms.When
triple-negative human mammary MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with the
conditioned medium (CM) collected from cultured CAFs, the cell viability
and migration were significantly elevated. Furthermore, these cells
manifest a more proliferative phenotype, exhibiting enhanced mRNA
expression of cycinD1, c-Myc and PCNA as well as increased
phosphorylation of Akt and STAT3.In addition, MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited
elevated expression of proliferative and invasive genes including MMP2
and MMP9 when incubated with CAFs in the indirect co-culture system.
Notably, mRNA levels of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2),
stromal-derived factor-1, interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 detected in
CAFs were higher than those in normal fibroblasts of the same patients.
In contrast, FGF2 was expressed at a relatively low level in breast
cancer cells. FGF2 exerts its biological effects by binding to and
activating FGF receptor (FGFR), a subfamily of cell surface receptor
tyrosine kinases. Notably, the expression of FGFR1 was up-regulated in
triple-negative breast cancer cells including MDA-MB-231 cells while
another major FGF2-corresponding receptor FGFR2 was rarely expressed.
Therefore, we focused on FGF2-FGFR1 signaling in the context of paracrine
communication between breast cancer cells and CAFs. CAF-stimulated
MDA-MB-231 cell migration as well as FGFR1 expression was abolished when
FGF2-neutralizing antibody was added to the CAF-CM. In addition,
treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with FGF2 induced the phosphorylation of
FRS2 and Akt. FGF2-induced cell migration and up-regulation of cyclinD1
expression were abrogated by siRNA-mediated FGFR1 silencing. Furthermore,
FGF2 promotes nuclear localization of FGFR1. Taken together, above
findings suggest that secretion of FGF2 by CAFs stimulates proliferation
and migration of breast cancer cells through interaction with FGFR1 which
may contribute to human breast cancer progression.

