Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of 5FU chemotherapy and oncolytic adenovirus in
combined cancer treatment


Previous studies have shown that Interferon(IFN)-based chemoradiation
therapy can improve survival after resection of pancreas cancer. However,
its clinical utility to this point has been limited due to the severe
toxicity related to its use of systemic IFN. Our aim in this study is to
evaluate our group's novel oncolytic adenovirus (OAd) which allows
targeting IFN treatment to cancer cells while sparing healthy tissue. We
have previously shown the ability of IFN to sensitize cancer cells to
chemotherapy as well as demonstrated an increased therapeutic effect of
the drug in immunocompetent models. This study was conducted to analyze
the combination of 5FU chemotherapy and our OAd in vitro in order to
assess the interaction of treatments and determine the optimum combined
treatment regimen.Treatments were analyzed in pancreatic cancer and
esophageal adenocarcinoma cell lines S2013 and OE19. Recombinant OAds
expressing luciferase rather than IFN were used to isolate the
combination of 5FU and the virus. Two viral models were evaluated: our
therapeutic virus (Cox2) selectively replicative in Cox2 expressing
cancer cells and a nearly identical but universally replicative virus
(wild type). Cells were treated with 0, 1 or 10 viral particles per cell
and 0, 5, 10, or 20 uM 5FU. Three timing regimens were used: simultaneous
administration, 5FU 4 hours before virus, and virus 48 hours before 5FU.
Crystal Violet and MTS Assays were used to measure cell death. Viral Copy
number to assess viral replication was measured using qPCR.Cell death
analysis showed time dependent killing of each virus, with a 2 day delay
for the Cox2 virus. 5FU and each virus produced dose dependent cell death
independently. There was a significant additive effect seen in cell death
from combining treatments when using 5FU before virus in both S2013 and
OE19. Simultaneous treatment showed an additive killing effect with the
combination in S2013, but a reduced killing by the combination compared
to virus alone in OE19. There was also reduced killing when using virus
before 5FU in S2013. Viral copy experiments are in progress.Our Cox2 OAd
shows a killing effect similar to wild type in multiple cancer cell
lines. When combined with 5FU treatment the expected addition in overall
cell death from the independent treatments varies by timing of
administrations as well as by type of cancer cell line. The reduced
killing of the combination treatment in the simultaneous and virus before
5FU regimens may suggest an inhibition of the virus by 5FU under certain
conditions. This also suggests the possibility of a treatment regimen
with optimal therapeutic effect, which appears to be 5FU before virus
based on the results collected. Further studies investigating different
chemotherapeutic drugs and regimens should be conducted to examine these
trends.

