Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Landscape of somatic mutations in DNA repair genes in prostate
cancer


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is a genetic disease that is characterized by
multiple genomic alterations. Studies have shown that there is increasing
associations between DNA repair genes and PCa. Previously we have
reported somatic mutations in Polb and Polk enzymes that are critical for
base excision repair and translesion DNA synthesis respectively. In the
present study we identified frequently mutated genes that are involved in
DNA repair pathway by sequencing all exons of DNA repair pathway genes
(129). A total of 57 tumors with matched non tumor tissue was used.
Tumors include 24 Caucasians, 21 African Americans (AA). PCa tumors that
were 6 gleason score and 50% of viable tumor cells were only included.
All the PCa were procured from Tulane University (TU) Hospital, New
Orleans and ethical approvals were obtained from the TU Local Research
Ethical Committee. Genomic DNA from tumors was using agilent SureSelect
kit was customized to enrich the target that contained all exons of 129
genes of DNA repair pathways. Samples were sent for sequencing by
Illumina HiSeq 2000. We validated experimentally somatic mutations in
genes that were either affected by somatic non-synonymous or synonymous
mutations with a frequency significantly greater than background rates
(P8) in AA and Caucasians revealed that 12 mutations per tumor for
Gleason score 6, versus 22.3 mutations for Gleason 8, 9 or 10. Due to the
limitation of samples with gleason score 6 in both races we could not
draw a trend individually. Analysis of mutation spectra across the DNA
repair genes revealed that C> T transitions (27%) markedly higher in AA
PCa followed by T > C transitions (24%). Interestingly in Caucasians PCa
C > T transitions (26.8%) were higher including marked increase of C > A
(17%) and T > G (17%) transversions. Understanding the mutational changes
at the individual patient level could enable personalized treatment and
patient selection based on tumor mutational profile for clinical drug
testing might be critical for development of new treatments strategies.
Support PC094628, and NIH grant 8 P20 GM103518

