Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIF11 silencing or inhibition induces chromosome instability


Chromosome Instability (CIN) is defined as an increase in the rate at
which whole chromosomes or large parts are gained or lost. CIN is not
only associated with virtually all tumor types, but it is associated with
aggressive tumors, the acquisition of multi-drug resistance and
consequently poor patient prognosis. Despite these associations, the
genes and molecular defects that contribute to CIN are only poorly
understood. Recently, we performed a high content screen that identified
KIF11, a microtubule associated motor protein, as a candidate CIN gene.
Here, we couple RNAi-based gene silencing with biochemistry and cell
biology to show that diminished KIF11 expression and/or function induce
CIN. HCT116 cells were employed, as they are a karyotypically stable
colorectal cancer cell line of epithelial origin that has been used for
similar CIN studies. KIF11 was either silenced (both individual and
pooled siRNA duplexes) or inhibited (Monostrol) and expression levels
were determined by Western blots. To determine whether KIF11 silencing or
inhibition affects DNA content, two phenotypes frequently associated with
CIN, namely increases in nuclear area and micronucleus formation were
evaluated. Fluorescence microscopy was employed on DAPI-counterstained
samples and revealed statistically significant increases both nuclear
area and micronucleus formation following KIF11 silencing and inhibition
relative to controls. Next, flow cytometry was performed on propidium
iodide labeled samples to assess whether increases in DNA content were
associated with the changes in nuclear area. As predicted, increases in
the proportion of cells with >G2/M DNA content occurred within the KIF11
silenced populations. Finally, mitotic chromosome spreads were generated
and chromosomes were manually enumerated from 100 spreads per
condition/control. Subsequent Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests identified
statistically significant increases in the cumulative distribution
frequencies of mitotic chromosome numbers within the spreads generated
from the KIF11 silenced cells relative to controls. To extend our
findings beyond the colorectal cancer cell context employed above,
analogous studies were performed in hTERT cells (karyotypically stable
fibroblast cell line) with very similar results. Collectively, these data
indicate that KIF11 expression and function are normally required to
maintain genome integrity. They further suggest that the loss of KIF11
expression and/or function may be a contributing factor in the etiology
of tumorigenesis in colorectal cancer and perhaps other tumor types as
well.

