Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer cell-induced differentiation of human monocytes
into MDSCs ex vivo is inhibited by targeting STAT3


Background: The transcription factor Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription Factor 3 (STAT3) is implicated in acquired drug resistance,
metastases and immune suppression in prostate cancer and is a potential
target in drug-resistant prostate cancer. Today, the treatment options
for metastatic drug-resistant prostate cancer are very limited and
existing immunotherapies have so far shown low efficacy. Cancer cells may
avoid immune responses by expressing immunosuppressive markers or
activating immunosuppressive cells. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSC) play a major role in the suppression of antitumor immunity and
active STAT3 signaling has been shown to be involved in the
immunosuppressive functions of these cells. Elevated levels of MDSC have
been found in the peripheral blood and at the tumor site of prostate
cancer patients and to correlate with disease progression.Aims: In this
study we aimed to investigate if human monocytes could be induced to
differentiate into immunosuppressive cells in the presence of prostate
cancer cells and if this effect could be blocked by the STAT3 inhibitor
GPA500 (galiellalactone).Methods: Monocytes were isolated from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from healthy human donors using a magnetic
monocyte enrichment kit. Monocytes were co-cultured with the prostate
cancer cell lines DU145, LNCaP or longterm IL6 treated LNCaP cells
(LNCaP-IL6+) in transwells allowing cancer cells and monocytes to share
culture medium. The co-cultures were grown for three days with or without
the STAT3 inhibitor GPA500 (5 uM or 10 uM) with subsequent analysis by
flow cytometry for cell surface markers of MDSC differentiation (CD14+
HLA-DRlo). The presence of active STAT3 (pSTAT3) in the prostate cancer
cell lines was determined by Western blot.Results: Monocytes in the
presence of DU145 and LNCaP-IL6+ cells showed a significantly increased
population of CD14+ HLA-DRlo cells. In the presence of GPA500 the
induction of this population was inhibited in a dose dependent manner
compared to untreated cells. Co-culture with LNCaP cells that lack pSTAT3
did not induce this population in monocytes after three days in culture.
Furthermore, GPA500 induced a dendritic cell-like population in monocytes
in the absence of prostate cancer cell co-culture. This population was
also observed in monocytes when co-cultured with LNCaP-IL6+ cells, but
not in DU145 co-cultures, with GPA500 present.Conclusion: The prostate
cancer cell lines DU145 and LNCaP-IL6+ were able to induce a monocyte
population displaying MDSC markers and this induction could be inhibited
by the STAT3 inhibitor GPA500.Impact: This study demonstrates that
inhibiting the transcription factor STAT3 in prostate cancer could
potentially reverse the immunosuppressive mechanisms caused by MDSC
activation and that STAT3 inhibitors, alone or in combination with other
therapies, could be a new treatment option for prostate cancer.

