Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manufacturing and characterization of KTE-C19 in a multicenter
trial of subjects with refractory aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL)
(ZUMA-1)


Introduction: KTE-C19 is an autologous anti-CD19 CAR T cell product that
is being studied in a phase 2 multicenter trial (ZUMA-1, NCT02348216). We
developed a robust and efficient manufacturing process to support this
trial, and compared the characteristics of the starting lymphocytes to
resultant CAR T cells.Methods: After apheresis and PBMC enrichment, cells
were activated with anti-CD3 antibody and cultured in serum free medium.
T cells were transduced with a retroviral vector encoding the CAR gene,
expanded to achieve a target dose and cryopreserved. The product CAR T
cells and the starting PBMCs were evaluated by flow cytometry.Results: 7
subjects were dosed in the phase 1 portion of the trial. KTE-C19 was
successfully manufactured at a dose of 2 106/kg (minimum 1 106/kg) for
all subjects. All lots contained mainly CD3+ T cells (median 97%;
94-99%). While there was inter-subject variability in PBMC and CAR T cell
product characteristics, the CD8/CD4 T cell ratios in PBMC and
corresponding CAR product were similar (Table 1). T cells in PBMC from
patients with NHL contained a majority of effector memory (36%) and
effector T cells (27%), however, T cells in KTE-C19 contained a majority
of central memory (37%) and effector memory (42%) CAR+ T cells. These CAR
T cells were active and objective responses occurred in 5/7
patients.Conclusions: A KTE-C19 dose was successfully produced for all
subjects. The optimized manufacturing process generated clinically active
CAR T cells with a less differentiated phenotype than T cells in the
starting PBMC population. Less differentiated cells likely confer
preferred product characteristics based on preclinical studies. This
manufacturing process is robust and well suited for multicenter clinical
trials.
Comparative analysis of T cells from KTE-C19 and PBMC from patients with
refractory aggressive NHL.

