Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the mechanisms of early and later stages of
resistance to the selective CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib


Background: Dysregulation of the cyclin D-CDK4/6-Rb axis occurs in a
substantial proportion of ER-positive (ER+) breast cancers promoting
proliferation and resistance. Adding the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib to
endocrine treatment has led to a substantial improvement of the outcome
of patients with ER+ metastatic breast cancer. However, with the expected
clinical implementation of CDK4/6 inhibitors, acquired resistance is
emerging as a major clinical challenge. Using long-term culture with
palbociclib, we have established MCF7 and T47D cell lines with 8-10 fold
increased IC50 values as a model of acquired resistance. Characterization
of resistant cell lines using phosphoproteomic analysis and RNAseq
revealed increased activity in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway which can be
targeted therapeutically by co-treatment with CDK4/6 inhibitors and
PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors (Lenihan C, et al, San Antonio Breast Cancer
Symposium 2015). The present work addresses whether palbociclib still has
target effects and/or residual activity in resistant cells, to
characterize cell cycle pathways in resistant cells, to establish the
role of ER-signaling in resistant cells, and to study if palbociclib
resistance might be associated with a more aggressive phenotype.Results:
Western blot analysis of newly generated resistant clones demonstrated
significant reduction of phospho RB (ser780), in keeping with maintained
target inhibition with palbociclib. Although total RB decreased in some
clones, the protein remained detectable in all resistant clones.
Cumulative population doubling confirmed palbociclib still has an effect
on cell proliferation in resistant clones. Subsequent long-term culture
in the presence of palbociclib altered the effect of the drug; these
cells gradually lose the inhibition of pRB, as well as the residual
anti-proliferative effect of palbociclib, suggesting potential loss of
palbociclib target effects. Mutational analysis of RB is ongoing. Cell
cycle analysis of resistant clones demonstrated an increase in cyclin E
expression suggesting up-regulation of alternative cell cycle pathways.
Morphological changes of resistant clones and multiple phosphorylation
changes in the Rho/Rac pathway showed by our phosphoproteomic analysis
suggested that resistant clones might exhibit a more aggressive
phenotype. Tumor spheroid-based invasion assays and transwell migration
assays confirmed increased migration and invasion of resistant clones
compared to sensitive cells.Conclusions: Whilst Palbociclib has sustained
target effects and anti-proliferative activity during early stages of
resistance, these effects gradually diminish during later stages of
acquired resistance. Palbociclib resistant breast cancer cells also
exhibit a more aggressive phenotype. In vivo investigation is ongoing to
better characterize the escape mechanisms involved in CDK4/6 inhibitors
resistance.

