Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 inhibitor WP1066 as a novel therapeutic for medulloblastoma


The purpose of this study is to determine the efficacy of the STAT3
inhibitor WP1066 on the sonic-hedgehog (SHH) subtype of medulloblastoma
(MB).STAT3, or signal transducer and activator of transcription 3, is a
potential novel target for the treatment of SHH-MB. We have generated
substantial preliminary data showing that STAT3 activation promotes the
survival of SHH-MB cancer stem cells (CSCs) that are critical for
treatment resistance and tumor recurrence.Smoothened (SMO) antagonists
have shown efficacy in treating subtypes of SHH-MB, however all tumors
develop resistance and SMO inhibitors are ineffective for patients with
SHH-MB harboring mutations downstream of SMO. Our preliminary in vitro
data suggests that combined SMO and STAT3 inhibition has synergistic
activity, and that constitutively activated STAT3 is protective against
SHH-MB cell death mediated by SMO inhibition.Methods:The effect of
increasing concentrations of WP1066 on Shh-responsive MB cells was
assessed by Western blot analysis for STAT3 phosphorylation, WST assay
for cell proliferation, and soft agar colony formation. The effect of
WP1066 on apoptosis and the cell cycle was assessed by flow cytometry.An
ex vivo murine SmoA1 SHH-MB brain slice culture method was used to assess
the effects of WP1066 alone and in combination with radiation. In vivo
studies consist of mice treated with 1) WP1066, 2) SMO inhibitor LDE225
3) WP1066 in combination with LDE225 and 4) vehicle alone. All mice are
imaged by MRI prior to treatment and every 3 weeks after treatment. Tumor
volume is calculated and rate of tumor growth and survival are measured.
The mice are followed until death or the end of the experiment at 36
weeks.Results:In human Shh-responsive MB cells in vitro, WP1066 blocked
IL6-induced STAT3 activation (phosphorylation), decreased cell
proliferation and abrogated tumor colony formation. Results regarding the
mechanism of inhibition of cell proliferation/viability by WP1066 (i.e.
apoptosis and cell cycle analysis) are pending.In the SHH-MB brain tumor
slice cultures, WP1066 treatment induced potent tumor cell kill,
especially of the CSCs within the perivascular niche. WP1066 also showed
synergy with radiation, but did not add toxicity to normal brain
cells.Preliminary in vivo data indicate a statistically significant
decrease in the rate of tumor growth and prolonged survival in mice
treated with WP1066 compared to vehicle control. Results of the efficacy
of WP1066 with LDE225 are pending.Conclusions:WP1066 has potent efficacy
against Shh-responsive MB cells in vitro and SHH-MB tumors ex vivo,
without toxicity to normal brain cells. Preliminary data is promising for
WP1066 activity against SHH-MB in vivo, suggesting WP1066 is a novel
therapeutic for SHH-MB.

