Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting hedgehog transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2 restores
sensitivity to vemurafenib-resistant human melanoma cells


Melanoma represents the deadliest of all skin cancers being responsible
for more than 75% of skin cancer-related deaths. Although the results
with BRAF inhibitors have been very promising, practically all of the
patients treated thus far have developed resistance to these drugs. The
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been implicated in a variety of
malignancies, including melanoma. However, there are no reports on the
activation of this pathway in the setting of vemurafenib-resistance.
Herein, we first identified that melanoma cell lines, with acquired in
vitro-induced vemurafenib resistance, showed increased levels of Hh
pathway component genes glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 and 2
(GLI1/GLI2) compared to nave cells. We also observed these findings in
melanoma samples from patients. Moreover, the increased expression of the
transcription factors GLI1/GLI2 was independent of canonical Hh signaling
and was instead correlated with non-canonical Hh signaling, involving
TGF/SMAD signaling. Knockdown of GLI1 and GLI2 restored the
vemurafenib-resistant cells to sensitivity, an effect associated with
both growth arrest and senescence. Treatment of vemurafenib-resistant
cells with the GLI1/GLI2 inhibitor Gant61 led to decreased invasion of
the melanoma cells in a 3D skin reconstruct model and was associated with
a decrease in metalloproteinase (MMP2/MMP9) expression and microphtalmia
transcription factor (MITF) upregulation. Our findings also demonstrated
that GLI1/GLI2 modulation could be a useful strategy to prevent drug
resistance. Alternating pre-treatment with vemurafenib and Gant61
significantly reduced IC50 of subsequent vemurafenib treatment in nave
melanoma cells, demonstrating a promising approach for the control of
vemurafenib-resistance in patients with unresectable melanoma. The
modulation of vemurafenib chemosensitivity was triggered by GLI1/GLI2
repression during the acquisition of resistance, which did not occur in
the treatment protocols with only vemurafenib continuously or in
alternate days. The alternating treatment regimen with vemurafenib and
Gant61 was able to suppress GLI expression, delaying or decreasing
vemurafenib resistance. Taken together, our data demonstrated an
unprecedented mechanism of vemurafenib resistance by GLI1/GLI2
upregulation, shedding light on the development of Hh pathway inhibitors
as a promising strategy for melanoma treatment.

