Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced cytotoxicity following sequential treatment with
filanesib and melphalan in human myeloma cell lines


As a single agent, melphalan is used as a preparative treatment prior to
autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) in patients with multiple myeloma
(MM) given its myelosuppressive and anti-myeloma effects. While most
patients achieve complete remission following ASCT, a majority will
develop recurrent disease. Therefore, novel combinations that improve the
anti-myeloma activity of melphalan may improve post-transplant outcomes.
The first-in-class agent Filanesib (Fil) is a kinesin spindle protein
inhibitor which induces mitotic arrest/apoptosis in proliferating cells
and has demonstrated anti-myeloma activity in vitro and in vivo. In this
study, we tested the effects of combination treatment with filanesib and
melphalan in the human myeloma cell lines (HMCLs), U266, MM1S and
NCI-H929. As single agents, melphalan and filanesib both inhibit myeloma
cell proliferation as assessed by the MTS assay. However, when HMCLs were
treated simultaneously with both drugs an antagonistic interaction was
observed. This antagonism was in part due to cell cycle arrest in the
S-phase, which prevented filanesib from downregulating the anti-apoptotic
proteins, BCL-2 and MCL-1 and exerting its cytotoxic effect in the
G2/M-phase.. To elucidate whether sequential treatment could enhance
cytotoxicity, HMCLs were treated with either melphalan (1 hour) followed
by filanesib (MelFil) for 48 hours or filanesib for 48 hours followed by
1 hour melphalan treatment (FilMel). Compared to the apoptosis observed
with individual drugs, the MelFil sequence led to significantly lower
apoptosis, whereas the the FilMel treatment led to enhanced apoptosis
following 48 hours after drug washout. Furthermore examination of
recovery of cell proliferation following seven days of recovery after
drug removal revealed an increase in cell proliferation for the MelFil
treatment compared to a decline in the number of viable cells for FilMel
treatment. Taken together, our findings suggest that filanesib
pretreatment prior to melphalan may be a clinically relevant therapeutic
combination strategy. Moreover, our data underscore the importance of
testing sequencing strategies for optimizing therapeutic efficacy of
combination treatment.

