Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toll-like receptor expression and ligation promotes in vitro
invasion in pancreatic cancer


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer (PC) has the worst prognosis of all the
major cancers. The role of inflammation in tumor progression and
metastasis, particularly in PC, is widely accepted. Our lab has recently
shown that levels of circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and associated
proteins (histones, HMGB-1, etc.) are elevated in PC patients at baseline
and increase in response to standard therapies. It is also known that
components of the innate immune system respond to cfDNA and associated
proteins. Specifically, the toll-like receptors (TLRs) have been shown to
be activated by cfDNA and associated proteins. These TLRs, specifically
TLR-4 and TLR-9, have been shown to promote tumor progression and
metastasis in other cancers such as breast, colorectal, and skin cancers.
We wanted to investigate the role of TLRs in PC by characterizing
receptor expression and downstream function. We also attempted to inhibit
the downstream effects of TLR signaling using nucleic acid binding
polymers (NABPs) that our lab has previously utilized in other disease
models such as systemic lupus erythematosus.Methods: Three human
(MiaPaCa-2, BxPC-3, PANC-1) and one murine (KPC-4580P) PC cell line were
characterized for TLR-4 and TLR-9 expression by western blot. Briefly,
cells were plated and lysed using RIPA buffer. Total protein
concentration was quantified using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and
normalized prior to running the cell lysates on SDS-PAGE. The protein
bands were then transferred to immunoblotting membrane and probed with
specific primary antibodies, followed by fluorescent secondary
antibodies. Blots were exposed and quantified via LI-COR. Downstream
function of TLR expression was tested using Transwell-matrigel invasion
assays wherein cells were plated in the Transwell system in the presence
of TLR-4 and TLR-9 specific agonists (LPS and CpG or mtDNA,
respectively). These cells were also treated with NABPs to inhibit TLR
activation.Results: All PC cell lines expressed TLR-4 and TLR-9. The
invasion assays indicated that in the presence of TLR-4 and TLR-9
specific agonists, PC cells exhibited increased invasion. Moreover, PC
cells that invaded in response to TLR-9 agonists were inhibited in the
presence of NABPs. Our lab has also prepared conditioned media (CM) from
cells treated with clinically relevant doses of radiation. Our PC cell
lines displayed increased invasiveness in response to CM and decreased
with NABP treatment.Conclusion: We have previously shown that there are
elevated levels of cfDNA and associated proteins in PC patient serum and
have now shown that these factors can have direct effects on PC cells via
TLRs that are expressed by the cancer cells. Treating cells with NABPs in
the presence of TLR agonists can abrogate TLR mediated invasion in vitro.
Our goal is to further characterize the effects of TLR signaling on
cancer cells including RNA transcription and protein translation
profiling.

