Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes as mediators of paracrine signalling that promote
invasive behavior in rhabdomyosarcoma


Exosomes are small membranous vesicles secreted into body fluids by
multiple cell types, including tumor cells. Tumor exosomes contain intact
and functional protein, mRNA and miRNA that may alter the cellular
environment to favor tumor growth. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is an
aggressive childhood soft tissue tumor, with two distinct subtypes,
alveolar (ARMS) and embryonal (ERMS) histology. ARMS tumors are
characterized in the majority of cases by a fusion oncoprotein
PAX3-FOXO1, thought to be an initiating factor in tumorigenesis. To date,
no studies have been performed to investigate the possible role or
content of exosomes in paracrine signaling in RMS.In the present study,
we isolated and characterized exosomes secreted from RMS cells, using 3
ERMS (fusion oncoprotein negative) and 2 ARMS (fusion oncoprotein
positive) cell lines. RNA analysis showed that small RNA were enriched in
RMS-derived exosomes, therefore we focused on evaluating the miRNA
content. Array expression analysis showed that exosome miRNA clustered
together well, and to a higher extent than cellular miRNA, in ARMS cell
lines. Similarly, in the 2 ERMS cell lines that had mutant p53, exosome
miRNA clustered together and the pattern of expression was very different
from the corresponding cellular miRNA. ARMS and ERMS exosome-enriched
miRNA were different, and only 2 miRNA were found to be common among
both; putative targets are implicated in cancer and inflammation.
Functionally, using in vitro assays, we found that both ERMS- and
ARMS-derived exosomes significantly increased the cellular migration and
invasion of normal human fibroblasts, and had a positive effect on
viability and proliferation of both fibroblasts and RMS cells. In vivo,
Matrigel plug assay showed that RMS-derived exosomes had a positive
effect on the migration and invasion of stromal cells, suggesting a
positive role on angiogenesis.We conclude that RMS-derived exosomes can
exert specific paracrine effects on recipient cells, enhancing cell
viability as well as invasive properties of fibroblasts and stromal
cells, and therefore is likely to play a role in promoting RMS
angiogenesis and metastasis. Ongoing studies are aimed at directly
assessing the role of RMS-derived exosomes in clinical angiogenesis and
metastasis, using in vivo murine models, in addition to dissecting the
role of specific enriched miRNA on recipient cell biology.

