Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomimetic proteo-lipid vesicles for the treatment of melanoma


The systemic administration of pharmaceutics presents several drawbacks,
such as: i) reduced drug's stability because of the degradation by lytic
enzymes in pathological (secreted by the cancer cells) or physiologic
(lysosome acidic environment) conditions, and ii) lack of specific tumor
targeting, that requires high doses to achieve therapeutically effective
drug concentrations, and increases the risk of off-target effects. Drug
encapsulation and delivery through nanocarriers can offer many advantages
over free drugs, as prevention of drug degradation, control of drug
pharmacokinetic and biodistribution, and improvement of intracellular
penetration, as well as drug solubilization. However, regardless of the
type of approach, the organs of the mononuclear phagocytic system
efficiently clear the particles from circulation while protein
opsonization often prevents the proper interaction between targeting
ligands and target biomarkers. Most cancers are characterized by
inflammation and increased leukocyte infiltration. The surface of the
leukocyte, in fact, is enriched with transmembrane proteins that
determine self-tolerance, adhesion, and negotiation of the inflamed
vascular barrier. Leveraging on leukocyte ability to efficiently
recognize and infiltrate the tumor tissues, we developed a liposome-like
Biomimetic Vesicle (BioV), formulated with leukocyte membrane proteins
able to provide extended biocompatibility, self-tolerance and targeting.
We hypothesize that the transferring of leukocyte membrane proteins on
the surface on a nanovesicle will enhance BioV selective targeting
towards the tumor-associated vasculature, increase payload's
accumulation, and improve cancer specific cytotoxicity. C57BL mice were
intradermally injected with B16 cells. Intravital microscopy and typical
tumor growth inhibition curve associated with histological analysis were
used to assess BioV targeting and efficacy, respectively in comparison
with conventional liposomes and free drug. Once the tumor reached 70-100
mm3, mice were randomly divided into 6 groups (n = 10) and treated with
saline (CTRL), free doxorubicin (DOX), empty and DOX-loaded liposomes,
empty and DOX-loaded BioVs, at a drug concentration of 7 mg/Kg.
Melanoma-bearing mice were treated once per week for one month, and tumor
volume and survival rate were investigated. Compared to the other groups,
BioVs showed higher tumor targeting and DOX accumulation, increased
antitumor efficacy, and prolonged survival rate. Histological analysis on
tumor slides showed increased apoptosis and reduced immune cell
infiltration in the groups treated with BioVs. We believe that BioV
represents a promising drug delivery system possessing advantageous
biomimetic properties. The high versatility of this approach and its
molecular mechanisms of action make this platform a technology applicable
for the treatment of all the inflammation-related cancers.

