Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crocin prevents early lesions of liver cancer:system biology
approach


The angiogenesis inhibitor, sorafenib, remains the only available therapy
of the poorly diagnosed hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Only recently
patents of VEGF receptors-3 inhibitors are developed.; hence,Thus, a
novel approach against HCC is essential for a better therapeutic outcome.
Saffron and its active constituents were reported to have anti-tumor
properties. Objective: The aims of this study were to examine the
chemopreventive action of saffron's main biomolecule, crocin, against
chemically-induced liver cancer in rats, and to explore the mechanisms by
which crocin employs its anti-tumor effects. Method: We investigated the
anti-cancer effect of crocin on an experimental carcinogenesis model of
liver cancer by studying the anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory,
anti-proliferation, pro-apoptotic activities of crocin in vivo. In
addition, we provided a network analysis of differentially expressed
genes in tissues of animals pre-treated with crocin in comparison to
induced-HCC animals tissues. To further support our results, in vitro
analysis was carried out. We assessed the effects of crocin on HepG2
cells viability by treating them with various concentrations of crocin;
in addition, effects of crocin on cell cycle distribution of HepG2 cells
were investigated. Results: Findings reported herein demonstrated the
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic properties of crocin when
administrated in induced-HCC model. Crocin exhibited anti-inflammatory
properties where NF-kB, among other inflammatory markers, was inhibited.
In vitro analysis confirmed crocin's effect in HepG2 by arresting the
cell cycle at G2/M phase, inducing apoptosis and down regulating
inflammation. Network analysis identified NF-kB as a regulatory hub, and
therefore, a candidate therapeutic drug target. Conclusion: Taken
together, our findings introduce crocin as a candidate chemopreventive
agent against HCC.

