Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the therapeutic efficacy of Cyst(e)inase to induce
oxidative stress mediated cytotoxicity in pancreatic cancer cells


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is the only cancer in the US with a
dismal one-digit 5-year survival rate (7%). Its oncogenic program relies
on upregulated ROS antioxidant mechanisms to maintain oxidative balance.
Hence, perturbation of this balance might be an effective therapeutic
strategy for pancreatic cancer. A major intracellular antioxidant is the
tripeptide glutathione (GSH). Cysteine (Cys), which has the functional
moiety of GSH, can either be synthesized de novo or imported
[predominantly as cystine (CSSC) that is reduced intracellularly to Cys].
In cancer, de novo synthesis of Cys has to be supplemented with
extracellular import in order to fulfil the excessive metabolic demand of
proliferation. This intricate balance between ROS and antioxidants, and
the excessive requirement for Cys/CSSC import in tumor cells, in part to
maintain oxidative balance through GSH synthesis, potentially provides a
therapeutic window. We believe that prolonged depletion of the serum Cys
and CSSC pool by a genetically engineered human enzyme called
Cyst(e)inase may provide a pancreatic cancer therapeutic avenue either as
a monotherapy or in combination with other agents with low or minimal
toxicity.In this study, Cyst(e)inase treatment (3-500 nM) of cultured
pancreatic cancer cell lines (MIA-PaCa2, BxPC3, Panc1) caused a
dose-dependent decrease in survival and intracellular GSH content.
Further mechanistic investigation showed an increase in intracellular
ROS, activation of AMP kinase and autophagy signaling, as well as
inhibition of the mTORC1-p70S6K-S6 ribosomal protein signaling pathway.
There was also a concentration dependent reduction in cyclin D1 after
treatment with the enzyme. Cyst(e)inase displayed synergistic
cytotoxicity when combined with the natural compound curcumin. Notably, a
single intraperitoneal 100 mg/kg dose of PEGylated Cysteinase in mice was
able to deplete serum CSSC below 5 M (normal is 70 M) for over 3 days
with a half-life of 4 days. Longer treatment with Cyst(e)inase at this
dose given 4 times/week for 6 weeks did not produce significant signs of
toxicity. This in vivo dose also inhibits the growth of prostate cancer
cells in xenograft tumor models. Ongoing experiments to evaluate the in
vivo efficacy of Cyst(e)inase for inhibition of pancreatic tumor growth
as well as further mechanistic studies will be presented. Collectively,
the current data suggest that depletion of extracellular Cys/CSSC using
Cyst(e)inase may have utility either as a monotherapy or a combination
therapy for several cancers including pancreatic cancer.

