Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis of colorectal cancer progression
reveals activation of EGFR through demethylation of the EREG promoter


The molecular drivers that underlie transformation of colonic epithelium
into colorectal adenocarcinoma (CRC) have been well described. However,
the mechanisms through which some of the clinically targeted pathways are
activated during CRC progression have yet to be elucidated. Here, we
employed an integrative genomics approach to examine CRC progression.
Transcriptional profiling of laser capture microdissected colonic crypt
cells, differentiated surface epithelium, adenomas, carcinomas, and
metastases, showed distinctive patterns in the activation of
developmental and oncogenic pathways, including the clinically important
EGFR axis. We observed a dramatic up-regulation of the EGFR ligand EREG
in primary and metastatic cancer cells as compared to normal and
adenomatous tissues that was indicative of autocrine tumor production,
and confirmed this pattern of gene expression by in situ hybridization.
Global methylation analysis indicated that up-regulation of EREG during
the adenoma-carcinoma transition was associated with de-methylation of
two key sites within the EREG promoter and this was accompanied by an
increase in the levels of EGFR phosphorylation, as assessed by reverse
phase protein analysis. In a clinical trial setting, we observed that low
levels of EREG methylation in patients who received cetuximab as part of
a Phase II study were associated with high expression of the ligand and a
favorable response to therapy. Conversely, high levels of promoter
methylation and low levels of EREG expression were observed in tumors
that progressed after treatment. We also noted an inverse correlation
between EREG methylation and expression levels in several other cancers
from the TCGA datasets, including those of the head and neck, lung, and
bladder. We propose that up-regulation of EREG expression through
promoter de-methylation might be an important means of activating the
EGFR pathway during the genesis of CRC and, potentially, other types of
cancer.

