Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interplay between perlecan/HSPG2 and matrilysin/MMP-7 in the
prostate cancer tumor microenvironment directs metastatic programming
through focal adhesion kinase and FoxM1


Prostate cancer (PCa) cells interact with the stroma and extracellular
matrix (ECM) during tumor expansion and invasion during metastasis.
Dissecting the complex matrix-cancer interplay is essential to halting
tumor progression. A vital component of the ECM is perlecan/heparan
sulfate proteoglycan 2 (HSPG2). As a large extracellular proteoglycan,
perlecan helps orchestrate tumor angiogenesis, proliferation,
differentiation and invasion. Actively metastasizing cancer cells must
proteolytically degrade several tissue borders which perlecan patrols,
including the basement membrane, vasculature, reactive stromal matrix and
bone marrow. We have demonstrated that perlecan, even fully decorated
with glycosaminoglycan chains and in the context of the basement
membrane, is cleaved efficiently by the protease matrilysin/matrix
metalloproteinase 7 (MMP-7). MMP-7 levels increase, especially in
relation to its endogenous inhibitor, during metastatic programming in
several cancers including PCa. Recent analysis of a tissue microarray of
157 prostatectomy patients showed perlecan and MMP-7 are increased in
tandem, with perlecan disappearing at the sites where MMP-7 is high,
indicative of a protease-substrate relationship in tissue. This idea is
supported by the finding that perlecan fragments are present in serum of
PCa patients, with a majority from domain IV. Additionally, higher
perlecan staining in cancer related stroma positively correlated with
higher grade cancer. Investigating the effects of perlecan on metastatic
PCa cells showed full length perlecan and specifically domain IV of
perlecan triggers clustering of PCa cells. Perlecan proteolysis by MMP-7
reverses this, favoring cell dispersion and tumor dyscohesion. To
discover the molecular signaling events associated with perlecan binding
to PCa cells, a reverse phase protein array was analyzed for protein
interactions that were plotted in Cytoscape. Network analysis revealed,
and western blotting confirmed, perlecan and MMP-7 mediated proteolysis
altered focal adhesion kinase (FAK) signaling, with intact perlecan and
domain IV suppressing FAK activity during clustering, and MMP-7 cleaved
perlecan activating FAK, consistent with the induction of dispersion.
Further work showed that cleavage of perlecan increased the pro-cancer
transcription factor forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1). This work reveals
that degradation of perlecan by MMP-7 in the tumor microenvironment can
unlock stable epithelial contacts and reprogram PCa cells for invasion
and metastasis through processes involving FAK and FoxM1.

