Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: anti-ROR1 x anti-CD3 ADAPTIR molecule, ES425, redirects T-cell
cytotoxicity and inhibits tumor growth in preclinical models of
triple-negative breast cancer


Background: Effective treatment of metastatic, triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) remains a highly unmet medical need. We have developed
ES425, a bispecific ADAPTIR (modular protein technology) molecule that
redirects T-cell cytotoxicity to tumor cells expressing ROR1 (receptor
tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1), an oncofetal antigen expressed
on TNBC and other malignancies. Results are presented for studies run to
examine in vitro and in vivo activity of ES425 in preclinical models of
TNBC.Materials and Methods: Target-dependent cytotoxic activity was
examined in vitro by treating ROR1(+) cell lines and ROR1() cell lines
with ES425 in the presence of purified human T cells or human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Cytotoxic activity was determined using
chromium release assays. T cells were assessed for activation and
proliferation using multi-color flow cytometry. Pharmacokinetics of ES425
in NOD/SCID gamma (NSG) mice was determined using single intravenous dose
of approximately 10 mg/kg. Serum concentrations at time points ranging
from 15 minutes to 504 hours were used to calculate the terminal
elimination half-life of ES425. To assess activity in vivo, NOD/SCID mice
were implanted subcutaneously with the ROR1(+) TNBC tumor cell line
MDA-MB-231 and purified human T cells and treated with ES425. This model
was run twice with T cells from different human donors. Tumor growth was
assessed by measuring tumor volume.Results: ES425 efficiently redirected
T cell cytotoxicity against ROR1(+) cell lines at low picomolar
concentrations in vitro. Cytotoxic activity was dependent on expression
of ROR1 by the target cells. T cells were activated and proliferated in
response to ES425 in the presence of ROR1(+) target cells; proliferation
was not observed in response to ROR1() cells. In vivo, pharmacokinetic
analysis showed a serum half-life of approximately 7 days in NSG mice,
and ES425 inhibited growth of MDA-MB-231 tumors in mouse xenografts.
Repeat experiments showed similar inhibition of tumor growth and an
improvement in overall survival.Conclusions: These studies show that
ES425 may be an efficient agent for redirecting T cell cytotoxicity in
preclinical TNBC models and merits investigation as a potential
therapeutic in TNBC and other malignancies.

