Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effect of combined irreversible electroporation and
liposome-encapsulated NVP-BEZ235


IntroductionIrreversible electroporation (IRE) is a technique that uses
electrical pulses to cause disruption in the lipid bilayer integrity by
creating nanopores. Regions that are close to the probe will have a
permanent, irreversible damage to the cells, while farther away regions
will subject the cell membranes to re-seal (reversible). This reversible
region provides opportunity for enhanced nanoparticle uptake. In this
study, we tested the efficacy of combined IRE and nanoparticle-mediated
drug delivery in vitro and in vivo in a hepatocellular carcinoma
model.MethodsLiposome-encapsulated NVP-BEZ235 (L-BEZ) was made from
hydration-sonication, followed by an optional extrusion step. Particle
size was tested via dynamic light scattering. BEZ concentration was
quantified by fluorescence. Cytotoxicity of IRE and its drug combinations
was tested on Hep3B cells using ECM 830 (BTX Harvard Apparatus) at 1600
V/cm field strength. In vivo efficacy was studied on nude mice bearing
Hep3B xenografts with single dose of IRE, or drug alone (L-BEZ or BEZ at
4 mg/kg, intratumoral injection), and its combinations.Results and
DiscussionLiposomes range from 100-500 nm in hydrodynamic volume. Highest
loading efficiency achieved was 90% (1.8 mg/mL of BEZ). To test the
release of BEZ from the liposome, solution of L-BEZ was treated with IRE
and the supernatant was tested against Hep3B cells. The extract from
L-BEZ had a significantly higher cytotoxicity (51%) as compared to the
empty liposome (20%) with a p-valueIntroductionIrreversible
electroporation (IRE) is a technique that uses electrical pulses to cause
disruption in the lipid bilayer integrity by creating nanopores. Regions
that are close to the probe will have a permanent, irreversible damage to
the cells, while farther away regions will subject the cell membranes to
re-seal (reversible). This reversible region provides opportunity for
enhanced nanoparticle uptake. In this study, we tested the efficacy of
combined IRE and nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery in vitro and in vivo
in a hepatocellular carcinoma model.MethodsLiposome-encapsulated
NVP-BEZ235 (L-BEZ) was made from hydration-sonication, followed by an
optional extrusion step. Particle size was tested via dynamic light
scattering. BEZ concentration was quantified by fluorescence.
Cytotoxicity of IRE and its drug combinations was tested on Hep3B cells
using ECM 830 (BTX Harvard Apparatus) at 1600 V/cm field strength. In
vivo efficacy was studied on nude mice bearing Hep3B xenografts with
single dose of IRE, or drug alone (L-BEZ or BEZ at 4 mg/kg, intratumoral
injection), and its combinations.Results and DiscussionLiposomes range
from 100-500 nm in hydrodynamic volume. Highest loading efficiency
achieved was 90% (1.8 mg/mL of BEZ). To test the release of BEZ from the
liposome, solution of L-BEZ was treated with IRE and the supernatant was
tested against Hep3B cells. The extract from L-BEZ had a significantly
higher cytotoxicity (51%) as compared to the empty liposome (20%) with a
p-value<0.05. This suggests that IRE can release BEZ from the liposome.
The LC50 values of L-BEZ and BEZ was determined to be the same (47
ng/mL). In vitro combination treatment of L-BEZ + IRE showed higher
cytotoxicity than the controls (BEZ + IRE, BEZ alone, and IRE alone). In
vivo, IRE and its combinations significantly suppressed tumor growth more
than non-IRE treated groups. Histology showed a median percent necrosis
for L-BEZ + IRE (37%) doubled compared to IRE treatment alone
(17%).ConclusionThe use of minimally invasive IRE in combination with
nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery treatment is a promising technique to
achieve local disease control in hepatocellular carcinoma.

