Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems analysis of colon cancer cell metabolism rewired by p53
and KRAS mutations


Introduction. Somatic mutations in proto-oncogenes and tumour-suppressor
genes contribute to rewire the already deregulated metabolic network in
cancer cells, resulting in uncontrolled proliferation and oncogenesis. In
this study, we set out to establish a dynamic mathematical model of
bioenergetics and to exploit it to explore the multifaceted cross-talk
between bioenergetics, somatic gene mutations in KRAS and p53, and cell
proliferation and survival.Model Development. We have developed an
ordinary differential equations-based model of central carbon metabolism
in cancer cells which includes glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway,
citric acid cycle and respiratory chain, based on our previous work and
published models. The model describes how nutrients (glucose, glutamine,
lactate, pyruvate, serine and glycine) from the extracellular
micro-environment affect bioenergetics parameters. The resulting model
predictions are linked to cell proliferation via a heuristic function.
Enzymatic activities regulated by p53 and KRAS mutations were obtained by
mining publically available datasets and their regulation by the
mutational status was modelled by adapting the corresponding kinetic
parameters. To estimate the kinetic parameters, model simulation outputs
were fitted to a portfolio of experimental data both generated de novo in
house and gathered from the literature in HCT-116 colon cancer cells.
Experiments were performed on parental HCT-116 (p53 competent; harbouring
a KRAS mutation on exon 2 of codon G13) and three derived mutant cell
lines covering all four combinations of p53 and KRAS mutational status to
isolate their relative and joint effect on bioenergetics signatures.
HCT-116-derived cell lines included: p53 proficient cells with the KRAS
allelic mutation silenced by homologous recombination in the presence or
absence of p53 knockout by lentiviral shRNA.Results. The model was
calibrated against ATP concentrations measured via single-cell microscopy
(ATeam probe and TMRM dye) following pharmacological inhibition of
respiratory chain complexes (rotenone, sodium azide and oligomycin) as a
function of nutrients availability (glucose, lactate, pyruvate).
Modelling results revealed that p53 and KRAS mutations drive a shift in
metabolic signatures and L-lactate emerged as a pivotal metabolite to
stratify the different phenotypes. Systems analysis revealed that in KRAS
mutated cells p53 deficiency leads to an increase in glucose uptake and
flux through the pentose phosphate pathway and a decrease in lactate
production. Indeed, p53 deficient HCT-116 cells showed a decrease in
extracellular lactate with respect to p53 proficient cells in validation
experiments.Conclusions. The computational model developed can be used to
benchmark mechanistic hypotheses by which tumour suppressors and/or
oncogenic mutations rewire metabolism and to identify putative targets
for therapeutic intervention.

