Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of circulating tumor cells as a surrogate for
distant metastasis in stage IV breast cancer


Background: Metastasis is responsible for virtually all breast cancer
related deaths. While circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been shown to
be prognostic in metastatic breast cancer (MBC), their use as a biomarker
to date has been limited. While initial treatment recommendations are
based on primary tumor biology, ASCO guidelines call for biopsy of a
metastatic site to guide decision making for systemic therapy. The ANGLE
Parsortix system is a microfluidics device that separates CTCs based on
size and deformability, without the need for cell-surface marker
selection. We hypothesize that the ANGLE Parsortix system permits
isolation and gene expression profiling of pure CTCs and allows
comparison of the biopsied metastatic site, thereby acting as a surrogate
for macrometastases.Methods: We are currently enrolling metastatic breast
cancer patients to a prospective, observational clinical study in which
CTCs are enumerated and captured from 10-20 mL peripheral blood (PB) via
the ANGLE Parsortix system. CTCs, peripheral blood (PB), and metastatic
sites were profiled with RNA Seq via the Illumina HiSeq (primary
predictor). We received fresh frozen tissue biopsies from the following
metastatic sites: skin, brain, pleural effusion, pericardial effusion,
breast, cerebrospinal fluid and bone tissue. Bioinformatics analysis was
then performed. NanoString PAM50 and real-time polymerase chain reaction
will be used as validation studies.Results: To date we have successfully
isolated and molecularly profiled CTCs and metastatic tissue (MT) from
9/9 stage IV breast cancer patients. Final bioinformatics analysis on the
last five patients is underway. Principal component analysis demonstrated
clustering of MT and CTCs, with clear separation from PB. These results
demonstrated high purity of CTCs, eliminating the need for subtraction of
PB background signal, and demonstrated common gene expression between
CTCs and MT. Differential gene expression analysis (FDR p0.98) between
CTCs and MT. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) analysis of 214-gene
signature identified biological pathways related to metastasis in CTCs
and MT. Individual intra-patient analysis confirmed gene-expression
correlation between CTCs and MT, but not PB.Conclusion and outlook: Cell
surface marker independent CTC isolation is feasible for RNA Seq analysis
without background subtraction. Furthermore, RNA Seq of CTCs can identify
gene expression signatures that correlate with distant macrometastatic
sites. The gene-expression patterns revealed biological relevant
information that could be used as biomarkers or identify potential
therapeutic targets.

