Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting chronic lymphocytic leukemia by interfering glutathione
synthesis using a novel therapeutic enzyme cyst(e)inase (AEB3103)


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukemia in
the Western countries. Despite recent advance in new therapeutic agents
that have improved treatment outcomes, CLL remains incurable due in part
to the inability to completely eradicate the leukemia cells in vivo.
Previous studies showed that CLL cells have high intrinsic oxidative
stress and are highly dependent on cellular antioxidant glutathione (GSH)
to maintain redox balance and cell viability. One logical strategy to
impact CLL cells would be to abrogate the glutathione protection of CLL
cells in vivo. Recently we discovered that primary leukemia cells
isolated from CLL patients were unable to effectively utilize cystine for
GSH synthesis due to low expression of the cystine transporter Xc-, and
that bone marrow stromal cells highly express Xc- and effectively take up
cystine for conversion to cysteine (Zhang et al: Nature Cell Biology,
2012). These findings provide a biochemical basis to develop novel
strategies to effectively target leukemia cells in the stromal
microenvironment and improve in vivo therapeutic activity. In this study,
we tested the depletion of extracellular cystine and cysteine using a
novel therapeutic enzyme-cyst(e)inase (AEB3103), as a potential way to
block GSH synthesis in CLL cells and abolish the stromal protection of
the leukemia cells. Our study showed that AEB3103 was very effective in
depleting GSH in CLL cells and caused massive CLL cell death even in the
presence of stromal cells. Importantly, AEB3103 could also overcome drug
resistance of CLL cells with p53 deficiency both in primary leukemia
cells isolated from CLL patients with 17p deletion and mouse leukemic
cells isolated from mouse model we recently reported (Liu et al:
Leukemia, 2014). In addition, AEB3103 showed very low toxicity to normal
cells. These promising in vitro data warrant further animal studies,
which are currently on ongoing using the CLL mouse model with
TCL1-Tg:p53-/- genotype. Our study suggests that AEB3103 and its
combination with standard anti-CLL drugs may potentially be useful for
clinical treatment of CLL, even for the more aggressive CLL subtypes with
unfavorable cytogenetic alterations such as those with chromosome17p
deletion and p53 mutations, and may improve in vivo therapeutic activity.

