Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of gangliosides GD2 is associated with worse
prognosis in melanoma patients


Background: Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-engineered T cells have
demonstrated potent clinical efficacy in patients with B cell lymphoma.
However, the application of CAR-T cell therapy targeting other solid
tumors has been limited. The GD2 gangliosides are sialic acid-containing
glycosphingolipids that play a role in signal transduction and cell-cell
recognition. 1st generation gangliosides GD2 chimeric antigen receptor T
cells in some patients with refractory neuroblastoma already studied in a
phase I clinical trials, indicate that T cells expressing 1st generation
anti-GD2 chimeric antigen receptors were safe and mediated modest
antitumor activity. In a phase I study, the murine IgG3 monoclonal
antibody (MoAb) 3F8, specific for the ganglioside GD2, was administered
intravenously to 17 patients with metastatic GD2 positive neuroblastoma
or malignant melanoma. Antitumor responses occurred in 7 of 17 patients.
However, the expression of the gangliosides GD2 in Asian melanoma
populations has not been reported.Methods: This study involved tumor
samples from 228 melanoma patients (129 acral melanomas, 65 mucosal
melanomas, 13 melanomas on skin with chronic sun-induced damage, 21
melanomas on skin without chronic sun-induced damage) in Peking
University Cancer Hospital & Institute. Clinical data were collected.
Immunohistochemistry assays using antibodies against gangliosides GD2
were performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens. The
ability of gangliosides GD2 chimeric antigen receptor T cells to kill
gangliosides GD2+ melanoma cell was evaluated by MTT in vitro.Results:
Among the 228 samples,40.3% of the cases(92/228) demonstrated positive
staining with gangliosides GD2. Expression of gangliosides GD2 were
relatively more frequent in acral (48.1%) and mucosal (36.9%) melanomas
than in CSD (15.4%) and Non-CSD (19.0%) melanomas. The median survival
time for patients with expression of gangliosides GD2 was significantly
shorter than patients with absence of gangliosides GD2 expression (21.4
vs 57.6 months, PBackground: Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-engineered T
cells have demonstrated potent clinical efficacy in patients with B cell
lymphoma. However, the application of CAR-T cell therapy targeting other
solid tumors has been limited. The GD2 gangliosides are sialic
acid-containing glycosphingolipids that play a role in signal
transduction and cell-cell recognition. 1st generation gangliosides GD2
chimeric antigen receptor T cells in some patients with refractory
neuroblastoma already studied in a phase I clinical trials, indicate that
T cells expressing 1st generation anti-GD2 chimeric antigen receptors
were safe and mediated modest antitumor activity. In a phase I study, the
murine IgG3 monoclonal antibody (MoAb) 3F8, specific for the ganglioside
GD2, was administered intravenously to 17 patients with metastatic GD2
positive neuroblastoma or malignant melanoma. Antitumor responses
occurred in 7 of 17 patients. However, the expression of the gangliosides
GD2 in Asian melanoma populations has not been reported.Methods: This
study involved tumor samples from 228 melanoma patients (129 acral
melanomas, 65 mucosal melanomas, 13 melanomas on skin with chronic
sun-induced damage, 21 melanomas on skin without chronic sun-induced
damage) in Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute. Clinical data
were collected. Immunohistochemistry assays using antibodies against
gangliosides GD2 were performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
specimens. The ability of gangliosides GD2 chimeric antigen receptor T
cells to kill gangliosides GD2+ melanoma cell was evaluated by MTT in
vitro.Results: Among the 228 samples,40.3% of the cases(92/228)
demonstrated positive staining with gangliosides GD2. Expression of
gangliosides GD2 were relatively more frequent in acral (48.1%) and
mucosal (36.9%) melanomas than in CSD (15.4%) and Non-CSD (19.0%)
melanomas. The median survival time for patients with expression of
gangliosides GD2 was significantly shorter than patients with absence of
gangliosides GD2 expression (21.4 vs 57.6 months, P<0.05). Statistical
differences were found between primary melanomas with metastatic
melanomas (34.9% vs 53.0%, PBackground: Chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR)-engineered T cells have demonstrated potent clinical efficacy in
patients with B cell lymphoma. However, the application of CAR-T cell
therapy targeting other solid tumors has been limited. The GD2
gangliosides are sialic acid-containing glycosphingolipids that play a
role in signal transduction and cell-cell recognition. 1st generation
gangliosides GD2 chimeric antigen receptor T cells in some patients with
refractory neuroblastoma already studied in a phase I clinical trials,
indicate that T cells expressing 1st generation anti-GD2 chimeric antigen
receptors were safe and mediated modest antitumor activity. In a phase I
study, the murine IgG3 monoclonal antibody (MoAb) 3F8, specific for the
ganglioside GD2, was administered intravenously to 17 patients with
metastatic GD2 positive neuroblastoma or malignant melanoma. Antitumor
responses occurred in 7 of 17 patients. However, the expression of the
gangliosides GD2 in Asian melanoma populations has not been
reported.Methods: This study involved tumor samples from 228 melanoma
patients (129 acral melanomas, 65 mucosal melanomas, 13 melanomas on skin
with chronic sun-induced damage, 21 melanomas on skin without chronic
sun-induced damage) in Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute.
Clinical data were collected. Immunohistochemistry assays using
antibodies against gangliosides GD2 were performed on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded specimens. The ability of gangliosides GD2 chimeric
antigen receptor T cells to kill gangliosides GD2+ melanoma cell was
evaluated by MTT in vitro.Results: Among the 228 samples,40.3% of the
cases(92/228) demonstrated positive staining with gangliosides GD2.
Expression of gangliosides GD2 were relatively more frequent in acral
(48.1%) and mucosal (36.9%) melanomas than in CSD (15.4%) and Non-CSD
(19.0%) melanomas. The median survival time for patients with expression
of gangliosides GD2 was significantly shorter than patients with absence
of gangliosides GD2 expression (21.4 vs 57.6 months, P<0.05). Statistical
differences were found between primary melanomas with metastatic
melanomas (34.9% vs 53.0%, P<0.05). In addition, the gangliosides GD2
chimeric antigen receptor T cells exhibited specific lysis of melanoma
cell with gangliosides GD2 expression in vitro experiment.Conclusion:
These data demonstrate the expression of ganglioside GD2 are more
frequent in acral and mucosal melanomas than in cutaneous melanomas in
Chinese patients. The higher expression of gangliosides GD2 on metastatic
melanomas compared to primary melanomas was in conformity with the
viewpoint that GD2 expression was related to increased metastatic
potential. Gangliosides GD2 chimeric antigen receptor T cells represents
a clinically appealing treatment strategy for melanoma patients with
ganglioside GD2 expression.

