Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of mutant SPOP proteins in prostate cancer using
targeted proteomics


Speckle-type POZ protein (SPOP) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor protein
that functions as a potential tumor suppressor, and SPOP mutations have
been identified in 10% of human prostate cancers. However, it remains
unclear if mutant SPOP proteins can be utilized as biomarkers for
diagnosis, prognosis or targeted therapy of prostate cancer. To address
this issue, selected reaction monitoring (SRM) and PRISM (high-pressure,
high-resolution separations coupled with intelligent selection and
multiplexing) -SRM mass spectrometry assays have been developed for
quantifying mutant SPOP proteins.SRM assays for wild-type SPOP protein
and 11 prostate cancer-derived mutations were developed. The presence of
multiple lysine residues in the mutation regions precludes the use of
conventional tryptic digestion. Arg-C was selected instead due to its
superior performance in generating mutation site(s) containing SPOP
peptides that are more suitable for SRM analysis comparing to other
proteases (e.g., Asp-N). Although the resulting Arg-C peptides are longer
and more hydrophobic than typical tryptic peptides, all the SRM assays
showed a linear dynamic range of more than two orders of magnitude. The
limits of quantification for the mutation site(s) containing peptides
range from 10 to 100 fmol/g of total protein in the cell lysate. Applying
these SRM assays to analyze 293T cells with and without expression of the
three most frequent SPOP mutations in prostate cancer (Y87N, F102C or
F133V) led to confident detection of all three SPOP mutations in
corresponding positive cell lines but not in the negative cell lines.
Expression of the F133V mutation and wild-type SPOP was at much lower
levels compared to that of F102C and Y87N mutations, which agrees with
RT-PCR results. It is unknown if this is related to activity of the SPOP
protein. PRISM-SRM assays have shown further improvement in
sensitivity.SRM enables multiplexed, isoform-specific detection of mutant
SPOP proteins in cell lysates, which holds great potential in biomarker
development for prostate cancer.

