Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the ROR receptors in ovarian cancer progression and
chemoresistance


BACKGROUND: Despite recent advances in our understanding of the
underlying genetic profile of distinct subtypes of ovarian cancer,
overall survival remains poor. This is partly due to the absence of
available targeted therapies, widespread metastatic disease at diagnosis,
and the development of resistance to chemotherapy in the majority of
patients. Patients with a more mesenchymal gene signature have a shorter
overall survival, and are more likely to recur and develop
chemoresistance. These patients also have upregulated Wnt signalling, a
key developmental pathway associated with metastasis, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and chemoresistance.AIM: To investigate the
role of the novel Wnt receptors ROR1 and ROR2 in ovarian cancer
progression and chemoresistance, to determine their feasibility as
therapeutic targets.METHOD: Expression of ROR1 and ROR2 was measured in
patient tumour (primary and metastatic) samples and ascites fluid taken
at multiple time points during disease progression. In addition, the
A2780 and cisplatin resistant A2780-cis cell lines were used as a model
of ovarian cancer chemoresistance. Profiling of EMT and Wnt genes was
undertaken alongside cell proliferation, adhesion, migration, invasion
and viability assays after modulation of ROR1 and ROR2.RESULTS:
Expression of ROR1 and ROR2 is increased in ovarian cancer patients
compared to benign fallopian tube and ovarian surface epithelium. High
ROR1 expression is associated with type I epithelial ovarian cancer, and
high ROR2 expression with aggressive type II epithelial ovarian cancer.
Expression of each receptor fluctuates in paired metastatic samples
compared to primary tumours, depending on the site of metastasis and
recurrence time. Both receptors are increased in a model of cisplatin
resistant ovarian cancer, and when silenced, cell migration and invasion
is significantly inhibited. Silencing ROR1 and ROR2 also sensitizes
resistant cells to cisplatin, and is associated with a shift away from a
mesenchymal phenotype.CONCLUSION: Upregulation of ROR1 and ROR2 drives
migration, invasion and chemoresistance through regulating EMT via
-catenin independent Wnt signalling. As cell surface regulators of
-catenin independent Wnt signalling, the ROR receptors represent
potential therapeutic targets for chemoresistant cancers.

