Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional control of inflammatory signaling in the
megakaryocyte and erythroid lineages: implications for the tumor
microenvironment


Thrombocytosis, characterized by high platelet counts, and anemia, caused
by low numbers of red blood cells, are associated with poor outcomes in
various solid tumors and also occur in several myeloid disorders. The
megakaryocyte and erythroid lineages give rise to platelets and red blood
cells, respectively, but the mechanisms that cause increased
megakaryopoiesis and concurrently decreased erythropoiesis in
malignancies are poorly understood. We and others have previously
identified that DLX4, a developmental transcription factor encoded by a
homeobox gene, is aberrantly expressed in several types of solid tumors
and myeloid malignancies but the mechanisms of DLX4 are poorly
understood. In this study, we identified that DLX4 expression increases
during megakaryopoiesis and decreases during erythropoiesis.
Overexpression and knockdown experiments using normal CD34+
stem/progenitor cells and bipotent K562 cells demonstrated that DLX4
induces lineage markers and morphologic features of megakaryocytes, and
concomitantly represses erythroid marker expression and hemoglobin
levels. Gene Ontology and Gene Set Enrichment Analyses of genome-wide
changes in gene expression induced by DLX4 showed that DLX4 induces a
megakaryocytic transcriptional program and inhibits an erythroid
transcriptional program. Bioinformatic analysis also revealed that DLX4
induces gene signatures that are associated with NF-kappaB signaling. The
ability of DLX4 to promote megakaryocyte development and to inhibit
erythroid differentiation was diminished by blocking NF-kappaB activity
or by repressing IL1B, a transcriptional target of DLX4. These findings
indicate that DLX4 promotes megakaryocyte development at the expense of
erythroid generation in part by inducing inflammatory signaling. Studies
are ongoing to investigate the transcriptional control by homeobox genes
of inflammatory signaling in thrombocytosis and anemia that are
associated with solid tumors and myeloid disorders.

