Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia as a driver of myeloid-derived suppressor cell recruitment
in hepatocellular carcinoma via CCL26/CX3CR1


Background and Objective: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
accumulate in tumors and highly pro-tumorigenic. These MDSCs exhibit
inhibitory functions against effector T cells and natural killer cells in
tumor sites, as well as secrete pro-angiogenic factors or differentiate
to endothelial cells to promote angiogenesis and metastasis. While it is
appreciated that depletion of MDSCs could bring tumoricidal effects,
there are significant gaps in knowledge about the underlying mechanisms
responsible for MDSC recruitment to tumor sites. Hypoxia, O2 deprivation,
is an important factor in the tumor microenvironment of HCC that modifies
the stromal components. Using hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as a model,
we investigated whether hypoxia is a driver of MDSC recruitment in
HCC.Experimental Procedures: Gene profiling of HCC cells exposed to
hypoxia and normoxia were analyzed by transcriptome sequencing to
identify potential hypoxia-induced chemokines for MDSC recruitment. MDSCs
were isolated from HCC-bearing mice by magnetic bead sorting for
different functional assays. Boyden chambers were used to evaluate the
invasive ability of MDSCs. Flow cytometry was used to detect the
frequencies of tumor-associated MDSCs in orthotopic HCC mouse
models.Results: We observed that MDSCs preferentially infiltrated into
hypoxic regions in human HCC tissues and hypoxia-induced MDSC
infiltration was dependent on hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs). HIFs
activated the transcription of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 26 (CCL26) in
HCC cells to recruit chemokine (C-X3-C motif) receptor 1
(CX3CR1)-expressing MDSCs to the primary tumor. Knockdown of CCL26 in HCC
cells profoundly reduces MDSC recruitment, angiogenesis, and tumor
growth. Therapeutically, blockade of CCL26 production in HCC cells by HIF
inhibitor, digoxin, or blockade of CX3CR1 in MDSCs by CX3CR1 neutralizing
antibody could substantially suppress MDSC recruitment and tumor
growth.Conclusion: This study unprecedentedly reveals a novel molecular
mechanism by which HCC cells direct MDSC homing to primary tumor and
suggests that targeting MDSC recruitment represents an attractive
therapeutic approach against HCC.

