Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of EZH2 as a therapeutic target in clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC)


Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a key component of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2). EZH2 is frequently overexpressed in a wide
variety of human malignancies including non-Hodgkin lymphoma, gastric
cancer, pancreatic cancer, and lung cancer. Thus it has potential to
become a therapeutic target. Characterization of EZH2 as a therapeutic
target in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has not been fully
explored. ccRCC have been defined by mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) tumor suppressor gene in combination with chromosome 3p loss.
Recent sequencing efforts have revealed that several chromatin remodeling
genes encoded on chromosome 3p are often mutated, of which PBRM1 is the
most frequent (41%). The PBRM1 gene codes for the BAF180 protein, a
SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex subunit. Loss of BAF180 in ccRCC may
disrupt the PBAF variant of the SWI/SNF complex. The SWI/SNF complex
remodels the chromatin landscape by either sliding or evicting the
nucleosomes from the chromatin. This chromatin remodeling modulates the
accessibility to promoter regions by transcriptional machinery. It is
through this mechanism that the SWI/SNF complex can regulate a range of
cellular processes. It has been demonstrated that the SWI/SNF complex can
act antagonistically to the PRC2 complex by evicting PRC2 complex from
the promoters of tumor suppressors such as CDKN2A/p16. Disruption of the
SWI/SNF complex would impede the eviction of the PRC2 complex, similarly
observed in SNF5-deficient malignant rhabdoid tumors. Therefore, we
hypothesize that PBRM1 inactivation disrupts specific SWI/SNF complexes
allowing EZH2 to bind and repress target tumor suppressor genes. Thus
inhibition of EZH2 in ccRCC may present as a targeted therapeutic option
in tumors with PBRM1 mutations. We have investigated EZH2 in ccRCC cell
lines with PBRM1 mutations and observed that these cells lines have
overexpression of EZH2 in comparison to RPTEC (renal cortex proximal
tubule epithelium cell line). We examined the effects on two EZH2
inhibitors (GSK126 and EPZ6438) on ccRCC cell lines both in vitro and in
vivo. Our preliminary data suggests EZH2 inhibition results in reduced
growth of ccRCC cell lines with PBRM1 mutations.

