Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of somatic mutations in plasma allows for non-invasive
real-time therapy response monitoring of lung cancer patients


Tumor-specific (somatic) mutations in plasma can serve as biomarkers for
tumor detection, monitor tumor response to specific therapies, detect
residual disease after surgery, and long-term follow-up. The intrinsic
low abundance of circulating cell-free tumor DNA (cfDNA) makes the
detection and quantification of such mutations in plasma a challenging
task. This study aimed to establish a comprehensive strategy to be used
in the detection of clinically relevant somatic mutations in plasma of
lung cancer patients both at diagnosis and during follow-up of
disease.Plasma samples from healthy controls were used to isolate cfDNA
and to optimize the experimental approach. A custom multiplex PCR panel
was designed to target 420 unique genetic variants. To cover a broad
range (0.0 -100%) of variant allele fractions (VAF), as expected for
somatic mutations in the plasma of cancer patients, the cfDNA samples
from the controls were mixed at five different ratios and sequenced using
five different levels of coverage. In order to evaluate our strategy,
plasma samples obtained at different stages of disease were collected
from a group of 100 lung cancer patients and used to isolate cfDNA. The
mean treatment follow up time was 6 months with a minimum of 1 and a
maximum of 23 months. Different enrichment strategies where tested. All
amplified products were used to prepare libraries and sequenced using the
Ion PGM system. The QuantStudio 3D Digital PCR System was used to confirm
selected results.Our controlled data set enabled us to define VAF, allele
depth and allele quality score cutoffs for a reliable detection of low
VAF in cfDNA. For variants present at VAF 5%, a sensitivity of 100% was
achieved at 500x coverage. At 1000x coverage, more than 94% of the
variants present at VAF Q30. In the plasma isolated from lung cancer
patients, tumor derived genetic mutations could be identified in as
little as 10ng of cfDNA. Mutations identified in cfDNA mirrored the
mutations identified in tumor biopsies. Mutations with VAF as low as 0.1%
could be detected in cfDNA and confirmed using Digital PCR. The changes
in tumor-specific mutations in cfDNA was then correlated with the
clinical follow up of the patients. Response to therapy, including
resistance, could be observed by tracking specific mutations in cfDNA and
the detection of tumor relapse could be anticipated up to two months
using cfDNA when compared to standard methodologies.In conclusion, the
comprehensiveness and speed of the NGS methodology, combined with the
high sensitivity of detection, delivered an experimental protocol for the
detection of somatic mutations in cfDNA for non-invasive real time
therapy response monitoring of cancer patients. This strategy can be
implemented in any molecular pathology laboratory with clear benefits for
the management of cancer patients.

