Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of cytochrome C oxidase 4 (COX4) in thyroid cancer cells


Background:Targeting cell metabolism has emerged as a therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of cancer. Metabolically active thyroid
cancers are resistant to treatment with radioactive iodine. Aberrant
expression of genes controlling glycolysis was demonstrated in thyroid
cancer cells, but little is known regarding the role of mitochondrial
proteins in thyroid carcinogenesis. Cytochrome c oxidase 4 (COX4) plays
pivotal roles in oxidative phosphorylation and the cellular response to
oxidative stress. COX4 may thus represent a promising therapeutic
target.Objectives:We examined expression of COX4 in human thyroid tumors
and performed functional studies using thyroid cancer cell lines.Material
and MethodsExpression of COX4 was examined by immunostaining in 25
follicular adenomas (FAs), 22 follicular cancers (FTCs), 90 papillary
cancers (PTCs) and in 48 samples from normal thyroid tissue. FTC-derived
(FTC133) and PTC-derived (BCPAP) cell lines were used to create
COX4-deficient cells by lentiviral transfection. The efficiency of COX4
inhibition was examined. Mitochondrial membrane potential was examined by
JC-1 staining. DNA-damage signaling was examined after cell exposure to
radiation (6-18 Gy). We also determined the effects of 2-deoxyglucose
(2DG) on viability of thyroid cancer cells with compromised COX4.
Caspase-3 and PARP cleavage assays were performed to measure
apoptosis.ResultsPositive immunostaining with anti-COX4 was detected in
6/48 (12.5%) normal tissue, 5/20 (25%) FAs, 7/22 (31%) FTCs, and 51/90
(56%) PTCs. The intensity of COX4 immunostaining was significantly higher
in thyroid cancers than in either normal thyroid (p = 0.0001) or benign
FAs (0.001). COX4 expression was more frequently detected in PTCs than in
FTCs (p = 0.03). The mRNA level of COX4 was higher in BCPAP and FTC133
cells compared to normal thyroid. In both cell lines, silencing of COX4
altered intra-cellular distribution of JC-1 staining. In control cells,
JC-1 staining was perinuclear, but in COX4-deficient cells it became
diffusely cytoplasmic. COX4 silencing affected cell growth and response
to radiation in a cell type specific manner. In BCPAP cells,
downregulation of COX4 was associated with inhibition of cell growth,
block in G1 phase and inhibition of Cyclin D1. In BCPAP cells, COX4
silencing activated DNA-damage signaling and increased sensitivity to
radiation. Inhibitor of glycolysis (2DG) was more efficient against
COX4-deficient than COX4-expressing BCPAP cells. In FTC133 cells,
silencing of COX4 increased the rate of growth and induced expression of
Cyclin D1. COX4 silencing did not increase FTC133 cell sensitivity to
radiation nor to treatment with 2DG.ConclusionCOX4 is implicated in
regulation of thyroid cancer cell growth and response to DNA damaging or
metabolic treatments. These data suggest that evaluation of COX4 in
thyroid cancer could serve as a biomarker of response to treatment with
metabolic agents.

