Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Meta-analysis of genomic aberrations identified in CTCs andctDNA
in triple negative breast cancer


Technological innovation and scientific advances in understanding cancer
at the molecular level have accelerated the discovery and development of
both diagnostics and therapeutics. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and
plasma circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) are non-invasive prognostic markers
that have been associated with metastatic and aggressive disease. Both
CTCs and ctDNA allow molecular characterization of a tumor that is
inaccessible or too risky to biopsy. The analysis of genomic aberrations
in both sample types provides insights into drug resistance and can help
determine appropriate, targeted cancer treatments. Mutations found in the
primary or metastatic tumor can be identified in both CTCs and ctDNA as
well as novel mutations that may reflect intratumoral and intermetastatic
heterogeneity. When collected and evaluated over an extended period of
time, changes in the CTC and/or ctDNA mutational profile can offer
guidance into the effectiveness of a treatment, indicate the progression
of disease, and detect recurrence of disease earlier.We have performed
whole exome sequencing of CTCs and ctDNA from a metastatic triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) patient to better understand the evolution
of tumor heterogeneity during therapy. The patient was enrolled in the
Intensive Trial of OMics in Cancer clinical Trial (ITOMIC-001) and
initially received weekly cisplatin infusions followed by additional
targeted therapy. Longitudinal peripheral blood samples were collected
over a period of 272 days following enrollment in the clinical trial.
CTCs were identified using the AccuCyte-CyteFinder system (RareCyte,
Seattle WA).We used next generation sequencing, and computational biology
tools to analyze genomic DNA from multiple CTCs, white blood cells (WBCs)
and ctDNA from various time points. We observed similar genomic
aberrations in both CTCs and ctDNA that could be classified into three
groups: a) a static group that remains unchanged during the course of
therapy, b) a sample-specific group that is unique to each time point and
c) an intermediate group that has variants that are short-lived but are
present across multiple time points. Variants identified in the liquid
biopsy samples were compared with variants observed in primary breast
tumor, metastatic bone marrow tumor and publically available pan-cancer
datasets. We then performed meta-analysis on somatic variants to identify
changes in affected networks in response to therapy over time. Several
key nodes were identified that could rationally have been targeted for
therapy using compounds currently in clinical trials. We then compared
and combined the perturbed networks obtained from the CTCs and ctDNA to
better understand the etiology of TNBC. These studies represent the first
step of a synergistic partnership between the genetic information
obtained from the analysis of CTCs and ctDNA with innovative health care
for patients with metastatic breast cancer.

