Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mithramycin depletes stem-like cells in lung adenocarcinoma via
repression of mastermind-like 2 and mastermind-like 3


Background: Targeting cancer stem-like cells is a potential strategy to
prevent development of drug resistance and tumor recurrence. Our group
has previously demonstrated that mithramycin attenuates induction of side
population (a phenotype of cancer stem-like cells) by cigarette smoke
condensate, and modulates expression of multiple genes regulating
stem-cell related pathways in lung cancer cells. The present study was
performed to further examine the effects of mithramycin on stem cell
signaling pathways, and ascertain if mithramycin can eliminate stem-like
cells in lung cancer following exposure to conventional chemotherapeutic
or targeted agents.Methods: Stem-like cell populations in lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines (H2228, H358 and HCC827) were detected based on
stem cell markers, CD133 or ALDH, using flow cytometry or ALDEFLUORTM
assay. Sphere-formation assays were performed using low attachment plates
and stem-cell media (serum-free DMEM/F12 media supplemented with
epidermal growth factor and fibroblast growth factor). qRT-PCR and
western blot techniques were used to evaluate gene and protein expression
levels, respectively. SiRNA transfection was performed to knockdown
target gene(s) of interest.Results: A small CD133+ or ALDH+ cell fraction
was detected in untreated H2228, H358 and HCC827 cells, respectively. The
chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin enriched CD133+ fraction in H2228 cells
and ALDH+ fraction in H358 cells, while the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib
remarkably increased ALDH+ fraction in HCC827 cells. Consistent with the
notion that stem-like cells are present in these cancer lines, H2228 and
H358 cells formed pulmospheroids when cultured in stem cell media in low
attachment plates, and these pulmospheroids showed increased expression
of stem-cell marker genes (Aldh1a1 and Prominin) as well as
stemness-related genes (Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog). Relative to untreated
controls, mithramycin decreased the cancer stem-like cell fractions in
all three cell lines, and abolished their enrichment after cisplatin or
erlotinib treatment. Analysis of stem-cell signaling pathways revealed
that maintenance of cancer stem-cell like fractions in H358 and H2228
cells requires Notch signaling. Mithramycin decreased gene and protein
expression of Mastermind-like 2 and 3 (MAML2 and MAML3), both of which
are important transcription co-activators of canonical Notch signaling.
Knockdown of MAML2 and MAML3 remarkably decreased the stem-like cell
fraction in H358 cells, which recapitulates the phenotype of mithramycin
treatment.Conclusion: Mithramycin depletes cancer stem-like cells via
repression of MAML2 and MAML3 and inhibition of Notch signaling. These
findings support evaluation of mithramycin as a strategy to eliminate
stem-like cells emerging in lung cancers after cisplatin or EGFR targeted
therapy.

