Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropilin 2 regulates lung disseminated tumor cell escape from
dormancy and progression into metastasis


Despite considerable advances in the treatment of cancer, about 50% of
patients will still eventually develop metastatic disease which remains
the main cause of cancer-related death. Disseminated tumor cells (DTCs)
are the precursors of metastasis and understanding their biology is one
of the most important challenges for the future of cancer research. Our
previous studies have shown that TGF2 through binding to TGFR3 regulates
DTCs quiescence through the activation of p38MAPK and induction of the
dormant genes DEC2 and p27. However, these DTCs dormancy may be reversed
when micro-environmental conditions shift to support DTCs expansion.
Nerve fibers and neural mediators are present in organs that serve as key
targets for breast and head and neck cancer metastasis, including lungs
and bone. In addition, neuropeptides and neurotransmitters receptors are
expressed by both, nerve and cancer cells, which suggests that
neurotrophic factors can act as messengers between the nervous system and
DTCs and influence metastasis progression. Therefore, we hypothesized
that in situations of chronic stress or inflammation, neural mediators
might influence DTCs fate at secondary organs. Using bioinformatics tools
we have found that the semaphorins receptor Neuropilin 2 (NRP2), a
co-receptor for TGF ligands, is overexpressed in basal and HER2+ breast
cancer patient samples and its expression in primary tumors correlate
with worst prognosis. In basal breast cancer cell lines, NRP2 expression
correlates with lower levels of DEC2 and p27 dormancy genes. Furthermore,
we have found that NRP2 is downregulated in dormant cells and
overexpressed in proliferative lung DTCs derived cell lines that express
low levels of P-p38, DEC2 and p27 dormancy markers. Our results show that
in lung DTCs derived cell lines, NRP2 inhibits TGFR3 expression favoring
TGF1 signaling and promoting DTCs growth. In agreement with this, breast
cancer lung metastasis express higher levels of NRP2 than quiescence lung
DTCs in vivo, suggesting that NRP2 might play a role in lung DTCs
proliferation. Therefore, we conclude that NRP2 can regulate breast
cancer lung DTCs progression from a dormant state to a proliferative
state and promote metastasis formation.

