Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of PI3K/mTOR leads to MEK/ERK over-activation in
leiomyosarcoma through suppression of mTORC2 inhibition


Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) are an uncommon group of malignant tumors composed
of cells showing smooth muscle differentiation that represent 10-15% of
all soft-tissue sarcomas and is therefore one of the most frequent
sarcoma subtype. From a genetic point of view, LMS are characterized by
numerous genomic alterations whose a large region of deletion on
chromosome 10 including the tumor suppressor gene PTEN. It is one of the
most frequent aberration (40-50% of cases) and is associated with
increased activation of the mTOR pathway. Moreover, in vitro and vivo
studies have demonstrated that the mTOR pathway plays a crucial role in
LMS tumorigenesis. There are no data about the role of PI3K/mTOR
targeting in LMS.The LMS cell lines have been derived from human surgical
STS specimens in our laboratory. Cells were treated for 72hrs with a
range of increasing concentrations of Everolimus (mTORC1 inhibitor),
BKM120 (PI3KCA inhibitor) and BEZ235 (dual PI3K-mTOR inhibitor) to assess
anti-proliferative activity by MTT-assay and apoptosis by AnnexinV/PI
staining. Effects on mTOR and MAPK pathway signaling were studied by
western blot analysis. The LMS cell lines were exposed to increasing
doses of BEZ235 in combination with GDC-0994 (ERK inhibitor) and synergy
was assessed by Chou-Talalay combination index (CI). Effects of all
inhibitors were observed in mice with subcutaneous LMS cell line-derived
xenograft tumors for 3 weeks.Dose-dependent growth suppression was more
clearly induced by BEZ235 (range, 0.001 to 0.1 M) than by Everolimus and
BKM120 (range 0.01 to 1.6 M). Apoptosis was also much more effectively
induced by BEZ235. We examined in vivo antitumor activity of the three
drugs in mice inoculated with LMS cells. In vivo, the effects of BEZ235
(70% tumor volume [TV] inhibition versus untreated tumors) was also
higher than that of BKM120 and Everolimus (30% and 55% TV inhibition). We
assessed the effects of BEZ235 on signaling pathways in all cell lines.
Strikingly, mTOR pathway was consistently repressed and BEZ235 markedly
induced ERK overactivation. This effect was not observed with BKM120 or
Everolimus suggesting a role of mTORC2. Knockdown of RICTOR via
transfection of siRNA significantly reduced the enhancing effect of
BEZ235 on ERK phosphorylation. Combined treatment with BEZ235 and
GDC-0994, a potent ERK inhibitor, resulted in synergistic growth
inhibition, apoptosis induction and decrease levels of both
phosphorylated proteins of mTOR and ERK pathways in vitro and in
vivo.Targeting PI3K and mTOR simultaneously using BEZ235 effectively
inhibits LMS cell growth and prolongs survival of mice in comparison of
those treated with BKM120 or Everolimus. However, BEZ235 suppress a
negative feedback loop mediated by mTORC2, thereby leading to enhanced
MEK/ERK pathway activity in LMSs cells. Combining BEZ235 with MEK/ERK
inhibitors may be a relevant approach to increase anti-tumor activity and
avoid drug resistance.

