Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of cytarabine resistance leads to increased
glucocorticoid sensitivity in AML


Acquired resistance to standard chemotherapeutic agents, such as
cytarabine, is a major challenge in the treatment of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Here, we hypothesized that development of resistance to
one chemotherapeutic agent may lead to increased sensitivity to other
drugs. Hence, we sought to identify novel drug vulnerabilities that arise
during the development of cytarabine resistance using both cytarabine
resistant AML cell lines and samples from AML patients who had relapsed
during cytarabine containing chemotherapy.We developed resistant variants
of AML cell lines MOLM-13 and SHI-1 by long-term drug treatment with
increasing doses of cytarabine. Profiling data from the in vitro
generated cytarabine resistant cell line variants were systematically
compared with corresponding data from 31 chemorefractory AML patient
samples. All samples were subjected to genomic and transcriptomic
profiling and high-throughput drug sensitivity and resistance testing
with a panel of 250 chemical compounds (each in five doses).Cytarabine
resistant AML cell line variants and patient samples showed co-resistance
to other nucleoside analogues, such as cladribine, clofarabine and
gemcitabine. Genomic profiling showed deletion of the deoxycytidine
kinase gene DCK, a well-known genetic lesion related to cytarabine
resistance, in both MOLM-13 and SHI-1 cytarabine resistant cell lines and
in one chemorefractory AML patient. Importantly, comprehensive drug
testing revealed that cytarabine resistant SHI-1 cell variants developed
increased sensitivity to glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone,
methylprednisolone and prednisolone when compared to parental cells. This
was accompanied by up-regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor NR3C1. We
also observed acquisition of glucocorticoid sensitivity in paired samples
from two AML patient cases who had relapsed after cytarabine containing
chemotherapy. Systematic ex vivo drug testing of 31 relapsed and
chemorefractory AML patient samples showed high sensitivity to
dexamethasone in five (20%) and to prednisolone and methylprednisolone in
four (13%) patient samples.In conclusion, our results from both
cytarabine resistant AML cell lines and chemorefractory patient samples
indicate that a subset of AML samples develop sensitivity to
glucocorticoids. This novel finding indicates the need of detailed
investigation of glucocorticoid efficacy in the clinic.

