Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel high energy alpha-pharmaceutical: In vitro and in vivo
potency of a mesothelin-targeted thorium-227 conjugate (TTC) in a model
of bone disease


Mesothelin (MSLN) is a 40 kDa membrane-anchored glycoprotein, involved in
mediating cell-cell adhesion, metastatic spread, promotion of cell
proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. Overexpression of MSLN is most
prominent in mesothelioma, ovarian, lung, triple-negative breast (TNBC)
and pancreatic cancers, while in healthy tissue, MSLN is confined mainly
to the mesothelial cells of the peritoneum and pericardium. Several
MSLN-targeting approaches are currently being investigated, including
antibody drug conjugates. We describe herein a high energy,
alpha-particle emitting MSLN Targeted Thorium Conjugate
(MSLN-TTC).Thorium-227 (227Th) has a half-life of 18.7 days and decays
via emission of an alpha particle to radium-223 (half-life 11.4 days), a
calcium-mimetic used in the treatment of CRPC [1]. The MSLN-TTC comprises
an anti-mesothelin monoclonal antibody covalently linked via an amide
bond to a chelator moiety possessing high affinity for thorium-227. We
present data from in vitro cytotoxicity assays demonstrating selective
cell killing on MSLN positive cell-lines as well as in vivo efficacy in a
mouse orthotopic bone xenograft model using NCI-H226 luciferase labeled
cells.Experimental procedures:MSLN-TTC was prepared in high radiochemical
yields and purity. In vitro cytotoxicity experiments were performed on
the mesothelin-positive cell lines Ovcar-3 (ovarian), NCI-H226 (lung
mesothelioma) and mesothelin-transfected HT29 (HT29MSLN/colorectal)
cells. An in vivo model was established by orthotopic intratibial
inoculation of luciferase-transfected NCI-H226 cells in athymic mice.
Development of bone disease was monitored by luciferase activity and the
extent of bone lesions determined by x-ray imaging and
microCT.Results:MSLN-TTC induced specific in vitro cytotoxicity via
induction of DNA double strand breaks as determined by phosphorylated
histone protein H2AX. MSLN-TTC demonstrated statistical significant in
vivo potency administered as a single dose of either 250 or 500 kBq/ kg
in the orthotopic bone xenograft model. Animals treated with MSLN-TTC
showed a) significantly reduced disease in the bone metastatic lesions b)
decreased metastatic disease in the lungs and c) significant reduction in
osteolytic/ osteoblastic bone lesions as evidenced by X-Ray and microCT
compared to the vehicle control group. Furthermore, no significant loss
in body weight was observed during the course of the study demonstrating
that the MSLN-TTC was well tolerated.The data presented support the
further investigation of the MSLN-TTC in bone metastatic
disease.References:1. Henriksen, G., et al., Targeting of osseous sites
with alpha-emitting 223Ra: comparison with the beta-emitter 89Sr in mice.
J Nucl Med, 2003. 44(2): p. 252-9.

