Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral treatment with a highly interferogenic TLR9 agonist
reverts tumor escape from PD-1 blockade


The induction of tumor specific T cell exhaustion by the PD-1/PDL-1
pathway is an important mechanism of immune escape in cancer. Therapies
blocking or reversing T cell exhaustion can produce durable responses in
metastatic cancers including melanoma, NSCLC, renal carcinoma and bladder
cancer. However, only a small subset of patients experience response upon
anti-PD-1/PDL-1 treatment, whereas many others are refractory, showing no
response at all. Thus, a key challenge is transforming a non-permissive
tumor microenvironment into an immunologically competent one, in order to
increase the frequency of patients with durable responses to PD-1/PDL-1
blockade.We have characterized a mouse tumor model with a reproducible
dichotomous response to anti-PD-1 treatment analogous to that observed in
human cancers. We show that the ability of tumors to be rejected in
response to anti-PD-1 treatment is highly correlated with degree of T
cell infiltration, expression of Type I IFNs and B cell activation
signatures, in whole tumors and in tumor infiltrating leukocytes. We then
evaluate whether immunomodulation by intratumoral vaccination with a TLR9
agonist, SD-101, would affect rate of response to anti-PD-1 blockade.
SD-101, is a CpG-C class oligonucleotide, optimized to induce both very
high levels of IFN-alpha as well as maturation of dendritic cells and B
cells. Intratumoral injection of SD-101 in tumor bearing mice undergoing
anti-PD-1 therapy leads tumor rejection in 100% of treated mice versus a
20% tumor rejection in mice treated with anti-PD-1 blockade alone. SD-101
alone, although efficacious in reducing tumor growth, did not lead to
durable tumor rejection.Immune cell subset depletion studies implicate
CD8, but not CD4, T cells in the rejection of tumors treated with
anti-PD1 plus SD-101. T cell response generated in one flank by IT
injection of SD-101 synergizes with systemic PD-1 blockade to induce
rejection of unvaccinated distal tumors. In addition, we show that mice
receiving systemic anti-PD-1 plus SD-101 have a higher percentage of CD8+
T cells infiltrating the tumors when compared to anti-PD-1 responders,
anti-PD-1 non-responders or SD-101 given alone. Infiltrating CD4 and CD8
T cells in tumors with combination treatment, show a higher proliferative
capacity and a higher frequency of cells producing both TNF-a and IFN-g
than tumors responding to anti-PD-1 monotherapy. This demonstrates the
potential for SD-101 to significantly enhance the frequency of responders
to anti-PD-1 therapy by increasing the number and functionality of
anti-tumor T cells within the tumor.

