Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipidomic analysis: a powerful tool for evaluating lipid
metabolism in cultured cancer cells


Lipids have numerous functions in biological processes, structural as
well as regulatory. Cancer cells show differences from healthy normal
cells in their metabolism, including lipid metabolism, which contribute
to their survival and growth. Overexpression of fatty acid synthase
(FASN) is commonly observed in cancer cells and there is also evidence of
other lipid pathways being changed in tumor cells. The general aim of
this project is to establish a lipidomic based UPLC-QToF method for
evaluation of lipid composition in cultured cells of normal and cancerous
origin using electrospray quadrupole traveling wave ion mobility Q-ToF
mass spectrometry. Cell lines were selected based on their lipid
metabolism, including three breast cancer cell lines: SK-Br-3
(overexpresses FASN), T47D (TP53-mutated), MCF7 (estrogen
receptor-positive); and one pancreatic cancer cell line,
ASPC-1(overexpresses 5-and 12-lipoxygenases). Furthermore, we analyzed
the immortalized breast epithelial stem cell line D492 along with its
subline, D492M, that has undergone epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Principal component analysis (PCA) revealed distinct differences
in lipid composition between all the cell lines tested, each cell line
showed a clear cluster of lipid components and patterns that were
reproducible between experiments. The Sk-Br-3 was most clearly separated
from the other two breast cancer cell lines. Further analysis revealed
significant differences in levels of phosphocholins (PC) that are
elevated in Sk-Br-3compared to other cell lines. Further investigations
of the data have led to identification of certain PC that are different
between cell lines. Significant differences were detected in the lipid
composition of D492 and D492M. In conclusion, different levels of
lipid-synthesizing enzymes are reflected in distinct lipid profiles in
breast cancer cells. The observed differences in lipid profiles of the
breast epithelial cell line and its mesenchymal-like subline may provide
an insight into membrane changes associated with EMT and help evaluate
lipidomes of tumor samples from patients in terms of invasive potential.

