Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mir-194-3p suppresses tumorigenic potential of glioblastoma stem
cells by targeting the canonical NF-kB pathway


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common tumor of the central nervous
system, with its deadly nature owing to high rates of invasion and
angiogenesis. A key element in its pathogenesis is a small subpopulation
of neoplastic cells called glioma stem cells (GSCs) that are responsible
for tumor initiation, maintenance and relapse. Approaches to target GSCs
have mostly proved futile due to their chemo- and radio-resistance
potential. Given that microRNAs carry a potential to affect both normal
and stem cells, we employed a microRNA-based targeted approach to
identify the subset of microRNAs that could distinctively affect the
stemness of GSCs. Our study tests the hypothesis that GSCs will show an
altered miRNA expression upon their differentiation, and their profiling
may lead to identification of specific microRNAs that regulate the
process. Our initial efforts resulted in identification of hsa-miR-194-3p
as one of the potential candidates, which was consistently downregulated
in multiple GSCs that we investigated. Stable cell lines overexpressing
hsa-miR-194-3p showed a decreased proliferation rate and reduced
sphere-forming ability. In silico analysis revealed TAB2, an upstream
activator of NF-B pathway to be the potential target of hsa-miR-194-3p,
which was confirmed by luciferase assay and knockdown approaches. The
regulatory role of hsa-miR-194-3p was substantiated by its ability to
inhibit the NF-B pathway and the corresponding downstream targets
including IL-6 and STAT3. In vivo studies revealed a reduced tumor
forming ability when the cell lines overexpressing hsa-miR-194-3p were
injected intracranially in NOD/SCID mice, compared with the non-target
control. Our results indicate that hsa-miR-194-3p blocked the canonical
NF-B signaling and negatively affected tumor formation. We have carried
out this study this in a unique model system expecting it to uncover
another layer of complexity that may add a new facet to meet the
challenge imposed by the cancer stem cell paradigm. In conclusion, we
accentuate the anti-tumorigenic role of hsa-miR-194-3p as a connecting
link to both stemness and NF-B signaling.Funding sources: This work was
supported by R01CA108633 (To AC), 1RC2CA148190 (To AC) U10CA180850-01 (To
AC), 1R01CA169368 (To AC) from the National Cancer Institute (NCI), Brain
Tumor Funders Collaborative Grant (To AC), Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center Award (To AC).

