Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A PKC-RAF-ERK signaling axis for downregulation of Id1 and Id3 in
colorectal cancer cells


Members of the Id family (Id1-Id4) are emerging as attractive therapeutic
targets in multiple tumor types. Id proteins are dominant negative
antagonists of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, with
recognized functions in development, stem cell maintenance/self-renewal,
and cell fate determination. Recent studies have identified Id proteins
as master regulators of cancer-initiating cells and tumor aggressiveness,
with critical roles in regulation of central hallmarks of cancer,
including cell proliferation, survival, senescence, angiogenesis,
migration, metastasis, and chemoresistance. Deregulated Id1 and/or Id3
expression has been observed in more than twenty human cancers, including
colorectal cancer (CRC). Based on their important roles in tumors, Id
proteins are being actively explored as therapeutic targets, with
promising results in mouse models and human tumor cell lines. Id1 and Id3
appear to have redundant functions in CRC; thus Id-based therapy would
ideally involve a strategy that targets Id1 and Id3 simultaneously.We
have identified a novel pathway of Id1 and Id3 repression involving the
signal transduction molecule PKC. Activation of PKC in non-transformed
intestinal cells (IEC-18 cells) and human CRC cells that retain PKC
potently suppresses Id1/Id3 mRNA and protein. Restoration of the enzyme
in PKC-deficient CRC cells also results in Id1/Id3 downregulation.
Suppression occurs at the transcriptional level and is mediated by the
proximal 932 bp of the promoter for Id1. Notably, the effects of PKC were
observed in CRC cell lines with diverse genetic backgrounds, differing in
the status of APC, -catenin, K-RAS, the PI3K/AKT pathway, and/or TP53.PKC
activates a growth inhibitory MEK/ERK signaling pathway in intestinal
cells that is required for Id1/Id3 downregulation. Our demonstration that
PKC can activate ERK and suppress Id1/Id3 in KRAS-mutant CRC cells
suggested that the effects of PKC occur downstream of RAS activation.
Notably, PKC was unable to downregulate Id1/Id3 in CRC cells harboring
V600E mutations in BRAF, indicating that RAF activation is a key mediator
of PKC-induced Id downregulation. This conclusion was further supported
by the ability of the RAF inhibitor, sorafenib, to block the effects of
PKC on Id1/Id3 in BRAF-wild type cells. KSR1 is an important regulator of
RAF function; however, PKC retained its ability to downregulate Id1 in
KSR1 knockdown CRC cells, excluding a role for altered KSR1-RAF
interactions in the effects of PKC. Collectively, these data indicate
that PKC regulates a novel signaling pathway for downregulation of
Id1/Id3 that intersects the MEK/ERK pathway at or upstream of RAF, but
downstream of RAS. Manipulation of this pathway for coincident
downregulation of Id1 and Id3 offers a promising therapeutic strategy for
treatment of CRC and other cancer types.Supported by NIH grants CA036727,
CA016056, CA191894 and DK60632.

