Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological reactivation of the tumor suppressor protein
phosphatase 2A as a novel approach for the treatment of breast cancer


PP2A is a phosphatase that is functionally dysregulated and inactivated
in over 50% of all breast cancers independent of histological type. While
much attention has focused on oncogenic kinases as targets for cancer
treatment, therapeutic targeting of phosphatases, the key negative
regulators of these same signaling pathways, has remained largely
unexplored. Starting with the observation that tricyclic neuroleptic
drugs exert anticancer effects, our laboratory reverse engineered these
drugs to generate a novel series of compounds that retain the
anti-proliferative effects and favorable pharmacokinetic properties but
are devoid of the undesirable central nervous system pharmacology of the
parent drugs. It was subsequently demonstrated that these first
generation novel derivatives exert anticancer effects in cell culture and
xenograft models of cancer (without overt toxicity) by modulation of
critical oncogenic signaling pathways. Recently, it was determined that
the molecular basis of the actions of these novel derivatives is the
activation of PP2A. Comprehensive profiling for activity in a panel of
240 cancer cell lines has shown that these first-in-class small molecule
activators of PP2A (SMAPs) have significant anti-proliferative activity
in breast cancer cell lines, and studies have been extended to disease
relevant in vivo models (patient derived xenograft, GEMM, and traditional
xenograft models). PP2A's ability to negatively regulate a diverse set of
oncogenic drivers in breast cancer means SMAPs are able to exert their
effects through multiple biological mechanisms, swiftly disrupting
cellular energetics and metabolism, inducing apoptosis and inhibiting
proliferation. This will be exhibited through a variety of biological
assays evaluating cell growth, apoptosis and changes in cellular
metabolism. Target engagement assessed via western blotting demonstrates
inhibition of PP2A targets critical for mediating SMAP activity, notably
c-MYC and AKT. As a result, this research demonstrates SMAPs have potent
activity in a wide variety of breast cancer contexts where response to
current therapies is modest and limited by the development of treatment
resistance. Thus, SMAPs may be a viable treatment option for high-risk
populations of patients who do not respond to the current standard of
care. This research strives to demonstrate that therapeutic reactivation
of PP2A may represent a novel approach for breast cancer treatment and
that these molecules may favorably impact the lives of women suffering
from breast cancer.

