Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of mimotopes of the epithelial mucin-1 (MUC1) in
non-small cell lung cancer


BackgroundMimotope analysis has been widely used in mapping epitopes for
drug target, and also used in the development of new diagnostics,
therapeutics and vaccines. The epithelial mucin-1 (MUC1) is a
glycoprotein in human endometrium and has been found highly expressed in
tumor tissues of NSCLC patients. Mimotopes of MUC1 has great potentials
to be immunotherapy targets for NSCLC. In this study, we use phage
display technology to screen a T7 NSCLC phage library to identify
mimotope peptides of MUC1 proteins.MethodA T7 NSCLC phage library was
screened by 3-round of biopanning with anti-MUC1 monoclonal antibody
acting as a molecular target. Forty positive clones were picked for ELISA
confirmation using anti-MUC1 antibody. In addition, these clones were
then amplified and coated with ELISA plates. Forty NSCLC patient and 40
control serum samples were used to test the ELISA plates. Statistical
analysis was preformed, and the most significant clones were picked and
PCR amplified for sequencing.ResultTwo peptide sequences, AAPDFRP and
SAPDDRP, were identified and the competitive inhibitory rates of MUC1
were more than 50%. The intensity between MUC1 monoclonal antibody and
the positive clones of these two sequences had positive correlation. In
addition, in serum binding specificity detection, these two amino acid
sequences showed higher tumor binding specificity with lung cancer
patients serum than that of healthy human serum(PBackgroundMimotope
analysis has been widely used in mapping epitopes for drug target, and
also used in the development of new diagnostics, therapeutics and
vaccines. The epithelial mucin-1 (MUC1) is a glycoprotein in human
endometrium and has been found highly expressed in tumor tissues of NSCLC
patients. Mimotopes of MUC1 has great potentials to be immunotherapy
targets for NSCLC. In this study, we use phage display technology to
screen a T7 NSCLC phage library to identify mimotope peptides of MUC1
proteins.MethodA T7 NSCLC phage library was screened by 3-round of
biopanning with anti-MUC1 monoclonal antibody acting as a molecular
target. Forty positive clones were picked for ELISA confirmation using
anti-MUC1 antibody. In addition, these clones were then amplified and
coated with ELISA plates. Forty NSCLC patient and 40 control serum
samples were used to test the ELISA plates. Statistical analysis was
preformed, and the most significant clones were picked and PCR amplified
for sequencing.ResultTwo peptide sequences, AAPDFRP and SAPDDRP, were
identified and the competitive inhibitory rates of MUC1 were more than
50%. The intensity between MUC1 monoclonal antibody and the positive
clones of these two sequences had positive correlation. In addition, in
serum binding specificity detection, these two amino acid sequences
showed higher tumor binding specificity with lung cancer patients serum
than that of healthy human serum(P<0.05).ConclusionPeptides of AAPDFRP
and SAPDDRP showed a high homology in the mimic epitopes of the
epithelial mucin-1 (MUC1) glycoprotein in NSCLC. These may be potential
immunotherapy targets which could also act as candidates of tumor vaccines

