Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol, a phytochemical from magnolia plant, prevents UV
radiation-induced immune suppression in mice through inhibition of PGE2
and DNA methylation


The exposure of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) to murine skin suppresses the
development of allergic contact hypersensitivity (CHS) response which is
considered to be a prototypic T-cell mediated immune response.
UVR-induced suppression of immune system has been implicated in skin
cancer risk. Honokiol has been shown to have anti-skin carcinogenic
activity, and here we have assessed the effect of honokiol on UVR-induced
immunosuppression and its possible mechanism of action. Our CHS
experiments revealed that exposure of C3H/HeN mouse skin with UVB
radiation (150 mJ/cm2) for 4 consecutive days resulted in significant
suppression of CHS response (75%, PThe exposure of ultraviolet radiation
(UVR) to murine skin suppresses the development of allergic contact
hypersensitivity (CHS) response which is considered to be a prototypic
T-cell mediated immune response. UVR-induced suppression of immune system
has been implicated in skin cancer risk. Honokiol has been shown to have
anti-skin carcinogenic activity, and here we have assessed the effect of
honokiol on UVR-induced immunosuppression and its possible mechanism of
action. Our CHS experiments revealed that exposure of C3H/HeN mouse skin
with UVB radiation (150 mJ/cm2) for 4 consecutive days resulted in
significant suppression of CHS response (75%, P<0.001) to the skin
contact sensitizer, 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB), which was associated
with the enhancement in the levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression
and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production. Topical treatment of mice with
honokiol (0.5 and 1.0 mg/cm2 skin area) in hydrophilic-cream based
topical formulation or indomethacin (50 g/mouse), a COX-2 inhibitor,
significantly inhibits UV radiation-induced suppression of CHS response
(PThe exposure of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) to murine skin suppresses
the development of allergic contact hypersensitivity (CHS) response which
is considered to be a prototypic T-cell mediated immune response.
UVR-induced suppression of immune system has been implicated in skin
cancer risk. Honokiol has been shown to have anti-skin carcinogenic
activity, and here we have assessed the effect of honokiol on UVR-induced
immunosuppression and its possible mechanism of action. Our CHS
experiments revealed that exposure of C3H/HeN mouse skin with UVB
radiation (150 mJ/cm2) for 4 consecutive days resulted in significant
suppression of CHS response (75%, P<0.001) to the skin contact
sensitizer, 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB), which was associated with
the enhancement in the levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression and
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production. Topical treatment of mice with
honokiol (0.5 and 1.0 mg/cm2 skin area) in hydrophilic-cream based
topical formulation or indomethacin (50 g/mouse), a COX-2 inhibitor,
significantly inhibits UV radiation-induced suppression of CHS response
(P<0.01-0.005). The exposure of mice with UVB resulted in DNA
hypermethylation, increase in DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) activity, and
elevated levels of Dnmt proteins in mouse skin, while treatment of mice
with honokiol before each UVB exposure reduced the levels of DNA
methylation as well as Dnmt activity compared with non-honokiol-treated
control mice. The COX-2 deficient mice are resistant to UV-induced
suppression of CHS response. Treatment of UVB exposed COX-2-deficient
mice with PGE2 (50 g/mouse/day) results in UV-induced suppression of CHS,
increase in DNA methylation and Dnmt activity in the skin. Further,
treatment of honokiol reversed the effect of PGE2 on UV-induced
suppression of CHS response in COX-2-deficient mice. Treatment of C3H/HeN
mice with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dc, 1.0 mg/kg body weight, i.p.),
a DNA demethylating agent, after each UVB exposure restored the CHS
response which was associated with a reduction in Dnmt activity and
global DNA methylation levels compared to the UV-exposed mice which were
not treated with 5-Aza-dc. We also compared the effect of honokiol with
commercially available anti-cancer drugs, such as imiquimod and
5-fluorouracil, on CHS response in UV-exposed mice. Topical treatment of
mice with equi-molar concentrations of honokiol and cancer drugs did not
show significant difference in terms of inhibition of UVB induced immune
suppression and thus suggests honokiol as a substitute for these drugs.
These findings provide evidence that honokiol acts through inhibition of
inflammatory mediators and subsequently DNA demethylation in UVR-exposed
mouse skin.

