Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic characterization of aberrant signaling induced by
oncogenic fusions in non-small cell lung cancer


Recent studies have greatly expanded the knowledge about genetic
alterations in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Gene fusions involving
the tyrosine kinases ALK, ROS and RET are found in 5 - 10% of NSCLC
patients and are considered as oncogenic drivers. However, the cellular
signaling activated downstream of oncogenic fusions has not been
systematically investigated and it remains unclear if different fusions
induce specific targetable signaling patterns.In this study we have
employed quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics to
systematically characterize the signaling induced by oncogenic fusions
frequently found in NSCLC. To this end, cDNA sequences of oncogenic
fusions containing the tyrosine kinases ALK, ROS and RET and different
fusion partners were constructed and ectopically expressed in HEK 293 and
lung cancer cell lines. Subsequently, tyrosine phosphorylated peptides
were enriched and identified by LC-MS. Stable isotope labeling with amino
acids in cell culture was employed to precisely quantify the abundance of
phosphorylation sites in cells expressing different oncogenic fusions.Our
data demonstrate that all investigated oncogenic fusions induce massive
tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins and lead to increased
phosphorylation of the majority of all quantified phospho-tyrosine sites.
For instance, we quantified 1300 unique phosphotyrosine sites from HEK
293 cells expressing EML4-ALK. Of those, 952 increased more than 4-fold
in abundance. Comparative analyses of the signaling patterns allowed
defining kinase-specific phosphorylation signatures. In addition,
comparison of signaling patterns induced by different fusions permitted
us to investigate the contribution of the non-kinase fusion partner to
the downstream signaling. We were able to identify several
phosphorylation events that were associated with specific non-kinase
fusion partners. For example, kinase fusions containing the kinesin-1
heavy chain (KIF5B) specifically led to phosphorylation of cytoskeletal
proteins, including cytoskeleton-associated protein 5 (CKAP5). We are
currently investigating the functional role of these phosphorylation
events for the oncogenic transformation.In summary, we demonstrate that
MS-based phosphoproteomics is a powerful tool to investigate aberrant
signaling induced by oncogenic fusions in non-small cell lung cancer.
Importantly, we find that the kinases involved in the oncogenic fusions
largely define the downstream signaling and that the investigated fusion
partners only exhibited a minor effect on the downstream signaling.

