Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide screen in C. elegans identifies cell non-autonomous
suppressors of let-60/RAS mediated oncogenic over-proliferation


Coordinated proliferative signals from the mesenchymal cells play a
crucial role in the regulation of proliferation of epithelial cells
during normal development, wound healing and several other normal
physiological conditions. However, when epithelial cells acquire a set of
malignant mutations, they respond differently to these extrinsic
proliferative signals leading to enhanced abnormal proliferation of
mutant epithelial cells and hence tumor growth. Despite mounting evidence
that stromal cells influence the growth of tumors and cancer progression,
it is unclear which specific genes in these mesenchymal cells regulate
the molecular signals that promote the over-proliferation of the adjacent
mutant cells. The complexity of several cell types and their interactions
in vivo in the cancer mouse models and human tumor samples limits our
ability to identify mesenchymal genes important in this process. Thus, we
took a cross species approach to use C. elegans vulval development as a
model to better understand the impact of mesenchymal (mesodermal) cells
on the proliferation of the epithelial (epidermal) cells. This model
includes well-described signaling interactions between mesodermal (anchor
cell, gonad, and muscle) cells and epidermal (vulva precursor cells,
VPCs) cells. In this system, three of the six equipotent VPCs normally
acquire vulva fates (termed 1 and 2) upon receiving coordinated EGF and
Wnt signals from the mesodermal cells, and lateral Notch signaling
between the VPCs. Then, they divide 3 times to produce a symmetric vulva
comprised of 22 daughter cells. Abnormal activation of the EGF pathway,
such as by introducing gain-of-function (gf) mutations in let-60/Ras,
leads to the promotion of vulval fates in the remaining three VPCs, which
then divide inappropriately resulting in development of multiple vulval
protrusions (Muv phenotype).To identify genes that function in mesodermal
cells to inhibit the proliferation of Ras-activated epidermal cells, we
genetically engineered C. elegans to develop a strain that possesses
let-60(gf)/Ras mediated over-proliferation (Muv phenotype) and RNA
interference (RNAi) competence specific to the mesodermal tissues. This
strain was subjected to a genome-wide RNAi screen. Our screen identified
47 genes that, upon RNAi knock-down of a gene in mesodermal cells,
suppress over-proliferation of let-60(gf)/Ras epithelial cells in a
genotype-specific manner. Notably, these genes encode chromatin
remodeling proteins, ribosomal proteins, proteins involved in vesicle
transport, and metabolic factors, rather than secreted molecules.
Importantly, candidate genes emerged from this screen are significantly
enriched for the conserved genes from C. elegans to humans. These results
form an initial understanding of molecular factors in mesenchymal cells
that impact oncogenic cell proliferation.

