Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin suppresses synthesis of pro-survival sphingolipid,
sphingosine-1-phosphate, by inhibition of sphingosine kinase-1, in MCF-7
and SK-BR-3 breast cancer cell lines


The antidiabetic drug, Metformin, may possess anti-cancer properties.
Metformin has been shown to suppress proliferation of breast cancer cells
primarily through activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and
its suppression of downstream signaling pathways, such as mTOR, involved
in cell replication. Other mechanisms may also play a role. Sphingolipids
have a role in apoptosis and survival. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a
bioactive lipid mediator, promotes cell survival, proliferation,
migration, angiogenesis, lymph angiogenesis, and immune response. S1P is
involved in both intracellular and extracellular functions and regulates
proliferation and survival. Blocking S1P synthesis inhibits cellular
proliferation. Sphingosine kinase (SphK) is a lipid kinase that catalyzes
formation of S1P from the precursor sphingosine. SphK is known to be
upregulated in cancer cells, promoting tumor progression. S1P has a
critical role in cancer progression and is considered a viable target for
cancer therapeutics.Our previous studies show that metformin has an
effect on the synthesis of pro-apoptotic ceramides. We hypothesized that
metformin induces cytotoxicity by reducing levels of the pro-survival
sphingolipid, S1P. Firstly, MCF-7 and SK-BR-3 breast cancer cell lines
were treated with increasing concentrations of metformin, and
cytotoxicity was determined by MTT cell culture experiments after 24
hours of drug exposure. Metformin induces cytotoxicity in these breast
cancer cells at a lowest concentration of 2.5mM, and percentage
cytotoxicity increases in a dose-dependent manner. We utilized liquid
chromatography and mass spectrometry and determined that cellular S1P
levels are decreased in MCF-7 cells treated with 2.5mM metformin when
compared with the control group. Finally, we treated MCF-7 and SK-BR-3
breast cancer cells with metformin, SK I/II (a known SphK inhibitor), and
an untreated control group for 2, 4 and 6 hours. The dose of metformin
was 10mM, which was chosen from a dose-response curve using MTT assay.
The dose of SK I/II was 20uM, chosen based on the IC50 given. All
treatments were done using low glucose media. Using the lysates from the
harvested cells, gel electrophoresis and western blots using antibodies
to SphK and S1P were run. Our results showed that metformin decreased the
cellular levels of SphK and S1P. Thus, metformin exhibits anticancer
properties via inhibiting the production of pro-survival lipid S1P. This
data suggests that the pro-apoptotic effect of metformin may be partly
mediated through its disruption of synthesis of S1P in breast cancer
cells. Further work is necessary to characterize the sphingolipid content
of MCF-7 and SK-BR-3 cancer cells before and after metformin treatment.

