Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knocking down the expression of DCLK1 reduces mammary tumor
formation, tumor cell self-renewal and metastasis: DCLK1 a novel
therapeutic target in breast cancer


Introduction: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, and is comprised
of a rare population of cells that display stem cell-like properties with
high metastatic potential and relative resistance to conventional
therapies. Doublecortin-like Kinase 1 (DCLK1) has recently been
identified as a tumor stem cell marker in the intestine and pancreas and
is overexpressed in many cancers including breast cancer. In this study,
we targeted DCLK1 as a novel therapeutic strategy in breast cancer cells
to reduce cancer cell self-renewal, tumorigenesis and metastasis.Methods:
Anti-DCLK1-siRNA was transfected into breast cancer cell lines (MCF7
[luminal] and MDAMB231 [basal-triple negative breast cancer cell line]).
For analysis of circulating tumor cells, MDAMB231/MCF7 cells were stably
transfected with RFP (red fluorescence protein). Tumor cell colony
formation, mammosphere formation (self-renewal), cell migration and
invasion were assessed to evaluate the effect of DCLK1 knockdown and or
DCLK1 overexpression on breast cancer cells self-renewal and metastatic
potential. Xenograft model was used to identify the role of DCLK1 on
breast cancer cell growth and circulating tumor cells in vivo. The data
were generated utilizing experimental protocols for clonogenic culture,
circulating tumor cells, immunohistochemistry, RT-qPCR and Western
blotting.Results: Expression of DCLK1 was 36% higher in human breast
cancer tissues than in normal breast tissue. Silencing DCLK1 via RNA
interference decreased the colony formation (70%), and self-renewal
ability (85%), of the breast cancer cell lines in vitro. In vitro
migration and invasion assays demonstrated that knocking down DCLK1 led
to less (40-80%) breast cancer cells migration and invasion. Furthermore,
expression of EMT associated factors (Slug, Snail, Twist, Zeb-1, Zeb-2
and Vimentin) and pluripotency factors (c-Myc, Sox2, Nanog and Oct-4)
were markedly reduced between 30 and 50%, after silencing DCLK1.
Inhibition of DCLK1 in xenograft tumors resulted in reduced tumor growth
(81%) and CTCs (95%) in vivo. However, overexpression of DCLK1 in the
non-metastatic MCF7 breast cancer cell line increased its in vitro
migration and invasion potency and pluripotency along with in vivo tumor
formation and progression.Conclusions: DCLK1 expression is associated
with breast cancer cell self-renewal, metastasis and tumorigenesis.
Targeting DCLK1 reduced breast cancer cell self-renewal, CTCs, metastasis
and tumor growth. DCLK1 inhibition may represent a novel targeted
therapeutic approach to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated
with breast cancer.

