Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of RNA editing enzymes in glioblastoma


This study was supported by AIRC.Glioblastoma (or grade IV astrocytomas)
is a highly heterogeneous and deadly malignant brain tumor and one of the
most incurable form of cancer in human that urgently needs new
therapeutic targets. There is great interest in elucidating all the
molecular basis and functional importance of genetics and epigenetic
mechanisms occurring in glioblastoma. In our laboratory, we investigate
whether essential post-transcriptional event (such as the A-to-I RNA
editing) is a possible molecular mechanism involved in the
appearance/progression of glioblastoma.A-to-I RNA editing modifies the
nucleotide sequence of RNA target molecules. The ADARs (Adenosine
Deaminases that Act on RNA) are the enzymes responsible for this
conversion acting on pre-mRNAs or non-coding RNAs (such as microRNA).
Inosine, is recognized by the translation and splicing machineries, as
Guanosine. Therefore, ADARs can play a direct and critical role in
generating alternative protein isoforms (by codon changes and splicing
pattern alterations) and modulating gene expression levels (by editing
microRNAs and/or 3-UTRs). In mammals, there are three different ADAR
enzymes (ADAR1-3). The deregulation of ADAR2 activity has been connected
with several neurological human diseases and Adar2 knockout animals show
a lethal neurological phenotype. We demonstrated a direct correlation
between a progressive decrease of ADAR2 editing activity and the
increased grade of malignancy in paediatric astrocytomas (from grade I to
grade IV). We show that the rescue of ADAR2 in glioblastoma cells is able
to significantly inhibit in vivo glioblastoma tumor growth. Differently,
when we decrease the expression of ADAR2 in malignant but not tumorigenic
astrocytoma cell line (A172) we observed a boost of several cancers cell
features such as cell proliferation, migration and colony formation.By
integrating deep-sequencing and array approaches with bioinformatics
analyses and molecular studies, we observed that ADAR2 is essential to
edit a small number of mature miRNAs and to significantly modulate the
expression of about 90 miRNAs in glioblastoma cells that may contribute
to cancer progression.Our findings disclose an additional layer of
complexity in miRNome regulation and provide information to better
dissect the impact of ADAR2 editing enzyme in glioblastoma.

