Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative cancer cell line profiling differentiates the
mechanism of action of different PI3K/mTOR, Aurora kinase and EZH2
inhibitors


[purpose] Profiling of drug candidates in cell line panels is an
important tool to compare the selectivity and targeting of new
anti-cancer agents. In addition, comparative profiling may be used to
repurpose established therapeutics by identifying new mechanisms of
action or cross-selectivities.[experimental procedures] A collection of
more than 120 anti-cancer agents, targeting all important oncogenic
signaling pathways, including classic cytotoxic agents as well as many
targeted kinase inhibitors and epigenetic modulators, was profiled on a
panel of 44 or 66 parallel cell line proliferation assays (Oncolines)
[1,2]. The Oncolines profiles of the compounds were compared by Pearson
correlations of their inhibitor responses. Inhibitor sets were clustered
using hierarchical trees. Response profiles were correlated to the
genetic background of the cell lines by Analysis of Variance
(Anova).[results] Reproducibility of the NTRC Oncolines cell panel was
validated by monitoring cell growth rate and the variation in IC50s of
replicate profiles over a period of three years. The Pearson correlation
between replicates ranged between 0.60 and 0.99 for 16 different
inhibitors, depending on dose-response curve shape. Correlation analyses
of the > 120 profiled anti-cancer agents revealed separate clusters of,
a.o., taxanes, platins, topo-isomerase inhibitors, and EGFR, ABL, MEK and
BRAF inhibitors. This demonstrates that the Oncolines profiles are an
unbiased representation of the compound's mechanisms. The profile of the
BTK inhibitor ibrutinib correlated with EGFR inhibitors. In biochemical
experiments we showed that this due to its cross-reactivity with EGFR.
The six Aurora kinase inhibitors profiled fall into two separate
clusters, which are related to their biochemical selectivity. Thus,
Aurora A-selective inhibitors are relatively more active in cell lines
with mutations in cell cycle checkpoint-related genes such as TP53 and
RB1; whereas pan-Aurora inhibitors are more active in cell lines with
mutations in growth factor signaling pathways, such as NRAS. Profiling of
eleven PI3 kinase and mTOR inhibitors revealed four distinct clusters.
PI3Kalpha and PI3Kdelta isoform selective inhibitors each target
genetically distinct subgroups of cell lines. Rapamycin-analogs, such as
everolimus, specifically target PTEN-mutant cell lines. Finally,
profiling of EZH2 inhibitors indicates that there are essentially two
classes and that these have a cellular profile that is distinct from
HDAC, DOT1L or BET inhibitors.[conclusions] Comparative cancer cell line
profiling is a powerful tool to rapidly explore the pharmacogenomics of
drug action in cancer cells and to identify new or previously unnoted
activities of compounds.[references]: [1] Uitdehaag et al. (2014) PLOS
ONE 9(3) e92146; [2] Uitdehaag et al. (2015) PLOS ONE 10(6) e0132230.

