Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of embryonic stem cells gene expression in pancreatic
cancer: Effects of metformin and indole-3-carbinol


Pancreatic cancer is among the top five deadliest cancers in developing
countries and is rapidly increasing in minority populations, particularly
African Americans. Understanding molecular mechanisms involved in the
etiology and progression of this cancer can greatly improve patient
prognosis. Cancer stem cells have been identified in pancreatic tumors
and have been shown to contribute to its progression and resistance to
standard treatments. Pancreatic cancer stem cells are subject to
regulation by key embryonic stem cell transcription factors that are
known to be aberrantly expressed in pancreatic cancer, such as SOX2, OCT4
and NANOG. Overexpression of OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG together or separately
led to tumor transformation and tumor metastasis. These stem cell factors
are known to promote self-renewal by interacting with other transcription
factors. Using a human embryonic stem cell RT2 Profiler gene array,
numerous stem cell genes were expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines
(MIAPaca2, Panc1). Both cell lines expressed high levels of SOX2, NANOG,
CD44, GATA2, POU5F1 (OCT4) and other genes. Panc1 expressed high levels
of SOX 17, while MIAPaCa2 expressed high levels of SOX 3,15 and 17.
Treatment of cells with indole-3-carbinol alone at 100 and 200M inhibited
or decreased the expression of SOX2, NANOG, CD44, SOX15 and STAT3.
However, treatment with metformin alone increased expression of SOX 15
and STAT3 in Panc1 cells but not in MIAPaCa2. Combination of metformin
and indole-3-carbinol inhibited the expression of SOX2, NANOG, STAT3, and
CD44. SOX2, POU5F1(OCT4) and NANOG are thought to be important players in
various human cancers. OCT4 has been found to be expressed in 69% of PDAC
and expression was shown too correlated to status and clinical state.
High levels of OCT4 and NANOG has been found to correlate to worse
prognosis and furthermore, contribute to multidrug-resistance and
metastasis. This study have shown that the dietary agent,
indole-3-carbinol alone and in combination with metformin down-regulate
critical stem cell genes involved in maintenance of pluripotency and
self-renewal of cancer stem cells.

