Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of TIMP2 via HIF-1/miR-210/HIF-3 regulatory
feedback circuit enhances cancer metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma


Cancer metastasis is a multi-step process that involves a series of
tumor-stromal interaction, including extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling which requires a concerted action of multiple proteolytic
enzymes and their endogenous inhibitors. This study investigated the role
of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2 (TIMP2) in the context of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) metastasis. We found that TIMP2 was the
most significantly downregulated member among the TIMP family in human
HCCs. Moreover, TIMP2 underexpression was frequent (41.1%; 23/56) in
human HCCs as compared to the corresponding non-tumorous livers and was
significantly associated with direct liver invasion into the adjacent
liver parenchyma and poorer survival outcomes of the HCC patients.
Furthermore, stable silencing of TIMP2 in HCC cell lines enhanced the
cell invasive ability and ECM degradation associated with formation of
invadopodia-like feature, suggesting that TIMP2 is a negative regulator
of HCC metastasis. Furthermore, using orthotopic tumor xenograft model,
we demonstrated that ectopic expression of TIMP2 open reading frame in
the highly metastatic HCC cell line MHCC-97L not only significantly
reduced the incidence of tumor microsatellite formation and venous
invasion in the primary hepatic tumor xenografts, but also pulmonary
metastasis, suggesting that both extrahepatic and intrahepatic metastasis
in HCC was suppressed by TIMP2 expression. Mechanistically, TIMP2
suppression in a hypoxic environment was induced through a regulatory
feedback circuit consisting of HIF-1, miR-210 and HIF-3. Taken
altogether, our findings established that TIMP2 was frequently
downregulated in human HCCs and its downregulation was associated with
aggressive behavior and poorer patients outcome. Its suppression was
under the regulation of a novel feedback circuit consisting of HIF-1/
miR-210/ HIF-3. Overall, our study has provided solid in vitro and in
vivo evidence that TIMP2 is an important regulator of ECM degradation and
HCC metastasis. These findings demonstrated that perturbation of the
dynamic HIF-1a signaling circuit by miR-210 inhibitor abolished TIMP2
downregulation and suppressed HCC cell invasion. They also support the
notion that targeting against HIF-1 signaling is a promising direction to
tackle the hypoxic responses in HCC elicited by transarterial
chemo-embolization (TACE) treatment to HCC patients.

