Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of FoxM1 inhibition with thiostrepton on ovarian cancer
immune response and sensitivity to chemotherapy in vitro


Background: An ideal anti-cancer agent will target a pathway that is
altered in cancer, produce a selective cytotoxic response in cancer
cells, induce immunogenic cell death, and enhance tumor immunity. FoxM1
inhibitor, thiostrepton, may fit this profile of an ideal anti-cancer
agent. FoxM1 is activated in the majority of high-grade serous
carcinomas, regulates DNA repair genes, and enhances cell proliferation,
metastasis, and chemotherapy resistance. We have previously shown that
loss-of-function and gain-of-function TP53 mutations contribute to FoxM1
overexpression, thus the p53-FoxM1 axis represents a novel therapeutic
target. However, the therapeutic potential of FoxM1 inhibition by
thiostrepton has not been fully investigated in ovarian
cancer.Hypothesis: We hypothesize that FoxM1 inhibition by thiostrepton
increases cancer cell sensitivity to chemotherapy and enhances anti-tumor
immunity.Results: Thiostrepton downregulates FoxM1 expression, induces
cytotoxic effects across various ovarian cancer cell lines, and shows
synergistic activities with cisplatin. In congruence with the
Connectivity Map data, qRT-PCR results of A2780 cells treated with
thiostrepton (10 M) show upregulation of pro-apoptotic genes DDIT3,
GADD45A and DDIT4, and downregulation of DNA repair and anti-apoptotic
genes FANCF, BRCA2, BRCC3, and BCL2. These results suggest that the
synergism observed may be a consequence of DNA damage induction by
cisplatin combined with inhibition of DNA repair by thiostrepton, making
this a lethal duo to cancer cells. Comet assay results from mouse ovarian
cancer cells, ID8, support this hypothesis by demonstrating an increase
in DNA damage following the combined treatment of thiostrepton and
carboplatin or thiostrepton and PARP inhibitor olaparib. Western blots
also show increased p-H2AX levels in these combined treatments. In
addition to the cytotoxic effect, thiostrepton can alter the cancer cell
immune response by affecting the expression of immunomodulatory genes.
This is supported by the ENCODE data, which indicates FoxM1 binds to the
cis-regulatory region of PD-L1 (programmed cell death ligand 1), a target
of ongoing immunotherapy clinical trials. Flow cytometry and Western
blots depict increased PD-L1 expression in ID8 cells treated with
thiostrepton (5 M). In these same cells, flow cytometry showed an
increase in RAE1 and 4-1BB ligands, which may lead to increased
recognition by natural killer T-cells, as well as enhanced
externalization of calreticulin, a hallmark of immunogenic cell
death.Conclusion: These studies demonstrate the novel effect of
thiostrepton on immunogenic cancer cell death and an effect on anti-tumor
immunity. These results suggest thiostrepton as an ideal anti-cancer
agent with the ability to target the DNA repair response and the immune
response to enhance the chemotherapeutic effects of cisplatin and
olaparib.

