Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CTCs and CTC clusters in breast cancer patient-derived xenograft
models


Breast cancer (BC) patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models represent a
continuous and reproducible source of circulating tumor cells (CTCs).
Using various BC PDX models, we describe the utility of CTCs and CTC
clusters in detecting tumor-specific mutations and our preliminary
results in understanding their predictive value for treatment response
and long-term outcomes. CTCs were detected in 300-450 l of blood of
PDX-bearing mice using the RareCyte technology adapted for small blood
volume. CTCs were isolated without cell surface marker-based enrichment
and identified them as DAPI+, human Cytokeratin (CK)+, and mouse CD45-.
Collective expression of cell surface markers (EpCAM, EGFR, and HER2) was
assessed using a cocktail of target-specific antibodies in CTCs and
primary PDX tumors. Individual CTCs and tumor cells from primary and
metastatic tumors were isolated using CytePicker for single cell analysis
of tumor-specific mutations. Single CTCs (1-41 per mouse) and CTC
clusters (1-2 per mouse) were detected in the blood of one ER+/PR+/HER2-
(BCM-4888) and two triple-negative BC (TNBC, BCM-4272 and BCM-3887) PDX
models. The PIK3CA T1035A mutation found in primary tumors of BCM-4888
was also detected in isolated CTCs and PDX primary and metastatic tumor
cells. As a proof-of-principle experiment, we have evaluated numbers of
single CTCs and CTC clusters at baseline and after treatment with 4
weekly cycles of vehicle (N = 5-6) or chemotherapy regimens (N = 2-3)
[docetaxel or carboplatin or their combination] in TNBC PDX models
BCM-4272 and BCM-3887. Preliminary analysis from these studies suggests
dynamic and differential effects of chemotherapy regimens on single CTCs
and CTC clusters, potentially reflecting the genetic characteristics of
tumors and their unique response to the selected chemotherapy agents.
Ongoing experiments in additional mice and PDX models will determine the
predictive role of CTCs and CTC clusters in treatment response and
long-term outcomes such as recurrence-free survival. In conclusion, we
have demonstrated that RareCyte technology detects CTCs from small
volumes of blood without the use of cell surface marker-based enrichment
method. Furthermore, CTCs and CTC clusters can be used to assess the
presence of tumor-specific mutations. Ongoing studies will fully reveal
the potential of CTCs and CTC clusters as surrogate markers of treatment
response and outcomes within PDX models.

