Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pemetrexed decreases circulating S100A9-myeloid derived suppressor
cells in patients with non-small cell lung cancer


Background: We previously reported that S100A9-myeloid derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs) are negatively associated with chemotherapy effect in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Pemetrexed-cisplatin
chemotherapy is a standard treatment for advanced lung adenocarcinoma.
The effect of chemotherapy on MDSCs is still not clear.Methods: We
prospectively enrolled nineteen stage 4 lung adenocarcinoma patients
without known driving mutation before chemotherapy. Fourteen patients
received pemetrexed-cisplatin and five with docetaxel-cisplatin as first
line chemotherapy. Peripheral blood MDSCs percentage was evaluate by flow
cytometry before first cycle and second cycle of chemotherapy.In vitro
migration assay with transwell MDSC/A549 cell co-culture system was used
to test the effect of chemotherapy on chemotactic ability of A549 cell.
Chemotherapy pretreated-A549 cells were cultured in the bottom chamber,
and MDSCs, isolated from PBMC with CD14+ magnetic bead, were cultured in
the upper chamber.Results: MDSCs percentage decreased after patients
received first cycle pemetrexed-cisplatin treatment (mean SD MDSC% in
PBMC: 25.913.9% vs 16.311.3%, pBackground: We previously reported that
S100A9-myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are negatively associated
with chemotherapy effect in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
Pemetrexed-cisplatin chemotherapy is a standard treatment for advanced
lung adenocarcinoma. The effect of chemotherapy on MDSCs is still not
clear.Methods: We prospectively enrolled nineteen stage 4 lung
adenocarcinoma patients without known driving mutation before
chemotherapy. Fourteen patients received pemetrexed-cisplatin and five
with docetaxel-cisplatin as first line chemotherapy. Peripheral blood
MDSCs percentage was evaluate by flow cytometry before first cycle and
second cycle of chemotherapy.In vitro migration assay with transwell
MDSC/A549 cell co-culture system was used to test the effect of
chemotherapy on chemotactic ability of A549 cell. Chemotherapy
pretreated-A549 cells were cultured in the bottom chamber, and MDSCs,
isolated from PBMC with CD14+ magnetic bead, were cultured in the upper
chamber.Results: MDSCs percentage decreased after patients received first
cycle pemetrexed-cisplatin treatment (mean SD MDSC% in PBMC: 25.913.9% vs
16.311.3%, p<0.05, n = 5). In the subgroup patients that had partial
response to pemetrexed and cisplatin, the MDSCs percentage decreased most
significantly. (25.09.1 to 7.15.2, p0.05)Conclusion:
Pemetrexed-cisplatin, but not docetaxel-cisplatin, decreased S100A9-MDSC
in patients with lung adenocarcinoma, an effect might be due to a
reduction in chemotactic ability of tumors by pemetrexed. In addition to
cytotoxic effect, clinical benefit of pemetrexed might be also due to the
effect on microenvironment.

