Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer vaccine development for hepatocellular carcinoma - HEPAVAC


The HEPAVAC Consortium aims to develop a highly innovative, novel cancer
vaccine approach for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The international
project consortium consists of 9 European Partners from academia and the
biotech industry with complementary and substantial expertise in
developing immunotherapeutic strategies to treat cancer. The project has
started in September 2013 and is supported by the European Commission's
7th Framework Program (www.hepavac.eu).HCC/normal adjacent tissue matched
samples have been collected for HLA immunopeptidome analysis. 17 HCC
samples from HLA-A*02+ patients and 15 samples from HLA-A*24+ patients
have been analysed by mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). RNA-expression
profiles have been established for 12 HCC samples.
HLA-presentation/expression of peptides and mRNA on primary HCC samples
are compared to >140 normal tissue samples from relevant organs
(including heart, brain, lung, kidney, liver, nerve, skin etc.) from
Immatics database.A total of 9051 HLA-A*02-restricted different
tumor-associated peptides (TUMAPs) have been identified from HLA-A*02+
samples, while a total of 3286 different HLA-A*24-restricted TUMAPs have
been identified from HLA-A*24+ samples. Of these, 33 HLA-A*02+ TUMAPS and
33 HLA-A*24+ TUMAPs have been validated, including peptide synthesis,
immunogenicity testing and pharmaceutical evaluation. Most promising
TUMAP candidates show selective expression only in HCC samples and no
expression in normal tissues. In parallel, more than 6600 HLA-DR TUMAPs
have been identified in Hep3B cells transfected with CIITA as well as an
average of 1500 HLA-DR TUMAPs have been identified in HCC samples.A total
of 16 newly identified HCC-specific epitopes have been selected for the
HEPAVAC vaccine cocktail and are currently synthesized according to GMP
standard. Of these, 7 are restricted to HLA- class I A*02; 5 HLA-A*24 and
4 HLA class II. In parallel, preclinical studies assessing the
formulation and combination of the immunological RNA-based adjuvant
(RNAdjuvant) with peptide cocktails are underway. A multi Center phase
I/II clinical trial in early HCC patients is predicted to start in July
2016.

