Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Live circulating tumor cells as a predictive biomarker of response
to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for resectable pancreatic cancer


The detection of increase in the number of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
during a patient's clinical course may be a harbinger of forthcoming
overt metastasis. To detect live CTCs (l-CTCs) in blood samples of cancer
patients (pts), we employed a new genetically modified
telomerase-specific replication-selective adenovirous, expressing GFP
(TelomeScanF35), containing both type 35 fiber that induce broad
infectivity and miR-142-3p target sequence that can prevent a false
positive toward blood cells. Recently, we indicated that preoperative
chemoradiation therapy comprising gemcitabine and S-1 administration
concurrent with full-dose radiation (NACRT) lead to encouraging survival
rate in pts with resectable pancreatic cancer. But, NACRT may have
disadvantages. NACRT requires several months, potentially delaying
surgical resection, and can be waste of time and may result in the pts
missing the chance for surgery. We assessed the l-CTCs burden in pts
treated with NACRT. This study was approved by the Osaka Police Hospital
IRB. Pts with resectable cytologically or histologically proven ductal
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were enrolled. Treatment consisted of an
intervenous infusion of Gem 800 mg/m2 on day 1, 8, 22, and 29; and S-1 80
mg/m2 orally on day 1-5, 8-12, 22-26, and 29-33 given concurrently with
IMRT to 60 Gy. Surgical exploration was scheduled 4-7 weeks after the
final radiation fraction. 7.5 ml of blood samples were obtained from the
pts included in this clinical study before NACRT, after 1 month of NACRT,
and after 2 months of surgical resection. To distinguish between
leucocyte and cells with epithelial origin, cells were stained with
anti-CD45 and anti-Cytokeratin Abs. To distinguish cells with mesenchymal
origin, cells were labeled with anti-Vimentin Ab. GFP-positive and
CD45-negative cells were counted as l-CTC. 16 pts aged 44-78 years (5
males and 11 females) were enrolled. No treatment-related deaths
occurred. CA19-9 was reduced to The detection of increase in the number
of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) during a patient's clinical course may
be a harbinger of forthcoming overt metastasis. To detect live CTCs
(l-CTCs) in blood samples of cancer patients (pts), we employed a new
genetically modified telomerase-specific replication-selective
adenovirous, expressing GFP (TelomeScanF35), containing both type 35
fiber that induce broad infectivity and miR-142-3p target sequence that
can prevent a false positive toward blood cells. Recently, we indicated
that preoperative chemoradiation therapy comprising gemcitabine and S-1
administration concurrent with full-dose radiation (NACRT) lead to
encouraging survival rate in pts with resectable pancreatic cancer. But,
NACRT may have disadvantages. NACRT requires several months, potentially
delaying surgical resection, and can be waste of time and may result in
the pts missing the chance for surgery. We assessed the l-CTCs burden in
pts treated with NACRT. This study was approved by the Osaka Police
Hospital IRB. Pts with resectable cytologically or histologically proven
ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were enrolled. Treatment consisted
of an intervenous infusion of Gem 800 mg/m2 on day 1, 8, 22, and 29; and
S-1 80 mg/m2 orally on day 1-5, 8-12, 22-26, and 29-33 given concurrently
with IMRT to 60 Gy. Surgical exploration was scheduled 4-7 weeks after
the final radiation fraction. 7.5 ml of blood samples were obtained from
the pts included in this clinical study before NACRT, after 1 month of
NACRT, and after 2 months of surgical resection. To distinguish between
leucocyte and cells with epithelial origin, cells were stained with
anti-CD45 and anti-Cytokeratin Abs. To distinguish cells with mesenchymal
origin, cells were labeled with anti-Vimentin Ab. GFP-positive and
CD45-negative cells were counted as l-CTC. 16 pts aged 44-78 years (5
males and 11 females) were enrolled. No treatment-related deaths
occurred. CA19-9 was reduced to <50% of baseline values in 10 of 12
measureable pts. 13 of 16 enrolled pts successfully underwent surgical
resection. 5 of 16 enrolled pts had l-CTCs (14CTCs,Vimentin[+]) detected
before NACRT. An increase in CTCs was seen in 4 of 5 pts after NACRT, but
no detectable l-CTCs were observed in only 1 pt after NACRT. These 4
CTC-positive pts continuously had CTCs detected after surgery. 2 of 4
CTC-positive pts early developed liver metastasis and died, despite R0
resection. On the contrary, small increase (12CTCs) of CTCs was seen
after NACRT in 4 of 11pts, who had no CTCs detected before NACRT. But, no
l-CTCs were detected in these 11 pts after surgery and they survived
without recurrence. CTC-positive pts before NACRT presented a higher rate
of liver metastasis after surgery than CTC-negative pts (50% vs. o%). We
may consider surgery first for the CTC-positive pts before NACRT. The
capture of l-CTCs may be useful biomarker for prognosis assessment or
stratification.

