Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of amineoxidases as a possible mechanism of action of
tamoxifen metabolites


To elucidate the mechanism of action of endoxifen in breast cancer, we
determined its effects on estradiol-mediated growth of ERalpha-positive
MCF-7 cells. Endoxifen is the active metabolite of tamoxifen; the most
widely used selective estrogen receptor modulator for anti-estrogen
therapy for women with estrogen receptor alpha-positive breast cancer.
Clinical trials recognized that tamoxifen was a prodrug and got converted
to active metabolites in the human body. Earlier studies recognized
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT) as the active metabolite of tamoxifen, although
recent studies showed that the concentration of endoxifen was up to
10-fold higher than that of 4HT in patients treated with tamoxifen. These
metabolites are formed by the action of cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6). We
used quantitative PCR analysis to examine the effects of endoxifen on
estrogenic stimulation of early response genes, c-myc, c-fos and Tff1.
Since the natural polyamines, putrescine, spermidine and spermine, play
important roles in estrogenic function, we also measured the activities
of enzymes in the polyamine biosynthetic/metabolic pathway: ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC), S-adenosyl-L-methionine decarboxylase (AdoMetDC),
spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase (SSAT), spermine oxidase (SMO),
and acetylpolyamine oxidase (APAO). Polyamine levels were quantified by
high performance liquid chromatography. Our results showed that estradiol
increased the proliferation of MCF-7 cells by 2- to 3-fold and endoxifen
suppressed the effects of estradiol on cell growth. The expression of
c-myc, c-fos and Tff1 genes was significantly increased by estradiol,
while the addition of endoxifen suppressed estradiol-mediated increase in
gene expression. Estradiol increased the activity of ODC and AdoMetDC,
whereas endoxifen suppressed the activity of these enzymes. Endoxifen had
no effect on SSAT activity, whereas it significantly increased activities
of amineoxidases, SMO and APAO. Estradiol increased putrescine and
spermidine levels and endoxifen inhibited this increase. There was no
significant effect on spermine levels. These data suggest that endoxifen
exerts its growth inhibitory effects on MCF-7 cells by suppressing the
expression of estradiol-stimulated oncogenes and polyamine biosynthetic
pathway. The antiestrogenic effect of endoxifen is also manifested
through the stimulation of polyamine oxidase enzymes, SMO and APAO. These
results indicate for the first time that the upregulation of SMO and APAO
is important in the mechanism of action of endoxifen in breast cancer
cells.

