Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spontaneous and vaccine-induced clearance of Mus Musculus
Papillomavirus1 (MusPV1) infection


Human papilloma virus (HPV) high risk (hr) types cause several cancers,
including cervical, vaginal, penile, and oropharyngeal, whereas low risk
types cause benign diseases such as skin warts, anogenital warts and
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis. Although hrHPV infection is one of
the most common sexually transmitted diseases most infections remain
asymptomatic and are cleared while a sub-population develops persistent
HPV-related pathologies including cancer. Further, immune-compromised
populations, notably organ transplant and HIV-positive patients, are
particularly vulnerable to HPV-related pathologies. Here, we describe the
first establishment of mouse papillomavirus-1 (MusPV1) disease in outbred
and immune competent SKH1-Elite mice (Crl:SKH1-Hrhr). Challenge of SKH1
mice with MusPV1 resulted in three clinical outcomes: 1) persistent (>2
months) papillomas (15%), 2) transient papillomas that spontaneously
regress typically within 2 months (10%), 3) no visible papillomas and
viral clearance (75%). SKH1 mice with persisitent papillomas were treated
using a potentially preventive and therapeutic DNA vaccine composed of
human calreticulin (hCRT) linked to MusPV1 early proteins, mE6 and mE7
and the late protein mL2 (hCRTmE6/mE7/mL2). Three intramuscular DNA
vaccinations (15 g in PBS) via in vivo electroporation were administered
weekly and immune responses were measured, including mE6/mE7/mL2 serum
antibody response and T-cell epitope mapping studies. Previously
persistent papillomas disappeared within 2 months after final
vaccination. Clearance of MusPV1 was confirmed by loss of mE6/mE7
transcript staining using RNA-CISH on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tail sections. Vaccination induced a strong mE6 and mE7 CD8+ T cell
response in all mice. Interestingly, mL2 antibody responses were faster
and stronger in asymptomatic challenged mice and in those that
spontaneously cleared their papillomas after challenge as compared to
mice with persistent papillomas. In sum, MusPV1 challenge of outbred,
immune-competent SKH1 mice represents a promising model to further study
potential immunotherapies for HPV-related disease and the relationship
between spontaneous clearance of papillomavirus and host genetics.

