Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-EGFRvIII TandAbs recruiting either T or NK cells are highly
specific and potent therapeutic antibody candidates for the treatment of
EGFRvIII+ tumors


EGFRvIII is the most prevalent tumor-specific variant of the wild-type
EGFR and represents an attractive tumor target in various solid tumors
such as GMB, HNSCC or NSCLC. Despite the clinical successes achieved with
EGFR targeting antibodies or small molecule inhibitors little therapeutic
progress has been made with EGFRvIII. There is still a high medical need
in such cancers and several agents are in development to address this
notoriously difficult target: Celldex vaccine rindopepimut in combination
with bevacizumab in late-stage development, or ADCs in early development
by Amgen or Abbvie. However, despite the high tumor specificity of
EGFRvIII expression, no potent T- or NK-cell engaging are currently in
clinical development.It has been recognized that there may be more
therapeutic potential with bi-specific antibodies recruiting immune
effectors for targeted destruction of antigen-positive tumor cells. We
developed tetravalent, bi-specific TandAbs that recognize EGFRvIII, and
recruiting either T-cells or NK-cells by binding to the activating
receptors CD3 and CD16A, respectively. This targeted antibody approach
allows the selective destruction of EGFRvIII+ tumor cells employing
highly potent and efficacious immune effector cells whilst sparing normal
cells that are EGFRvIII- or cells presenting the ubiquitously expressed
EGFR.The selected EGFRvIII/CD3 and EGFRvIII/CD16A TandAbs exhibited
exquisite specificity towards EGFRvIII in Western Blot, SPR, ELISA, and
flow cytometric assays. No binding was observed to recombinant EGFR or to
EGFR+ cells. They also displayed potent cytotoxicity towards EGFRvIII+
cell lines with EC50 values in the low picomolar range. No cytotoxicity
was observed on EGFRvIII- target cells or cells expressing EGFR
demonstrating the high selectivity of anti-EGFRvIII TandAbs. Importantly,
in the absence of EGFRvIII+ target cells our TandAbs did not elicit T- or
NK-cell activation and activation-induced immune cell proliferation
suggesting an excellent safety profile. In vivo pharmacodynamics for
anti-EGFRvIII TandAbs was demonstrated in a mouse xenograft model.The
clinical relevance of EGFRvIII as a tumor marker and the binding of our
anti-EGFRvIII variable domains were evaluated by immunohistochemistry.
Binding was shown in glioblastoma and other solid tumors, but no
expression was detectable on healthy tissue.In summary, the presented in
vitro and in vivo studies qualify EGFRvIII/CD3 and EGFRvIII/CD16A TandAbs
as highly attractive therapeutic antibody candidates and provides us with
the possibility of employing both T-cell and NK-cell recruiting
strategies for selective immunotherapy of EGFRvIII+ tumors. Due to tumor
specific expression of EGFRvIII and the absence of off-target activity
our TandAbs display an excellent safety profile reducing the risks of
side effects associated with other anti-EGFRvIII therapies.

