Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary flavonoid fisetin increases abundance of
high-molecular-mass hyaluronan conferring resistance to prostate
oncogenesis


With an estimated 220,800 new cases and 27,450 deaths in 2015, prostate
cancer (PCa) continues to be the second leading cause of cancer related
deaths in men in the US alone. Accumulation and turnover of extracellular
matrix (ECM) is a hallmark of tissue injury, repair and remodeling in
human diseases including PCa. Hyaluronan (HA), an extracellular
glycosaminoglycan, is a major component of the ECM and plays an important
role in regulating reepithelization, tissue healing and wound repair.
Elevated HA levels have been shown to be associated with aggressiveness
and disease progression in certain cancer types including PCa. Biological
responses triggered by HA mainly depend on the HA polymer length. High
molecular mass (HMM)-HA represses mitogenic signaling and has
anti-inflammatory properties while low molecular mass (LMM)-HA is
pro-angiogenic and promotes proliferation and inflammation. Diet-derived
agents, such as flavonoids, are of particular interest for cancer
chemoprevention as they offer a relatively favorable safety profile.
Using HPLC-MS analysis, we identified HA as a novel target of the dietary
flavonoid fisetin in tumor xenografts of human PCa NB11 and NB26 cells.
Fisetin treatment decreased HA levels in PCa cells both in-vitro
(40M:40h) and in-vivo (1mg/animal). We then evaluated the effect of
intraperitoneal administration of fisetin on HA size accumulation and
prostate carcinogenesis using the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse
prostate (TRAMP) model. Using the combination of Size Exclusion
Chromatography (SEC) with Multi-Angle Laser Light Scattering (MALS)
analysis that overcomes limitations of column calibration, we evaluated
intracellular and extracellular molar mass distribution of HA in fisetin
treated cell culture and animal models. We observed lower levels of
HMM-HA and higher levels of pro-angiogenic LMW-HA fragments in human PCa
PC3 cells. In contrast, we found that fisetin treatment increased HMM-HA
and reduced LMM-HA levels in PCa cells. Remarkably, the HA size profile
of fisetin treated cells resembled those of normal RWPE1 cells, which
predominantly exhibited higher abundance of anti-angiogenic HMM-HA and no
detectable LMW-HA. Likewise, secreted HA in fisetin treated PCa cells
comprised predominantly of LMM-HA, suggesting greater accumulation of
anti-angiogenic HMM-HA within the cells. Molar mass analysis of fisetin
treated TRAMP tumor tissues showed an abundance of HMM-HA and reduced
levels of LMM-HA when compared to untreated controls. Similarly, secreted
HA in fisetin treated TRAMP animals exhibited increased pool of
pro-angiogenic LMM-HA, suggesting greater accumulation of anti-angiogenic
HMM-HA within the tissues. Our findings suggest that fisetin confers
resistance to PCa oncogenesis by increasing the abundance of
anti-angiogenic HMM-HA which is associated with delayed disease
progression.

