Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy of leukemia and Ewing's sarcoma by human
antibody-targeted nanoparticles


Current cancer therapies have shown limited success due to the poor
selectivity. The recent chemotherapy could be far more effective if
higher doses could be specifically delivered to the tumor and not to
normal tissues. Therefore a reliable tumor specific therapy is urgently
needed to treat cancer patients. Targeted nanoparticle can attenuate the
off-target toxicity and enhance the efficacy of existing therapies, which
would be highly beneficial to the cancer patients. In spite of a lot of
effort still the optimal formulation of nanoparticle for the actual
translational applications was not established yet. Liposomes,
unilamellar vesicles composed of natural and/or synthetic lipids have
been an intensively studied system. By refining the early formulations
and after extensive testing, recently we could invent a new type of lipid
bilayer nanoparticle delivery system, HPLN (Hybrid Polymerized Liposomal
Nanoparticles) and demonstrate that this new type of polymeric
nanoparticle overcomes many, if not most, of the deficiencies noted and
has tremendous potential as an effective delivery vehicle for treating
many types of cancer. In our study it was shown that the targeted HPLN
with human antibodies (antiCD99 or antiCD19) can inhibit the growth of
Ewing's sarcoma and leukemia (ALL) in a murine model. The antitumor
effects of of HPLN were diminished pretty much by the removal of antibody
or drug (Doxorubicin), which proves efficacy of the targeted HPLNs is
specifically dependent upon the targeting antibody and drug. In addition,
no abnormalities in liver and kidney function tests, complete blood
counts or pathology of major organs are observed from tail-vein
administrations. These data provide strong evidence for the safety and
efficacy of this targeted HPLN delivery system of anticancer drugs to
Ewing's sarcoma and leukemia (ALL). In conclusion, our result showed a
potential of targeted HPLN as a selective delivery vehicle of cytotoxic
drugs to cancers. Hopefully this technology will be applied to treat many
other different types of tumor cells in the future.

