Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved oncolytic virotherapy by increasing adenovirus spread


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide and
kills more patients than the next four cancers combined (Colon, breast,
prostate, and pancreas). Currently available lung cancer treatments have
not been effective. Therefore the development of novel lung cancer
therapeutics is of critical importance. One emerging treatment option is
the use of E1b-deleted adenoviruses (Ads) which preferentially lyse
cancer cells. Although E1b-deleted Ads have been applied in clinical
trials, their efficacy remains low. We have developed a novel oncolytic
vector, AdUV, via the bioselection of the cancer selective E1b-deleted Ad
Adhz60. We have demonstrated that AdUV is much more potent against
multiple cancer cell lines than the parental vector Adhz60 in vitro and
suppressed tumor growth in vivo.We compared AdUV treated cells to cells
treated with the wildtype Ad5 and the E1b-deleted Adhz60. AdUV lysed A549
lung cancer cells more efficiently than Adhz60, but neither AdUV nor
Adhz60 killed MRC5 and HBEC normal lung cells. Possible mechanisms of
action were then investigated to determine how AdUV lysed A549 cells more
effectively. AdUV virions were shown to release from infected A549 cells
and induce autophagy more effectively than both Adhz60 and Ad5. Autophagy
induction is known to support Ad replication and spread through cancer
cell monolayers. The plaque assay was used to verify if AdUV could spread
more effectively than Ad5 and Adhz60 because viruses which efficiently
replicate and release from cells are known to form larger plaques. The
average size of plaques formed by AdUV is 340% and 214% larger than those
plaques formed by Adhz60 and Ad5, respectively. In vivo, AdUV was
non-lethal to athymic nude mice and strongly suppressed A549-xenograft
tumor growth, prolonging murine survival. These results indicate that
AdUV is a more effective, safe oncolytic Ad vector. Our findings also
demonstrate the utility of bioselection of the generation of more
effective cancer therapeutic vectors.

