Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK is a therapeutic and chemopreventative target in squamous cell
carcinoma


Purpose: While the prognosis of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cuSCC)
is excellent overall, advanced metastatic disease represents a
substantial mortality burden for which no standard targeted therapy
exists. Findings from genomic and proteomic studies and the observed
induction of cuSCC by BRAF inhibitor driven MEK/ERK pathway engagement
suggest that MEK/ERK activation is essential for cuSCC tumorigenesis and
tumor proliferation. Most cuSCC arise from a clinically and
histopathologically defined preneoplastic precursor, the actinic
keratosis (AK). Molecular studies of early events in cuSCC pathogenesis
strongly implicate MEK/ERK signaling at the proteomic and transcriptional
level. This occurs at the earliest recognizable transitions from
chronically UV-exposed skin to AK, with sharp elevation of ETS2/ELK1
transcriptional target expression. With these compelling rationales in
mind, we tested whether MEK inhibitors (MEKi) are a clinically actionable
treatment and chemoprevention approach for cuSCC. Given that several MEKi
are approved, this is a readily translated strategy.Experimental Design:
Preclinical testing was performed in 10 cuSCC cell lines and two mouse
models of cuSCC using two distinct MEK inhibitors, trametinib and
cobimetinib. We show that two MEKi, trametinib and cobimetinib are highly
effective against cuSCC cell lines in culture, effectively engage MEK/ERK
signaling in cells and in vivo, and potently induce cell cycle arrest and
senescence. Both established and new tumors are powerfully inhibited in
both xenograft and UV-driven autochthonous mouse models. This model,
which utilizes immunocompetent SKH-1E mice exposed to chronic, low-dose,
solar simulated UV light (12.5 kJ/m2 UVB weekly administered across three
doses) more faithfully recapitulates human cuSCC molecularly than
chemical carcinogenesis models. Lesions in this model exhibit
heterogeneity in latency and responses to therapy, as do human
tumors.Results: MEK inhibitor treatment of cuSCC lines strongly reduces
proliferation and induces senescence markers in cells, including p21 and
beta-galactosidase. This response was universal, but highly
heterogeneous. Sensitivity to MEKi was determined, in part, by modulation
of AKT activity, and combination MEKi and AKTi. In-vivo, an SRB1
xenograft model was exquisitely sensitive to oral trametinib treatment,
and in our spontaneous UV-driven Hairless mouse model of cuSCC, treatment
with the MEK inhibitors trametinib and cobimetinib strongly reduced tumor
growth and almost completely abrogated tumor induction. We confirmed
target engagement in-vivo showing that ERK signaling was significantly
suppressed.Conclusions: Overall, we conclude MEK signaling is critical
for cuSCC tumor induction and maintenance, and that MEK inhibition is an
attractive approach for both advanced cuSCC treatment as well as
chemoprevention.

