Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-Seq in the NYGC GBM Clinical Outcomes Pilot Study


Whole genome and targeted sequencing data have just started to
revolutionize clinical care for cancer patients. Based on genetic
variants in each tumor, clinicians can tailor treatment options for
patients. While genomic sequencing data provide the landscapes of genetic
variants, RNA-seq data can provide complementary information and allow us
to interpret the functional effects of discovered variants. However,
N-of-1 analysis with RNA-seq data poses several challenges, including
integration with DNA data and normalization of gene expression. To tackle
these challenges, we developed RNA analytics for integrative analysis for
tumor samples in a clinical setting.For variant analysis, we use RNA to
validate somatic variants (both SNVs and indels) and to elucidate
potential functional effects of the variants. Because RNA-seq has
different coverage patterns from WGS, we developed tools to calculate and
compare variant allele frequency in both DNA and RNA data, which allows
us to validate variants and evaluate allelic expression. Additionally,
leveraging on RNA-seq, our tools look for evidence of aberrant splicing
events, such as exon skipping and intron retention that are caused by
genetic variants. These analyses not only provide an integrative view of
the data, but also prioritize variants and potentially reveal variant
effects.Because many cancers are driven by fusion genes and some fusion
genes are recurrent in GBM, we use our data to detect gene fusion
supported by RNA-Seq, and if possible by WGS. We use FusionCatcher and
STAR-Fusion, coupled with OncoFuse to discover and annotate fusions in
RNA-Seq. We subsequently look for supporting evidence by any of the
structural variant callers we use.Gene expression quantification is most
valuable as a comparative measurement. However, this is challenging for
N-of-1 analysis, since such assessment requires proper normalization and
comparison to a proper cohort. Batch-effects due to library preparation
and other covariates exacerbate the issue of normalization. We tackle
this issue with various normalization and correction strategies.
Utilizing GC-bias correction, batch-effect adjustment, and public
datasets, our analytic provides gene expression measurement that allows
researcher to interpret whether the gene is up- or down-regulated
compared to a cohort (such as TCGA).Our RNA analytics comprehensively
utilize transcriptomic data and provides solutions to integrative
analysis. We have applied our tools to sequence data from five
glioblastoma patients and showed how RNA-seq can compliment WGS. Our
integrative analysis helps identify an exon-skipping event in MET in one
patient, which was validated with Sanger sequencing. The expression
analysis also helps identify potential aberrant activity of the SMO
pathway, possibly driven by a SMO missense mutation and loss of SUFU.

