Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling is essential for
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis induced by liver-specific disruption of Nrf1


Liver-specific inactivation of NF-E2 p45-related factor 1 (Nrf1) results
in sequential development of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH),
fibrosis, and finally hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the
detailed mechanisms responsible for this phenotype remain uncertain. In
the present study, a -naphthoflavone (-NF)-inducible liver-specific Nrf1
knockout mouse line which harbors an Nrf1flox/flox allele and a rat
CYP1A1-Cre transgene was employed to investigate potential mechanism
underlying Nrf1 deficiency-induced NASH.-NF-induced liver-specific
knockout Nrf1 resulted in a reversible typical NASH and mild fibrosis
phenotype. -NF treatment almost abolished Nrf1 expression after 2 weeks,
and induced dramatic elevation of serum transaminase, inflammation,
necrosis, ballooning degeneration and HSC activation, but these phenotype
diminished after 16 weeks, accompanied by restoration of Nrf1 expression.
These observations clearly demonstrated the dependency of NASH and
fibrosis on loss of Nrf1, and provide a novel model of reversible
non-alcoholic liver diseases.Notably, disruption of Nrf1 caused a
sustained activation of sonic hedgehog (shh) signaling pathway
accompanied by pronounced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. More
importantly, vismodegib, a hedgehog signaling inhibitor, dramatically
reversed the deleterious effects caused by loss of Nrf1, such as
elevation of serum transaminase activities, inflammatory cells
infiltration and hepatocyte necrosis. It has been reported that
hepatocytes undergoing endoplasmic reticulum stress and showed elevated
expression of hedgehog ligands. However, the mRNA level of hedgehog
ligand was not changed in Nrf1 deficiency mice, while the protein levels
of both shh and Gli2 were significantly increased. Furthermore, chemical
chaperone 4-PBA which can promote protein degradation partially reversed
the effects of Nrf1 deficiency on shh signaling. Collectively, these data
demonstrate that activation of sonic hedgehog signaling is essential for
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis induced by liver-specific disruption of
Nrf1, possibly through post-translational modification/procession of shh,
and hedgehog signaling could be targeted to treat non-alcoholic liver
diseases.The present works were supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 91429305, 81272468, and 81372266)

