Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the efficacy of TRAIL plus quercetin as a potential
breast carcinoma therapeutic


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women in the
United States. There is a continued need for the development of selective
and specific treatment options for all types of breast cancer, including
hormone-dependent and triple-negative subtypes. Recombinant human Tumor
Necrosis Factor-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand (rhTRAIL), the
optimized form of the endogenous death ligand, shows potential as an
effective anti-cancer therapeutic due to its ability to induce apoptosis
in cancer independent of wild-type p53 function, while displaying minimal
toxicity to normal cells. However, a majority of breast cancer cell lines
exhibit resistance to TRAIL treatment due to up-regulation of
pro-apoptotic proteins, down-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins,
and/or up-regulation of death receptors 4 and 5. To overcome TRAIL
resistance, a cotreatment option has been explored utilizing the natural
compound Quercetin (Q). Q is a flavonol found in certain fruits,
vegetables, and teas. As a single agent, Q has been shown to have
antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects on a variety of cancer cell
lines. The aim of this study is to examine the capacity of Q to enhance
TRAIL's pro-apoptotic and antiproliferative effects on breast cancer
cells. Sulphorhodamine B (SRB) assays were performed on hormone dependent
(MCF-7) and triple negative (BT-20) breast cancer cell lines to determine
if the cotreatment of Q and TRAIL hinders cell growth. Growth for both
MCF-7 and BT-20 cells was substantially inhibited by single agent Q
treatments (12.5 M; 20%, 25 M; 40%, 50 M; 60%) but not by single agent
TRAIL treatment (100 ng/mL; Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed
cancer in women in the United States. There is a continued need for the
development of selective and specific treatment options for all types of
breast cancer, including hormone-dependent and triple-negative subtypes.
Recombinant human Tumor Necrosis Factor-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand
(rhTRAIL), the optimized form of the endogenous death ligand, shows
potential as an effective anti-cancer therapeutic due to its ability to
induce apoptosis in cancer independent of wild-type p53 function, while
displaying minimal toxicity to normal cells. However, a majority of
breast cancer cell lines exhibit resistance to TRAIL treatment due to
up-regulation of pro-apoptotic proteins, down-regulation of
anti-apoptotic proteins, and/or up-regulation of death receptors 4 and 5.
To overcome TRAIL resistance, a cotreatment option has been explored
utilizing the natural compound Quercetin (Q). Q is a flavonol found in
certain fruits, vegetables, and teas. As a single agent, Q has been shown
to have antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects on a variety of
cancer cell lines. The aim of this study is to examine the capacity of Q
to enhance TRAIL's pro-apoptotic and antiproliferative effects on breast
cancer cells. Sulphorhodamine B (SRB) assays were performed on hormone
dependent (MCF-7) and triple negative (BT-20) breast cancer cell lines to
determine if the cotreatment of Q and TRAIL hinders cell growth. Growth
for both MCF-7 and BT-20 cells was substantially inhibited by single
agent Q treatments (12.5 M; 20%, 25 M; 40%, 50 M; 60%) but not by single
agent TRAIL treatment (100 ng/mL; <20%). Moreover, BT-20 and MCF-7 cell
growth was further inhibited by cotreatment with both agents; for
example, the cotreatment of 50 M Q and 100 ng/mL TRAIL inhibited BT-20
and MCF-7 cell growth by 80% and 90%, respectively. As a single agent, Q
was able to induce apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner in both breast
cancer cells; thereafter, Q's ability to sensitize breast cancer cells to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis was examined by western blot analysis. Compared
to single agent treatments, the combination of Q and TRAIL enhanced the
induction of apoptosis as indicated by increased PARP cleavage (a
hallmark of apoptosis) and the activation of the executioner caspases 3
and 7. Furthermore, the cotreatment of breast cancer cells with Q and
TRAIL enhanced the activation of the extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic
pathways, as assessed by the activation of caspase 8 and the release of
cytochrome c from the mitochondria, respectively. Overall, these findings
suggest that the cotreatment of Q and rhTRAIL possesses the potential to
be an anti-breast cancer therapeutic by enhancing pro-apoptotic and
anti-proliferative effects in hormone dependent and triple-negative
breast cancer cells.

