Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quercetin protects from doxorubicin induced vascular toxicity but
impairs its cytotoxic profile in breast cancer cells


The use of anti-cancer adjuvant therapy is rationalized by potentiating
the efficacy and/or protecting from major side effects of
chemotherapeutics. Doxorubicin is an effective anthracycline anticancer
agent for breast cancer despite its dose-limiting cardiovascular
toxicity. Quercetin is a flavonoid compound with potent antioxidant and
cardiovascular protective activity. The purpose of this study is to
investigate the influence of quercetin on the cytotoxic profile of
doxorubicin in breast cancer cell lines on the top of ameliorating
doxorubicin induced acute vascular toxicity. Incubation of isolated
aortic rings with doxorubicin (10 uM) significantly increased contractile
response of aorta to phenylephrine and decreased its relaxation response
to acetylcholine. Quercetin significantly protected from doxorubicin
induced vascular toxicity showing reduced contractile and increased
relaxation responses of aorta to doxorubicin. On the other hand,
quercetin combination significantly resulted in increasing the IC50 of
doxorubicin from 0.40.03 to 0.80.06 M in MCF-7 cells with combination
index indicative of strong antagonism (CI-value = 3.2). The IC50 of
doxorubicin did not change after combination with quercetin in MDA-MB-231
cells (7010 and 76.34 nM, respectively), however the CI-value was 1.98
which is indicative of antagonism as well. Only in T47D cells, quercetin
combination with doxorubicin was additive (CI-value = 1.17) and the IC50
of doxorubicin was significantly dropped from 0.740.05 to 0.360.003 M.
Quercetin did not affect total ROS level induced by doxorubicin, however,
it significantly impaired the immediate phase of intracellular ROS
generation by doxorubicin within MCF-7 cells from 125.23.6% to 102.53.9%
of control cells. Yet, quercetin synergized doxorubicin cytotoxicity
against MCF7 cells under hypoxic condition and significantly decreased
its IC50 from 8.90.7 to 0.90.02 M (CI-value = 0.2). Further investigation
showed that the combination of doxorubicin with quercetin significantly
increased the concentration of pro-caspase 3 compared to doxorubicin
alone in T47D and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Cell death mechanism was further
investigated using annexin-V/PI differential staining. Quercetin
combination did not significantly increase the percent of apoptotic or
necrotic cells compared to treatment with doxorubicin alone in all cell
lines under investigation. In addition, quercetin induced significant
accumulation of cells at S-phase as well as in G2/M-phase in both MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Quercetin did not affect cell cycle
distribution in T47D cells. In conclusion quercetin despite its potent
vascular protective activity against doxorubicin, it shows antagonistic
to boarder line-additive interactions with doxorubicin in different
breast cancer cell lines.

