Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Actinomycin D enhanced immunotoxin RG7787 killing of cancer cells


Immunotoxins are recombinant fusion proteins that contain an antibody
fragment directed against a tumor selective surface antigen attached to a
protein toxin. RG7787 is a newly developed, mesothelin-targeted
immunotoxin designed to be less immunogenic and better tolerated than the
previous clinical candidate SS1P. The targeting moiety of RG7787 consists
of a humanized anti-mesothelin Fab, while its effector moiety is a
truncated portion of Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE) consisting essentially
only of the catalytic domain III fused via a furin cleavable linker to
the Fab fragment. The domain III variant used in RG7787 contains
mutations that silence all known human B-cell and some T-cell epitopes.
RG7787 targets and kills mesothelin-positive tumor cells, which are
prevalent in mesothelioma, ovarian, lung, and pancreatic cancers. Safety
and immunogenicity of RG7787 are being assessed in these tumor
indications in an ongoing phase I trial. In order to further enhance the
anti-tumoral activity of RG7787, we screened for clinically used drugs
that can synergize with RG7787 in vitro and/or in vivo. Actinomycin D
(Act D) is a potent transcription inhibitor and is used for treating a
variety of cancers, including gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, Wilms
tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma, and Ewing's sarcoma. In this study we found that
the combination of Act D with RG7787 greatly stimulated cell killing of
mesothelin positive cell lines, such as KB31, KLM1, and Hay. The
combination also produced complete regressions of KLM1 pancreatic tumor
xenografts in mice. To investigate the mechanism of killing we used an
apoptosis RNA array and found that both Act D and RG7787 stimulate
apoptotic stress responsive genes including TNF, TRAILR2 (DR5), NFB,
GAD45A and TP53. The combination also increased cleavage and activation
of the pro-apoptotic proteins caspase-3, -9, and PARP. Taken together our
data indicate that combining RG7787 and Act D reduces the threshold for
activation of apoptosis in cancer cells.

