Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL12 inhibition with NOX-A12 (olaptesed pegol) increases T-cell
infiltration in tumor-stroma spheroids and synergizes with PD-1 immune
checkpoint blockade


Immune checkpoint inhibition promotes T cell-mediated killing of cancer
cells and can induce striking responses, but objective control of tumor
growth is observed in only 10-30% of patients with cancer types that
generally respond to this treatment (Fearon 2014, Cancer Immunol Res
2:187). A possible cause for this limitation of checkpoint inhibition may
be an immune-privileged tumor microenvironment (TME) which excludes the
cytotoxic T cells from the vicinity of cancer cells. The chemokine CXCL12
has recently been described as an important T cell exclusion factor in
the TME-driven immune suppression. In this study we aimed to investigate
whether CXCL12 inhibition by the clinical stage L-aptamer (Spiegelmer)
NOX-A12 (olaptesed pegol) is able to enhance T cell infiltration in 3D
tumor-stroma spheroids, thereby facilitating effective immunotherapy.We
established 3D multicellular microtissues that mimic a solid tumor with a
CXCL12-abundant TME. For this purpose, CXCL12-expressing murine stromal
MS-5 cells were co-cultured with solid human cancer cell lines in
ultra-low attachment plates for three days. Primary human T cells
isolated from healthy donors were added to the spheroids in the presence
of various concentrations of NOX-A12. The next day, spheroids were washed
and dissociated for T cell quantification by flow cytometry. T cell
localization in the 3D microtissues was assessed by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). In order to examine T cell activation in the spheroids, a
bioluminescent reporter-based PD-1/PD-L1 blockade bioassay (Promega) was
adapted to the 3D format: Jurkat-PD-1/Luc T cells were incubated with
anti-PD-1 and added to NOX-A12-treated spheroids (CHO-PD-L1 + MS-5).We
found that NOX-A12 increases the amount of T cells in tumor-stroma
spheroids in a dose-dependent manner; flow cytometry analyses revealed a
2-3 fold increase in spheroid T cell infiltration at 10 nM NOX-A12 in all
examined 3D co-culture types. Enhanced T cell infiltration in the
presence of NOX-A12 was corroborated by IHC. In line with this, we found
increased infiltration and activation of Jurkat-PD-1/luc T cells in the
MS-5/CHO-PD-L1 spheroids treated with NOX-A12. Importantly, NOX-A12
synergized with anti-PD1-induced T cell activation.Taken together, in
heterotypic 3D models that mimic the complexity of the TME, the CXCL12
antagonist NOX-A12 improved T cell-based tumor immunotherapy by
increasing T cell infiltration. By modulating the CXCL12 gradients within
the complex 3D structure, NOX-A12 appears to break the immune-privilege
of the TME, thereby paving the way for T cell migration into the tumor.
These data provide a rationale for the combination of NOX-A12 with
checkpoint inhibitors as well as other T cell-based therapies in patients
with solid cancer.

