Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dichloroacetate inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis
in human endometrial cancer cell lines


Objective: Dichloroacetate (DCA) is a well-tolerated, oral drug used in
the treatment of hereditary lactic acidosis. DCA has been found to have
anti-tumorigenic activity in various non-gynecologic cancers through its
inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase, leading to profound mitochondrial
defects in cancer cells. Thus, we sought to assess the effects of DCA on
human endometrial cancer cell lines.Methods: Three endometrial cancer
cell lines (KLE, Ishikawa, and ECC-1) were treated with varying
concentrations of DCA from 0.1uM to 100 uM. Cell proliferation was
measured using the MTT assay. Cell cycle progression was assessed by
Cellometer. Apoptosis was evaluated by the Annexin V-FITC assay using
Cellometer. Western immunoblotting was performed to assess effects of DCA
on cell cycle and cellular stress proteins. In addition, cellular stress
was measured using a reactive oxygen species assay. All experiments were
performed in triplicate.Results: DCA inhibited cell proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner in all three endometrial cancer cell lines
following 72 hours of exposure. The IC50 was 30 uM for KLE, 78 uM for
Ishikawa, and 72 uM for ECC-1. Treatment with DCA resulted in G1 phase
cell cycle arrest in all three cell lines. DCA induced apoptosis in all
three cell lines. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that DCA
increased cyclin D1 expression, decreased CDK4 expression, and increased
PERK expression after 24 hours of DCA exposure. A dose dependent increase
in reactive oxygen species was seen in all three cell lines. At a maximum
dose of 100 uM DCA, ROS production compared to controls for KLE increased
3.2-fold (p = 0.002), Ishikawa increased 1.8-fold (p = 0.003), and ECC-1
increased 2.1-fold (p = 0.002).Conclusions: DCA effectively inhibited
cell proliferation via G1 cell cycle arrest and induced apoptosis in
human endometrial cancer cell lines. DCA induced significant cellular
stress as evidenced by a dose dependent increase in reactive oxygen
species. Further evaluation of DCA as a targeted metabolic therapy in
endometrial cancer is warranted.

