Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effects of metformin on epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of CD44+/CD117+ ovarian cancer stem cells


Background: Although metformin, a first-line drug for treating diabetes,
may play an important role in inhibition of epithelial ovarian cancer
cell growth and cancer stem cells (CSCs), metformin at low dose showed
less effect on proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. In this study, we
evaluated the effect of metformin at low dose on ovarian CSCs in order to
understand the molecular mechanisms underlying ovarian
tumorigenesis.Methods: The inhibitory effects of metformin at los dose on
proliferation and population of ovarian cancer cells including SKOV3 and
A2780 were assessed by cell proliferation assay and flow cytometry.
Quantitative real-time PCR assays on expression of Bcl-2, Survivin and
Bax were performed to determine the effect of the metformin at low dose
on epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer cells and CSCs.
Tumor sphere formation assay was also performed to evaluate the effect of
metformin on spheres forming ability of CSCs. The therapeutic efficacy
and the anti-CSC effects of metformin at low dose were investigated by
using both SKOV3 cells and primary tumor xenografts. In addition, the CSC
frequency and EMT in tumor xenograft models were also assessed by flow
cytometry and quantitative real-time PCR.Results: Metformin at low dose
did not affect proliferation of ovarian cancer cells, however, it
inhibited the population of the CD44+/CD117+ selectively, neither CD133+
nor ALDH+ cells. It suppressed expression of snail2, twist and vimentin
significantly in cancer cells and CD44+/CD117+ CSCs in vitro. Low dose of
metformin reduced survivin expression in CSCs leading to arrest of cell
cycle. Metformin at low concentration inhibited the secondary and the
tertiary tumor sphere formation, decreased the growth of either SKOV3 or
primary ovarian tumor xenograft, enhanced the anticancer effect of the
cisplatin, and lowered the proportion of the CD44+/CD117+ CSCs in the
xenograft tissue. Metformin was also associated with a reduction of
snail2, twist, and vimentin in CD44+/CD117+ ovarian CSCs in
vivo.Conclusions: Our results implicate that metformin at low dose
inhibits selectively CD44+/CD117+ ovarian CSCs through inhibition of EMT
and potentiates the effect of the cisplatin.

