Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed immunofluorescence quantitation and validation of
multiple immune cell types in colon cancer epithelium and stroma


Immune response to tumor growth and development is highly complex and
varies with stromal and tumor cell composition and secreted factors.
Different immune cell types can have opposing functions (tumor
suppressive or immune suppressive) and their density, location and
activation state can have profound effects on tumor outcome. Routine
immune-profiling methods based on sample homogenization or limited in
situ detection capabilities may be insufficient to measure this
diversity. To fully decipher tumor immune response and contribution of
different cell types, there is urgent need to develop new imaging tools
for in situ immune cell-typing and quantification. MultiOmyx technology
allows repeated staining, imaging and cell-level analysis of multiple
biomarkers (at least 60) on the same FFPE tissue section. Together with
epithelial and stromal cell analysis, the relative location and quantity
of immune cells can be established, enabling regional assessment of
immune infiltration and activation status.Using this workflow, 747 stage
I-III colorectal cancer patient samples in TMA format were multiplexed
for a total of 61 proteins, including CD3 (all T-cells), CD8 (cytotoxic
T-cells), CD20 (B-cells), CD68 (macrophages) and pan-cytokeratin
(epithelial tumor cells). All images were registered, auto-fluorescence
subtracted and illumination corrected. Individual cells were segmented
using automated image analysis workflow, consisting of nuclei
segmentation, epithelium segmentation and stroma-epithelial cell nuclei
classification. We applied a probabilistic multi-class, multi-label
classification algorithms based on multi-parametric models to build
statistical models of CD protein expression and classify immune cells.
Using selected images, expert annotations of the following immune cells
were made [CD20+ (n = 4282 (cells)), CD3+ (n = 5600), CD8+ (n = 5346),
and CD68+ (n = 4261), and defects (n = 1739)]. Support Vector Machines
(SVM) were used to derive a statistical model for cell classification. To
objectively evaluate the cell classification accuracy, we performed
10-fold cross validation.The methods described performed well in
classifying cell-types, yielding 97% accuracy, relative to expert user
annotations, for all immune cell types. Classification accuracy was
slightly higher for lymphocytes vs. macrophages, likely due to more
diffuse localization of CD68. In line with previous reports, higher
T-cell infiltration was significantly correlated with recurrence-free
survival in the entire cohort. In summary, we have developed a highly
accurate quantitation method for in situ analysis of immune cells in
tumor and stroma. Using the same workflow, additional cell lineage and
functional markers can be added for deeper phenotyping and identification
of innate and adaptive immune cell lineages, generating new insights into
role of immune response in tumor progression.

