Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of risk-based colposcopy in the ALTS trial


Objective: Women referred to colposcopy have a wide spectrum of
underlying risk of precancer that could influence colposcopic practice
and management. We sought to evaluate important risk-strata based on HPV
status, cytology, and colposcopic impression in women undergoing
colposcopy.Methods: Among participants in the ASCUS-LSIL Triage Study, we
stratified women from the immediate colposcopy and HPV triage study arms
based on enrollment HPV typing, study cytology, and colposcopic
impression. In each group, absolute risk of CIN3+ at enrollment
colposcopy and cumulative risk over 2-year follow-up were estimated.
Immediate CIN3+ risk of LSIL and HSIL cytology were used as thresholds
for colposcopy referral and immediate treatment, respectively.Results: We
observed substantial differences in risk of precancer across strata.
Women with HSIL cytology, who were HPV16-positive, and high-grade
colpscopic impression had a 71% baseline and 78% 2-year risk of CIN3+,
respectively. HPV16-positive women with HSIL cytology and low-grade
impression, and women with high-grade impression and either HSIL cytology
or HPV16 infection, also showed significant CIN3+ risk exceeding the risk
of HSIL. In contrast, women with normal colposcopy, Objective: Women
referred to colposcopy have a wide spectrum of underlying risk of
precancer that could influence colposcopic practice and management. We
sought to evaluate important risk-strata based on HPV status, cytology,
and colposcopic impression in women undergoing colposcopy.Methods: Among
participants in the ASCUS-LSIL Triage Study, we stratified women from the
immediate colposcopy and HPV triage study arms based on enrollment HPV
typing, study cytology, and colposcopic impression. In each group,
absolute risk of CIN3+ at enrollment colposcopy and cumulative risk over
2-year follow-up were estimated. Immediate CIN3+ risk of LSIL and HSIL
cytology were used as thresholds for colposcopy referral and immediate
treatment, respectively.Results: We observed substantial differences in
risk of precancer across strata. Women with HSIL cytology, who were
HPV16-positive, and high-grade colpscopic impression had a 71% baseline
and 78% 2-year risk of CIN3+, respectively. HPV16-positive women with
HSIL cytology and low-grade impression, and women with high-grade
impression and either HSIL cytology or HPV16 infection, also showed
significant CIN3+ risk exceeding the risk of HSIL. In contrast, women
with normal colposcopy, <HSIL cytology, and absence of HPV16 infection
had the lowest baseline CIN3+ risk (3.2%), below the colposcopy referral
threshold in ALTS.Conclusion: Risk assessment at colposcopy can inform
colposcopy-biopsy practice and guide management. In the low-risk group,
biopsy yields little additional disease and a normal colposcopy may
confer higher reassurance that CIN3+ is not present; while in the highest
risk groups, immediate treatment without biopsy confirmation could be
considered according to current guidelines. Analyses evaluating the
benefit of multiple biopsies in these risk strata are underway and will
be presented at the meeting.

