Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic antitumor effect of selinexor, a selective inhibitor
of nuclear export (SINE) compound and panobinostat in a mouse model of
multiple myeloma


Introduction: Selinexor is an oral, first-in-class SINE compound that
binds to the primary nuclear exporter XPO1/CRM1. XPO1 exports over 200
cargos, including major tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) leading to their
inactivation. Inhibition of XPO1 results in nuclear retention of TSPs and
restores their normal functions. XPO1 also mediates the export of key
signaling molecules in multiple myeloma (MM) including c-MYC mRNA and
NF-B. Selinexor is currently being investigated in phase 2 clinical
trials in MM in combination with dexamethasone, pomalidamide,
lenalidomide, bortezomib and carfilzomib. In preclinical studies
selinexor has been shown to synergize broadly with these anti-MM drugs
making it an excellent candidate partner for combination therapies in MM.
To identify additional synergistic pairings, we investigated the use of
selinexor in combination with panobinostat, a pan-histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDAC) recently approved by the FDA in combination with
bortezomib for 3rd line treatment of MM, as a potential treatment for MM
both in-vitro and in-vivo.Methods: The effects of selinexor and
panobinostat alone or in combination on cell viability were tested on
MM1.S and NCI-H929 cell lines using MTT assays. Total RNA and whole
protein cell lysates were extracted and analyzed by qPCR and by
immunoblots. In-vivo, MM.1S cells were used to derive a xenograft mouse
model. Mice were treated with sub-therapeutic doses of selinexor and
panobinostat alone or in combination and with the therapeutic dose of
selinexor. Tumor growth was monitored for 17 days and% Tumor Growth
Inhibition (%TGI) was determined. Xenografts were harvested and analyzed
microscopically and by immunohistochemestry (IHC).Results:
Selinexor-panobinostat combination was highly effective both in-vitro and
in-vivo. In MTT assays, both selinexor and panobinostat demonstrated low
IC50 values (nanomolar) and when combined, they synergistically/
additively inhibit proliferation. Gene expression and western blot
analyses showed that the combination treatment leads to a synergistic
reduction in c-MYC mRNA and protein levels. In addition, an overall
reduction in expression of anti-apoptotic signaling molecules including
NF-B and p21 and an increase of expression of pro-apoptotic molecules
including cleaved caspase 3 and BAX were observed. Importantly, in-vivo,
while%TGI of sub-therapeutic doses of selinexor and panobinostat measured
58% and 52% respectively, the combination showed a synergistic effect,
measuring 93%. Importantly this high%TGI exceeded the effect of the
therapeutic dose of selinexor alone 79%.Conclusion:
Selinexor-panobinostat combination synergizes to induce apoptosis in MM
cells and amplifies anti-tumor effect in a MM xenograft model. These data
provide rational support for study of selinexor/ panobinostat combination
in clinical trials.

