Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico design, synthesis and evaluation of a new family of
C1-substituted pyrrolobenzodiazepines (PBDs)


The pyrrolobenzodiazepines (PBDs) are a class of naturally occurring and
synthetic DNA minor-groove binding agents. They covalently bind to the
C2-amino group of guanines, and can form mono-alkylated adducts and
cross-links depending on the structure of the molecule. PBDs can be
extremely cytotoxic, and there are reports of IC50 values in cell lines
in the high femtomolar ranges. Synthetic A-ring-linked PBD dimers have
found use as payloads in antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) due to their
potent cytoxicity, and a number of ADCs are now in clinical trials. The
C-ring of the PBD structure has been under-exploited as a means to
improve cytotoxicity, and for joining PBD units together to create novel
dimers. This lack of interest in the C-ring may have been due to
literature reports that related C2-linked PBD dimers are poorly DNA
interactive and cytotoxic. Using our proprietary molecular dynamics (MD)
protocols, we undertook a series of MD simulations to establish a
rationale for the poor DNA-binding affinity of C2-linked PBD dimers. We
were able to determine a number of characteristics preventing efficient
DNA-interaction including (a) their shape does not follow the curvature
of the DNA minor groove, (b) if a molecule is attached to DNA via one
imine moiety, the other imine moiety is not oriented in an appropriate
position to effect the second covalent cross-linking event, (c) if a
cross-linked model is produced, significant DNA distortion is observed,
suggesting that rapid repair would occur in cells, perhaps contributing
to the low cytotoxicity. During this study, our models and simulations
suggested that, after covalent adduct formation, C1-substituents should
extend along the minor groove in an appropriate orientation to form
extensive van der Waals interactions with functional groups on the minor
groove floor. This was reflected in free energy of binding calculations.
For example, in the case of one C2-linked dimer, calculations suggested a
weak binding affinity (i.e., -42.74 kcal/mol) with the DNA sequence
5-GCGATACTCGC-3, whereas under identical experimental conditions, an
equivalent C1-linked dimer had a much higher binding affinity (i.e.,
-50.42 kcal/mol). Based on these promising in silico data, a small
library of C1-PBD molecules was synthesised, and biophysical results
indicated that they possessed significant DNA-binding affinity. HPLC-MS
experiments using DNA sequences based on the STAT3 and NF-B transcription
factor consensus sequences showed that some library members converted up
to 60% of the DNA to covalent adducts within 3 hours. Furthermore, in
preliminary experiments in cell lines such as MDA-MB231, the same
molecules were highly cytotoxic with IC50 values in the nanomolar region
(e.g., 36 nM after 72 hour incubation for one compound). Studies are now
underway to further functionalise the C1-position of PBDs to enhance
cytotoxicity, and to assess their viability as novel payloads for use in
ADCs.

