Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Class-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors differentially
promote translation-dependent HER2 transcript decay in HER2-positive
breast cancer cells


Dysregulation of translational control is emerging as an essential aspect
of tumorigenesis ripe for targeted therapeutic intervention. We have
recently shown that polysome assembly can be differentially targeted by
class IIB/HDAC6 selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
(Wilson-Edell et al., Oncotarget, 2014), while translation-dependent and
3UTR-targeted decay of oncogenic transcripts like HER2 is induced by
pan-HDAC inhibition (Scott et al., Mol Cancer Res, 2008). To learn more
about the HDAC dependency of oncogenic transcript stability,
HER2-positive SKBr3 breast cancer cells were treated (2-24 h) with a
pan-inhibitor of both class I and II HDACs (trichostatin-A/TSA), a class
IIB > class I selective inhibitor (ACY-1215/Ricolinostat), class
I/HDAC1-3 selective inhibitors (Entinostat, ACY-1035), and class
IIB/HDAC6 selective inhibitors (ACY-775, Tubacin) for their respective
abilities to induce HER2 mRNA decay (Northern blotting), reduce HER2
protein levels, induce acetylation of histone 2B and/or tubulin (Western
blotting), and to reduce cell culture growth (MTT cell viability). In
parallel studies, protein candidates potentially mediating HER2
transcript decay were identified by mass spectrometry of complexes
specifically binding to the 3 UTR sense strand of HER2 mRNA. Polysome
profiling demonstrated that pan-HDAC inhibition promoted protein
candidates hnRNP-A2/B1 and the DEAD Box Helicase 5 (DDX5) to co-migrate
with the 40S ribosome, and candidate hnRNP-K to co-migrate with higher
(>60S) polysome fractions. Additionally, immunoprecipitates of these
candidates were found to be acetylated following pan-HDAC inhibitor
treatment. With regard to reducing cell viability (at 72 h) and HER2
protein levels (at 24 h), TSA and ACY-1215 proved to be the most potent
inhibitors, causing >50% reductions at >0.5 uM doses, while equimolar
doses of the HDAC6-selective inhibitors showed minimal effects and the
class I inhibitors (Entinostat, ACY-1035) showed only intermediate
effects on both cell viability and HER2 protein reduction. Interestingly,
only the pan-HDAC inhibitor TSA and the class I/IIB selective inhibitor
ACY-1215 appeared capable of activating HER2 mRNA decay within 6 h of
treatment; and both of these HDAC inhibitors produced similar enhancement
of hnRNP-A2/B1 and DDX5 co-association with the 40S ribosome fraction. In
summary, while the translational machinery including ribosome (40S, 60S)
and polysome protein complexes can be rapidly dysregulated by either
class IIB/HDAC6 selective or pan-HDAC inhibitors, it appears that the
rapid induction of HER2 mRNA decay requires inhibition of both class I
and class IIB/HDAC6 HDACs. These findings suggest that the
investigational HDAC inhibitor ACY-1215/Ricolinostat possesses optimal
class-selective properties for use as an adjunct to treat HER2-positive
breast cancers.

