Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEGPH20 increases the anticancer activity of standard chemotherapy
combinations, vincristine (VIN) and D actinomycin (DACT), in a Wilms
xenograft model


Hyaluronan (HA), which accumulates in the tumor microenvironment of many
solid tumors, is associated with tumor progression and negative clinical
outcomes. Preclinical studies have demonstrated that PEGPH20-mediated HA
removal from HA-rich xenograft tumors in mice decreases tumor
interstitial fluid pressure and water content, resulting in decompression
of tumor vasculature, increased tumor perfusion and enhanced
chemotherapeutic activity. Accordingly, the HA degrading enzyme,
pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), is currently
being evaluated in clinical trials with selected treatment regimens in
several malignancies, including metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma,
gastric cancer, breast cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. Advances in
treatment for pediatric Wilms tumor patients have significantly increased
survival, but salvage chemotherapy for relapsed pediatric patients
remains challenging. To evaluate the role of HA in this disease, 19 Wilms
tumor histological specimens were surveyed for HA status using a novel
probe (Jadin 2014). 79% (15/19) of the samples stained strongly for HA
when compared to non-tumor kidney tissue, prompting additional
preclinical studies. In brief, a human Wilms tumor cell line, WT-CLS1,
was transduced with hyaluronan synthase-3 (HAS3). The subsequent
WT-CLS1/HAS3 cells produced more HA and WT-CLS1/HAS3 xenograft tumors
grew significantly faster than parental WT-CLS1 tumors. To evaluate the
efficacy of PEGPH20 in combination with Wilms tumor chemotherapy (CTX)
combinations, WT-CLS1/HAS3 cells were inoculated adjacent to the tibial
periosteum of nude mice and tumor growth was monitored via
ultrasonography. When tumors reached 250 mm3, mice were staged into
treatment groups: vehicle control, PEGPH20, vincristine (VIN) plus
Dactinomycin (DACT), and PEGPH20+VIN+DACT at different dose/frequency
combinations. Average tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and overall survival
for PEGPH20+VIN+DACT-treated mice were superior to TGI and survival of
VIN+DACT treatment alone. In separate studies WT-CLS1/HAS3 tumor-bearing
mice were staged into three groups: vehicle control, low dose PEGPH20
(0.0375 mg/kg, iv) and high dose PEGPH20 (1 mg/kg, iv). Animals were
administered the hypoxyprobe pimonidazole (60 mg/kg, ip) three hours
prior to sacrifice, and whole tumors were removed and processed via
immunofluorescence. High dose PEGPH20 reduced this measure of tumor
hypoxia by 5% (p = 0.023). Taken together, these data demonstrate that HA
accumulation in Wilms tumor is common, and treatment with PEGPH20
hyaluronidase can increase CTX efficacy and reduce tumor hypoxia in a
preclinical model of this disease. These results support further studies
with PEGPH20 in combination with chemotherapy in preclinical models of
Wilms tumor and suggest investigation in this pediatric patient
population may be warranted.

