Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic hormones FGF19/15 promote hepatocellular carcinoma
through activation of CSCs in fatty liver


Background: Fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19), a member of the
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family, is a hormone that regulate
glucose, lipid, and energy homeostasis in human. It has been shown that
FGF19 and its specific receptor FGFR4 play an important role in
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) which is closely related
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Recently, we found FGF19 overexpressed in
the HCC tissue and serum in patients. The high level of FGF19 was
positively related to cancer stem cells (CSCs) specific surface markers
such as CD133 and EpCAM. The aim of this study is to identify potential
mechanism in which FGF15 (the FGF19's orthologous protein in mouse)/FGFR4
associated abnormal lipid metabolism initiates HCC progression in a
NASH-HCC mouse Model. Methods: In vivo study, male C57L/J mice were
injected intraperitoneally with N-nitrosodiethylamine(DEN) when 2 weeks
old. Both the DEN and control mice were divided into two groups based on
receiving high fat diet (HFD) or control diet (CD). Tumor nodules in the
liver were monitored by ultrasound. Body weight, glucose tolerance test
(GTT) and insulin tolerance test (ITT) were recorded during the
experimental period. The liver weights, tumor volume, histology, alanine
transaminase (ALT), alpha fetoprotein (AFP), and triglyceride (TG) were
determined at 8, 20 and 32weeks. In vitro study, human HCC cell lines
(Hep3B and Huh7) as well as mouse HCC cell lines (Hepa1-6 and FL83B,)
were exposed to a long-chain mixture of free fatty acid(FFA) at different
concentrations (UT, 0.5mM and 1mM FFA) for 24 and 48 hours, respectively.
EpCAM and CD133 were determined by flow cytometery in the isolated tumor
cells from HCC tissues. FGF19/15, FGFR4, CSCs surface markers and Wnt
signaling pathway (-catenin, GSK3) were analyzed by RT-PCR and Western
blot. FGFR4 signal was blocked to elucidate the role of FGF19/15 during
the CSCs activation in vitro. In addition, FGF19, FGFR4 and EpCAM were
also analyzed in human HCC samples. Results: Metabolic disorders were
observed when DEN mice fed with HFD. HCC incidence and tumor volume were
significantly increased in DEN+HFD group compared to that in DEN+CD
group. DEN mice fed with HFD showed increased levels of FGF15/FGFR4 and
-catenin as well as the CSCs surface makers. Increased expression of CSCs
surface makers were also found in the HCC cell lines when exposure to FFA
in vitro. Blockage the FGF19 signal can abolish Wnt/-catenin pathway and
cell stemness features in the FFA environment. Increased levels of FGF19,
FGFR4 and EpCAM were found in human HCC samples. Conclusion: Up-regulated
FGF19/15 and FGFR4 promoted the development of HCC by active CSCs
signaling in metabolic disorder microenvironment. FFA enhanced the CSCs
activation was partially dependent on Wnt/-catenin signaling. FGF19/FGFR4
could be a potential therapeutic target in HCC patients.

