Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel prognostic stromal subtypes in triple-negative breast cancer


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease in terms of presentation,
morphology, molecular profile and response to therapy. Gene expression
profiling has identified intrinsic molecular subtypes that are associated
with clinical markers (ER, PR, HER2) as well as prognosis and survival.
However, it is well established that the intrinsic molecular profiles of
breast tumors are not sufficient to perfectly predict disease outcome.
Increasing evidence indicates that characteristics of the breast stroma
influence tumor progression and response to therapy. Previous work in our
lab has demonstrated that gene expression signatures in human stroma can
predict outcome of breast cancer patients independently of clinical
parameters and molecular subtypes. In this study, we expand our findings
by focusing on a previously underrepresented subset of breast tumors that
have no detectable ER, PR or HER2 (termed Triple-Negative, TN). TN
tumors, which represent approximately 15% of all breast cancers, are
typically associated with poor outcome. However, the contribution of the
stroma to the underlying heterogeneity of TN breast cancer and its
corresponding influence on therapeutic response is not well understood.
To address this, we isolated TN tumor epithelial and stromal tissues by
laser capture microdissection and subjected them to gene expression
profiling. Class discovery revealed distinct gene-clusters (stromal
properties) which are associated with prognosis in TNBC whole tumor
samples. Analysis of the genes comprising each stromal property suggests
that the properties primarily represent the prevalence of distinct cell
types, namely T cells, B cells, activated fibroblasts, and myoepithelial
cells. Importantly, these properties are not mutually exclusive, i.e.
some tumors are associated with multiple stromal properties. While
confirming the heterogeneity of TN-associated stroma, this also indicates
that a multi-parameter classification better reflects the true nature of
the tumor microenvironment. This project provides the first integrated
in-depth analysis of the contribution of tumor stromal processes to TN
disease heterogeneity, and positions the tumor microenvironment for
therapeutic intervention.

