Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated Hippo pathway is a potential therapeutic target for
advanced gallbladder cancer


Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is lethal and aggressive disease characterized
by late diagnosis, poor prognosis and lack of effective therapeutic
options. An excellent candidate for targeting therapy in cancer is the
Hippo signaling pathway that has been reported to be deregulated in
different types of cancer and recently has emerged as a master regulator
that plays a critical role in multiple processes such as tumorigenesis,
apoptosis, tumor stem cell phenotype, drug cell resistance and metastatic
potential. However, little is known about the status of the Hippo kinase
pathway in human GBC. The aim of this study is determinate the Hippo
pathway activity in GBC and evaluate the potential therapeutic role of
YAP1 siRNA and the pharmacological inhibitor Verteporfin, a small
molecule that inhibit TEAD-YAP interaction. Immunohistochemistry was used
to analyze the expression of YAP1 and Survivin, a major downstream
effector and transcriptional target gene of Hippo signaling pathway, in
tissue microarray containing 198 advanced GBC samples. Then, we performed
an exploratory analysis of Hippo pathway activity by qRT- PCR in advanced
GBC and cholecystitis samples. The levels of expression of the Hippo core
kinase proteins in GBC cell lines was studied by western blot and the
inhibition of YAP1 was performed thought specific siRNA and Verteporfin.
Immunohistochemistry showed high nuclear expression of YAP1 in vast
majority of advanced GBC, which is correlated significantly with nuclear
Survivin expression. The 5-year survival rates of patients with
survivin-positive cancer were significantly lower compared with
survivin-negative cancer patients (pGallbladder cancer (GBC) is lethal
and aggressive disease characterized by late diagnosis, poor prognosis
and lack of effective therapeutic options. An excellent candidate for
targeting therapy in cancer is the Hippo signaling pathway that has been
reported to be deregulated in different types of cancer and recently has
emerged as a master regulator that plays a critical role in multiple
processes such as tumorigenesis, apoptosis, tumor stem cell phenotype,
drug cell resistance and metastatic potential. However, little is known
about the status of the Hippo kinase pathway in human GBC. The aim of
this study is determinate the Hippo pathway activity in GBC and evaluate
the potential therapeutic role of YAP1 siRNA and the pharmacological
inhibitor Verteporfin, a small molecule that inhibit TEAD-YAP
interaction. Immunohistochemistry was used to analyze the expression of
YAP1 and Survivin, a major downstream effector and transcriptional target
gene of Hippo signaling pathway, in tissue microarray containing 198
advanced GBC samples. Then, we performed an exploratory analysis of Hippo
pathway activity by qRT- PCR in advanced GBC and cholecystitis samples.
The levels of expression of the Hippo core kinase proteins in GBC cell
lines was studied by western blot and the inhibition of YAP1 was
performed thought specific siRNA and Verteporfin. Immunohistochemistry
showed high nuclear expression of YAP1 in vast majority of advanced GBC,
which is correlated significantly with nuclear Survivin expression. The
5-year survival rates of patients with survivin-positive cancer were
significantly lower compared with survivin-negative cancer patients
(p<0.05, Log-rank test). The gene expression analysis showed a
significant down-regulation of the Hippo kinase core suppressor genes
STK3 (MST2), STK4 (MST1), SAV1, LATS2 and up-regulation of GPCR5A and
BIRC5 in GBC tissues compared with cholecystitis. In addition, western
blot analysis show high levels of nuclear YAP1 in 4 GBC cells and its
expression were associated with a reduction in the phosphorylation status
of LATS1 and MOB. Our findings indicate that targeting YAP1 with siRNA
reduced mRNA and protein levels of this oncogene in almost 80% and
inhibited the clonogenic capacity of GBC cell lines. Otherwise, the in
vitro pharmacological inhibition of YAP1 with Verterporfin reduces YAP1
protein in a dose-dependent manner and was associated with
down-regulation of survivin. Our results showed that the Hippo- pathway
is deregulated in advanced GBC and mediates its oncogenic effects through
of attenuation of their suppressor core components, nuclear translocation
of YAP1 and up-regulation of survivin expression. Targeting YAP1 by siRNA
and Verteporfin leads to inactivation of YAP1 and survivin affecting
cancer cell survival capacity. Targeting the Hippo/YAP has the potential
to provide a novel strategy for GBC therapy. Research supported by
FONDECYT 3140426, 1130204, 11130515, 3140308.

