Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin sensitizes endometrial cancer cells to chemotherapy by
inhibiting IDH1-TET1 pathway


Chemotherapy-resistance is the major obstacle for endometrial carcinoma
patient administration. Accumulated evidences indicate that metformin
sensitizes cancers from several different sites to chemotherapy drugs and
reverses progestin resistance in endometrial cancer. Our group has
demonstrated that metformin reverses progestin resistance and enhances
the rate of cell-killing induced by chemotherapeutic agents in
endometrial cancer cells by downregulating GloI expression. Recent study
has revealed that aberrant expression of IDH1 contribute to chemotherapy
resistance. However, the role of IDH1 in metformin induced chemotherapy
sensitivity is not well characterized. As a critical enzyme of the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, IDH1 catalyzes isocitrate to produce
-ketoglutarate (-KG), a substrate of TET1, which control TET1-mediated
epigenetic modulation of the target genes, including the
chemotherapy-resistant genes. In the present study, we have found that
IDH1 is overexpressed in endometrial cancers compared with benign
endometrial lesions and normal endometria by immunohistochemical analysis
of specimens (200 cases of endometrial cancers, 10 cases of benign
endometrial lesions and 10 cases of normal endometria). Tissue microarray
immunohistochemical detection showed the expression of IDH1, TET1 and
5hmc was positively correlated in different pathological types of
endometrial tissue. Interestingly, we found that metformin reduces
expression of IDH1 at protein levels with a time- and dose-manners in
endometrial cancer cells. Furthermore, overexpression of IDH1 increased
TET1 at protein level and blocked metformin-sensitized endometrial cancer
to chemotherapy drugs, whereas decrease IDH1 expression lessened TET1
expression and paralleled with the attenuated chemotherapy-resistance.
Mechanistic investigations revealed that TET1 involved in
metformin-enhanced chemotherapy sensitivity via IDH1 by western blotting
and DNA dot blotting assays, this may attribute to that reduced
production of -KG resulted from metformin-suppressing IDH1 is not enough
to start TET1-mediated epigenetic modulation of chemotherapy resistant
genes. Overall, our findings demonstrate that IDH1 regulates -KG level
and TET1 expression, which in turn affecting metformin mediated
endometrial cancer chemotherapeutic sensitivity. Our study suggests IDH1
is a potential target to overcome cisplatin and paclitaxel resistance in
endometrial cancer.

