Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-injection of human monocytes improves the in vivo antitumoral
activity of bevacizumab in two NSCLC PDX models


Nowadays, an increasing number of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that
specifically target malignant cells or interfere with different
compartments of the tumor microenvironment are available for cancer
therapy. They take effect via different modes of action including the
initiation of a tumor-targeting immune response. Preclinical platforms
such as PDX models have to be improved to better recapitulate all
possible modes of action for mAbs as well as other immune-modulating
agents. In the current study, we evaluated the antitumoral activity of
Bevacizumab in two NSCLC PDX growing subcutaneously in NMRI nu/nu mice
with and without co-injection of human monocytes.Two NSCLC PDX, LXFA 2478
and LXFA 677, were subcutaneously implanted into 4-6 weeks old female
NMRI nu/nu mice (Harlan, Denmark). Tumor models were chosen based on
their VEGFA expression level. Additionally, LXFA 2478 and LXFA 677 show
high expression of TLR2 and CD14 respectively, two factors known to be
involved in monocyte attraction. When median tumor size reached 150 - 300
mm3, mice were equally distributed to treatment groups (n = 4/group).
Animals were treated once weekly for 7 cycles with a) control vehicle b)
control vehicle + 5106 human monocytes c) Bevacizumab at 40 mg/kg/d and
d) Bevacizumab + 5106 human monocytes. Tumor volume was determined twice
weekly by caliper measurement. At the end of the study, tumor and
lymphatic organs of the animals were harvested and subsequent IHC
analysis for human CD14, CD68 and CD163 was performed.In both
investigated tumor models, Bevacizumab showed moderate antitumoral
activity with a maximal tumor load reduction of 71% (LXFA 2478) and 84%
(LXFA677) as compared to untreated controls on days 39 and 35. The
co-injection of human monocytes markedly enhanced the therapeutic effect
of Bevacizumab in both NSCLC PDX: maximal tumor load reduction was 89% in
LXFA 2478 and 95% in LXFA 677 in combination groups. The injection of
monocytes alone did not affect tumor growth as compared to untreated
control. As predicted by the high VEGFA expression, NSCLC PDX showed high
sensitivity against Bevacizumab. This antitumoral activity was increased
by 18% and 11% for LXFA 2478 and LXFA 677, respectively, through the
additional injection of monocytes. Monocyte recruiting factors (namely
CD14 and TLR2) likely contribute to the mechanism of action.Monocytes and
macrophages have been reported to induce antibody-dependent cytotoxicity
and phagocytosis of tumor cells in the presence of IgG anti-tumor mAbs,
like Bevacizumab. Our results confirm these observations in a PDX based
NSCLC in vivo model. Therefore, the study highlights the suitability of
PDX for immuno-oncology approaches by supplementation of the murine host
with human immune cells. This advanced PDX approach will lead to more
predictive preclinical data for innovative mAbs and other compounds
acting via the activation of monocytes and related immune cells.

