Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Click colorimetric EdU proliferation and TUNEL assay: Conversion
of click chemistry from fluorescent to colorimetric for use with bright
field microscopy


We present here the conversion of click chemistry fluorescence-based EdU
proliferation assay and TUNEL apoptosis assay to use with bright field
microscopy. Advantages of having a colorimetric signal are the retention
of the click chemistry work flow while allowing for compatibility with
standard H&E staining and protocols.Proliferation using copper-catalyzed
labeling of the thymidine analog EdU (ethynyl deoxyuridine) was
introduced in 2007. This click-based assay has advantages over the
traditional antibody based BrdU assay. The small molecule detection is
simple, rapid and gives a bright signal useful for multiplexing.
Additionally, recent improvements to the chemistry allow for GFP and R-PE
compatibly with the EdU and TUNEL assays.Several approaches for creating
a colorimetric signal for EdU proliferation were attempted. The method
presented here had the shortest protocol and uses a biotin-based click
reaction followed by streptavidin -horseradish peroxidase (HRP) step.
This two-step reaction creates an essentially covalent link between the
EdU incorporated in the DNA and the enzyme reporter. Then standard HRP
chromogens such as DAB were used to produce a signal marking the
proliferating cells. Examples of proliferation using colorimetric EdU
labeling in adult Zebrafish caudal fin, mouse cardiac, and rat intestine,
mammary and uterine FFPE treated tissue are presented. Multiplexing with
alkaline phosphatase for two color detection are also presented. Two
color detection of EdU with BrdU or EdU with progesterone receptor (PR)
are shown. Most HIER protocols are compatible with EdU detection. For EdU
alone no HCl treatment is required. For EdU/BrdU double labeling the BrdU
protocol for DNA revelation is used. Anti-BrdU mouse antibody clone
MoBU-1 is used because of its lack of cross-reactivity with
EdU.Additionally, we present the click chemistry-based apoptotic TUNEL
assay colorimetric detection using the same approach. Clickable biotin
adapters are used to couple HRP to the ethynyl tails created by TdT
enzyme extension at 3 end of double stranded breaks. We provide examples
of this late stage indicator of apoptosis visualized with DAB substrate
and stained with standard H&E and other histological stains.

