Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The AP-1 transcription factor JunB promotes multiple myeloma cell
proliferation, survival and drug resistance in the bone marrow
microenvironment


Introduction: The activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor has
been implicated in a multitude of physiologic processes, but also
tumorigenesis. In multiple myeloma (MM), the role of AP-1 is largely
unknown.Experimental procedures: MM cell lines and primary tumor cells
were co-cultured with primary bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) or BMSC
lines. AP-1 expression was measured by western blot analysis and
real-time PCR. AP-1 activation was determined using TransAM AP-1 assay
kit. To investigate the upstream regulators of JunB, cytokine array and
specific inhibitors were used followed by 3H-thymidine incorporation,
western blot and TransAM AP-1 assays. To delineate the specific
functional role of JunB in MM pathogenesis, we used pLKO.1- JunB shRNA
(shJunB) and pLKO.1- scrambled shRNA (SCR) vectors for constitutive
knockdown, as well as pMSCV-JunB-ER-IRES-GFP and empty vectors for
inducible overexpression, together with 3H-thymidine incorporation,
alamarBlue, flow cytometry and western blot analysis, as well as gene
expression profiling (GEP). To evaluate the functional role of JunB in
vivo, a MM xenograft mouse model was used.Results: Co-cultures of MM
cells with BMSCs rapidly and strongly induced sustained expression and
activation of JunB, but not of other AP-1 family members. Induction of
JunB was predominantly mediated by soluble factors secreted by BMSCs
rather than direct MM-BMSC contact. Indeed, IL-6 stimulation of MM.1S
cells resulted in rapid and strong upregulation of JunB. Conversely,
anti-IL-6 receptor antibody tocilizumab blocked BMSC-induced JunB
expression and activation. Pharmacologic inhibition identified the
requirement of the MEK/ERK and NF-B pathways for BMSC-induced JunB
expression. Functionally, significant inhibition of proliferation was
observed in MM cells carrying pLKO.1- shJunB, but not pLKO.1-SCR.
Importantly, knockdown of other AP-1 family members had minor effects on
MM cell proliferation. Moreover, GEP performed on MM.1S- shJunB cells
co-cultured with BMSCs as well as data analysis of a patient cohort using
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) suggested a key role for JunB in the
regulation of Mcl-1 and c-Myc expression. Furthermore, knockdown of JunB
overcame resistance of MM cells to dexamethasone. Conversely, 4-OHT
treatment of MM cell lines transduced with JunB-ER but not control vector
induced significant JunB/AP-1 luciferase activity and protected MM cells
against bortezomib-induced apoptosis and ER stress. Confirming our in
vitro data, preliminary results show significant inhibition of tumor
growth in a xenograft mouse model inoculated with inducible
Tet-shJunB-GFP but not Tet-SCR-GFP MM.1S cells upon treatment with
doxycycline.Conclusion: Taken together, our data demonstrate for the
first time an important and surprising role of JunB/AP-1 in MM
tumorigenesis and strongly propose it as a novel therapeutic target in MM.

