Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of miRNA dynamics in governing cancer stem cell properties
via CD44v6/Nanog/ PTEN axis in head and neck cancer: Modulating the
master regulators


Background:Head and Neck Squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a major cause
of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Late diagnosis, metastasis and
therapeutic resistance are major confounders for the poor 5 year survival
rate and are attributed to the existence of Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs).
Several evidences have demonstrated the key role of nicotine in Tobacco
related Cancers; however, the plausibility of nicotine modulating CSC
markers still needs to be elucidated. Propelling evidences strongly
suggest that HNSCC is a genetic disease, regulated by epigenetic
mechanisms. Thus, understanding the role of miRNAs in regulation of CSCs
and its contributions to improvise the prognostic and therapeutic
implications is of great importance.Methodology:Orosphere was generated
from primary habituated and non-habituated HNSCC tumors using CD44+
immunomagnetic cell separation and ex-vivo expansion. Characterization of
these in-vitro models to evaluate spheroid formation ability and
expression profile of CSC markers (CD44v3, CD44v6, BMI1 and Nanog) was
carried out using quantitative Real Time PCR. Further, miRNA profiling of
the upstream regulators (miR5423p, miR34a and miR21) was conducted in
order to understand the miRNA mediated pathway that regulate these CSC
features in tumor development, metastasis and response to chemotherapy.
Correlation analysis of these miRNA profile along with the expression
levels of its CSC target gene, were analyzed in specimens from patients
with HNSCC.Result:Orosphere assay facilitated the propagation of CD44+
cells that retained CSC phenotype and self-renewal property. In-vitro
model of habituated tumor showed an increased spheroid forming efficiency
as compared to non-habituated models. In addition, these models showed
higher expressions of CSC markers (CD44v3, CD44v6, Nanog & BMI1) and a
significantly reduced expression of PTEN and ATM as compared to the
healthy individual; however the habituated and non-habituated were found
to have a trivial difference in their behavioral patterns. Furthermore, a
significantly increased expression of upstream miRNA was observed which
eventually leads to the modulation CD44 interaction with Nanog/PTEN, thus
forming an unexplored axis which can have prognostic and therapeutic
implications. Clinically, altered miRNA expression not only positively
correlated with CSC expression patterns but also associated with
increased progression of the disease.Conclusion:Collectively, this study
indicates that miR5423p and miR34a targets the HA-induced CD44v6
-Nanog-PTEN axis playing a vital role in regulating the CSC properties
comprising of self renewal, clonal proliferation and resistance to
chemotherapy in Head and Neck Cancers. Furthermore, our results depict an
undisputable role of these miRNA mediated pathways in the development of
tobacco related carcinogenesis

