Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the roles of deleterious and potentially damaging
variant alleles in African and Caucasian ancestral populations


The purpose of this study was to analyze the overlap between potentially
damaging Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) for coding gene regions
across African American and Caucasian populations. Allele frequency and
genotype data from the International HapMap Project was acquired for
ancestral groups from Utah Residents with Northern and Western European
Ancestry (CEU), Yoruba in Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI) and African Americans
from the Southwest (ASW) resulting in 34,844 unique variants. Using the
Variant Effect Predictor, non-synonymous SNPs in overlapping transcripts
were filtered and found in 12,367 unique genes. SIFT or Polyphen-2 scores
were used to determine which variants were likely to prove damaging to
protein function, resulting in 10,917 variants. Functional annotation of
biological pathways in genes affected by these variants was analyzed
using DAVID. There was enrichment in olfactory pathways/g-protein coupled
receptor function, cell membrane function and epidermal growth factor
activity. Comparisons of genes affected by these deleterious variants
were overlapped with the catalog of published genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) with SNP-traits associated with cancer. There were 90 of
463 genes in common with this data that were examined for linkage
disequilibrium with the damaging variants. Finally, SNPs with a variant
allele frequency differences >5% between CEU versus YRI or ASW resulted
in with 2,381 SNPs with 55.7% overlap between groups. Analysis of patient
genotypes found those in the CEU population were more likely to possess a
homozygous allele. Using Chi-Squared tests, populations were examined for
risk allele frequencies by genotype. This study demonstrated variants
with potentially damaging consequences in cancer pathways are
disproportionally represented in different ancestral populations.

