Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 regulation of MYC and MYCN in pediatric neural cancers


BackgroundMYC and MYCN have critical roles in a wide range of cancers and
can be deregulated through diverse transcriptional and
post-transcriptional mechanisms. Recent studies have shown that the
high-level MYCN expression needed to drive retinoblastoma and
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma proliferation depends upon efficient MYCN
translation mediated by highly expressed MDM2 and acting via a
p53-independent mechanism. Here, we assessed MDM2-mediated regulation of
MYC as well as MYCN in other pediatric neural tumors, specifically in
Group 3 medulloblastoma and in MYC-overexpressing neuroblastoma. We also
assessed MDM2-mediated regulation of MYCN in small cell lung cancer
(SCLC), which has genetic and morphologic features in common with
retinoblastoma.MethodsMDM2, MYCN, and MYC expression were defined in
Group 3 medulloblastoma lines D283, D425, D341; in MYC-overexpressing
neuroblastoma lines CHLA 255 and SY-5Y; and in p53-wild type and
p53-mutant SCLC lines H69 and H526 by western blotting. Cells were
infected with shMDM2 and scrambled control lentivirus and effects on
MDM2, MYC, and MYCN protein expression defined using western blot and
effects on cell growth defined using Cell Titer-Glo. In neuroblastoma
cells, MDM2 knockdown effects were defined with or without p53
co-knockdown.ResultsGroup 3 medulloblastoma lines D283, D341, D425 highly
expressed MYC but not MYCN. MDM2 knockdown did not decrease MYC
expression in these cells. MDM2 knockdown decreased MYC expression In
CHLA 255 and SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, along with p53 induction and cell
death, and MYC down-regulation and cell death were mitigated by
co-knockdown of p53. MDM2 knockdown decreased MYCN expression and
impaired viability in p53-wild type H69 SCLC cells and in p53-mutant H526
SCLC cells.ConclusionsMDM2 is not needed to sustain high-level MYC
expression in three Group 3 medulloblastoma cell lines. MDM2 sustains
high-level MYC in two MYC-overexpressing neuroblastoma cell lines via a
p53-dependent mechanism distinct from the p53-independent MYCN regulation
in MYCN-amplified neuroblastomas. In SCLC, MDM2 sustains high-level MYCN
expression and viability in a p53-independent manner, similar to MDM2
effects in retinoblastoma and in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma. These
findings suggest that MDM2 selectively sustains MYCN but not MYC
expression through a p53-independent mechanism and raise the possibility
that cis-acting elements specific to MYCN-RNA mediate MDM2 regulation.

