Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intensive NTS/NTR1 interaction enhances epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and promotes tumor metastasis via activating canonical
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma


Neurotensin (NTS) is an endogenous 13 amino-acid neuropeptide distributed
throughout the central nervous system and in parts of the digestive
system. Since its first detection in breast carcinoma over two decades
ago, NTS and its high-affinity receptor, neurotensin receptor 1 (NTR1),
have been found to affect various pathological processes, including
growth, anti-apoptosis, migration, and invasion, during the development
and progression of breast, colon, prostate, pancreas, and lung carcinoma.
However, limited studies have investigated the intracellular events
mediated by NTS/NTR1 in HCC. In our previous study, we found NTS
overexpression in certain hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples that
displayed stronger inflammatory response in a microenvironment, more
severe epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer, and worse
prognosis than NTS HCC patients. In the present study, the significant
correlation between NTS upregulation and tumor metastasis was confirmed
in 100 cases of HCC tissue samples, in which high NTS expression was
associated with incomplete envelope and portal vein invasion, as well as
early relapse and short survival after surgery. Furthermore, distinct EMT
features were identified in NTS+ HCC samples via Immunohistochemistry,
which expressed decreased E-cadherin, increased -catenin translocating to
the cytoplasm, and increased N-cadherin. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms involved in NTS-mediated EMT and HCC metastasis, two HCC cell
lines (i.e., Hep3B and HepG2) were genetically modified by NTR1 gene
transfection and NTR1-specific siRNA interference to establish different
NTS-responsible HCC models in vitro. These models demonstrated that
exogenous NTS stimulation and/or upregulated NTR1 expression exerted an
acceleratory effect on cell migration and invasion rather than
proliferation and apoptosis in both HCC cell lines. Real-time polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot indicated that intensive
NTS/NTR1 interaction repressed E-cadherin expression but enhanced
N-caherin and -catenin expression in HCC cell lines, accompanied by
dramatic increases in the expression of Wnt1, Wnt3, Wnt5, Axin, and
p-GSK3. SR48692 and TSW119, which are specific inhibitors targeting NTR1
and GSK3 phosphorylation, significantly impaired NTS/NTR1 interaction and
Wnt/-catenin pathway activation, thereby blocking NTS-induced EMT and
inhibited tumor invasion in vitro. Furthermore, SR48692 inhibited the
lung metastases of HCC cells line in vivo. Thus, we proposed that the
ectopic expression of NTS in HCC enhanced cell EMT and promoted tumor
invasion via activating the canonical Wnt/-catenin pathway, thereby
resulting in poor prognosis after conventional surgery.

