Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of pacritinib with erlotinib on JAK2-mediated
resistance in epidermal growth factor receptor mutation-positive
non-small cell lung cancer


Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring activating
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) benefit from
treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, almost
all of the patients eventually develop resistance to EGFR-TKIs within
approximately one year. The resistance mechanisms of EGFR-TKIs have not
been fully elucidated. We previously established an erlotinib-resistant
NSCLC cell line named PC-9/ER3 after continuously exposing PC-9 cells,
which harbor an in-frame deletion in EGFR exon 19, to erlotinib. PC-9/ER3
cells were 136-fold more resistant to erlotinib than the parental cells.
Although the PC-9/ER3 cells did not carry the T790M mutation or MET
amplification and had similar levels of pSTAT3, pJAK2 increased in the
resistant cells (Cancer Sci 103, 1795-802; 2012). Meanwhile, pacritinib
is a novel macrocyclic pyrimidine-based JAK2/FLT3 inhibitor with clinical
activity in patients with myelofibrosis and lymphoma, which will be used
as a standard therapy for myelofibrosis. In this study, we evaluated the
synergistic effect of pacritinib combined with erlotinib on
JAK2-medatited EGFR-TKI resistant NSCLC.Drug sensitivity was determined
using an MTT assay and the combination index was calculated according to
the methods based on the median-effect analysis. The combination of
pacritinib with erlotinib showed synergistic effects on JAK2-medated EGFR
TKI-resistant PC-9/ER3 cells in some cases. Western blotting showed that
the combination treatment markedly suppressed pAKT and pERK although
pSTAT3 was equivalent regardless of treatment with the pacritinib,
erlotinib, pacritinib plus erlotinib, or control in PC-9/ER3 cells.
Receptor tyrosine kinase array profiling demonstrated that pacritinib
suppressed MET in the PC-9/ER3 cells. The combined treatment of
pacritinib and erlotinib in PC-9/ER3 xenografts showed more tumor
shrinkage compared with each drug as monotherapy. Western blotting
revealed that pMET in the tumor samples was inhibited. These results
suggest MET suppression by pacritinib may play a role in overcoming the
EGFR-TKI resistance mediated by JAK2 in the PC-9/ER3 cells.In conclusion,
pacritinib combined with EGFR-TKI might be a potent strategy against
JAK2-mediated EGFR-TKI resistance.

