Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversible regulation of chimeric antigen receptor surface
expression


The purpose of this study is to develop and characterize a chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) T cell platform that can be rapidly and reversibly
down-regulated. The rationale for this approach is to mitigate the risk
of tissue toxicity as CAR T cell therapies are expanded from hematologic
malignancies to solid tumors. Whereas off-tumor/on-target activity can be
tolerable in the case of the B cell hypoplasia that occurs with CART
therapy for ALL, targeting of other normal tissues predicted to occur in
the solid tumor setting likely will be more clinically challenging.
Currently implemented design approaches to arresting CAR-mediated
toxicity have involved suicide domains. While effective in triggering CAR
T cell apoptosis, these approaches are not reversible, and additional
therapy would require repeated infusions, which may not be feasible under
certain circumstances. A system of temporary down-regulation could
overcome this obstacle and provide a useful alternative to current
strategies. To this end, we have fused a mouse anti-human GD2
neuroblastoma antigen-specific CAR to a LID (ligand-induced degradation)
domain. The LID domain, developed at Stanford University, targets the
polypeptide for degradation upon the addition of rapamycin or a similar
ligand, shield. In the study presented here, bulk human T cells were
transduced with lentivirus encoding either the control anti-GD2 CAR or
the anti-GD2-CAR-LID fusion construct. Transduced T cells, after a
standard procedure of stimulation and expansion, were then incubated in
either standard media alone or media with shield ligand. CAR expression
was measured at a range of shield ligand concentrations and at various
time points up to 24 hours by flow cytometry using goat-anti mouse
antibody. We observed a shield dose-response reduction in CAR expression
and found that this shield-induced reduction in expression started at 8
hours and approached 20% of baseline by 24 hours. As early as 24 hours
following the removal of the shield-containing media and washing, CAR
surface expression had returned to 65% of baseline. Next, we assessed in
vitro T cell effector functions including proliferation as measured by
flow cytometric cell counting, IFN-gamma release as measured by ELISA,
and cytotoxicity as measured by chromium release. We observed that in the
presence of shield ligand, T cell effector functions were reduced to near
background levels. The shield compound appeared to have no effect on the
control anti-GD2 CAR that did not contain the LID domain. Our conclusion
from these in vitro experiments is that the CAR-LID construct has the
potential to allow for temporary and tunable down-regulation of CAR T
cell activity in a clinical setting and warrants further
characterization. In vivo experiments designed to test the CAR-LID T
cells in a mouse model of xenografted disseminated neuroblastoma are
ongoing, and we plan to expand this approach to other tumor systems.

