Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAD1901, an orally available SERD, as an effective combination
partner in ER+ breast cancer


Breast cancer is subdivided into categories based on a patient's estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or Her2 expression status.
Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer makes up approximately 70%
of all breast cancers diagnosed and given the dependence on ER signaling
in this disease segment, most treatment modalities focus on inhibiting
some aspect of this pathway. Indeed, preventing estrogen synthesis (e.g.
with aromatase inhibitors) and modulating ER pathway activity (e.g. with
tamoxifen) continue to be mainstays in the standard of care for ER+
breast cancer patients. While patients typically respond well to these
agents, a majority of patients will relapse, emphasizing the need to
understand the specific mechanisms that can contribute to clinical
resistance. One such mechanism is the activation of compensatory or
concurrent signaling pathways that can stimulate growth (eg. Her2,
CDK4/6) and/or confer survival (eg. PI3K, AKT, mTOR). The recent approval
of palbociclib (CDK4/6i) or everolimus (mTORi) in combination with an
aromatase inhibitor for the treatment of advanced ER+ disease
demonstrates the effectiveness of combining anti-hormonals with targeted
agents. While these combinations have superior efficacy compared to the
use of aromatase inhibitors alone, alterations in ER itself, such as
amplification and mutations, have been described as a second mechanism
that can drive resistance to aromatase inhibitors in patients. These
findings highlight the need for a selective estrogen receptor
downregulator (SERD) that can degrade both wild-type and aberrant forms
of ER in order to more effectively treat this patient population. We have
recently demonstrated that treatment with RAD1901, an orally bioavailable
SERD, results in consistent and robust tumor growth inhibition of patient
derived xenograft (PDx) models, regardless of ER status. We hypothesized
that combining RAD1901 with agents that inhibit compensatory signaling
pathways would mitigate both mechanisms of resistance in ER+ breast
cancer patients, leading to greater efficacy. We performed an efficacy
screen with RAD1901 in patient derived xenograft (PDx) models with varied
genetic backgrounds, allowing us to mimic clinical phenotypes and to
better represent the heterogeneity within the ER+ breast cancer patient
population. These models harbored a wide range of ER expression levels,
in addition to other genetic alterations, which accurately represented
the patients diverse treatment history profiles. Based on results from
the screen, models were selected for additional studies to determine
which targeted agent, if any, can be combined with RAD1901 to achieve
maximal efficacy. By doing this, we were able to correlate response with
genetic background in clinically relevant models, potentially allowing us
to predict treatment strategies that have a higher likelihood of success
for specific patients.

