Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signature predicts induction treatment response
and clinical outcome in adult Colombian patients with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia


Background. In Colombia ALL in adults represents a public health problem
because its incidence and mortality increase annually. Only 61% of
Colombian adult patients with ALL achieve complete remission. The median
overall survival to the disease is less than 11.3 months and the
event-free survival is 7.34 months. Identification of prognostic factors
in patients with ALL is crucial for the proper planning of treatment
strategies and the optimal results of therapy. Our goal was to determine
gene expression signatures correlated with response to therapy and to
evaluate the utility of these expression patterns as predictors of risk
prior to therapy of adult Colombian patients with B-ALL.Methods. This
study included 43 adult patients newly diagnosed with B-cell precursor or
common B-ALL. Patients were recruited at the Colombian National Cancer
Institute and Hospital Universitario San Ignacio, both in Bogota,
Colombia. The leukemic blast population from diagnostic samples was
separated with magnetic microbeads coated with either anti-CD19 or
anti-CD34 antibodies followed by column enrichment using standard
procedures and MACS (Miltenyi, Bergisch Gladbach,Germany). Total RNA from
purified leukemic cells was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer's protocols. We used microarray analysis to
identify genes that distinguish poor from good response to induction
treatment using differential gene expression analysis and the response
group as reference and the Illumina Custom algorithm embedded in the
GenomeStudio software (Illumina). The expression profile was validated by
real-time PCR (RT-PCT) using TaqMan probes. The 2-CT method was used to
estimate the fold induction of each gene using GAPDH and an internal
calibrator as controls. Assays were done in triplicate.Results. We
identified 442 genes differentially expressed between 22 leukemia
patients who responded and 5 who did not respond to induction
chemotherapeutic treatment. Hierarchical analysis with the 99 most
differentially expressed genes between the two groups revealed 3 sets of
patients that differed in their clinical characteristics giving these
genes high prognostic clinical outcome impact capacity. We validated the
expression of 7 genes by RT PCR in 43 patients and, in addition to
finding a correlation with gene expression profiles, we established
correlations with good and poor prognosis from the time of
diagnosis.Conclusions. Our study suggests that the response to induction
treatment and clinical outcome of patients can be predicted from the
onset of the disease and that gene expression profiles can be used to
stratify patient risk adequately and accurately. The present study
represents the first showing that gene expression profiling could become
a clinically relevant tool for stratification in the early course of
disease of Colombian adults B-ALL.

