Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of novel therapeutic targets of
osteosarcoma using cutting edge technologies


Osteosarcomas are sarcomas of the bone, derived from osteoblasts or their
precursors, with a high propensity to metastasize. The current treatment
options have not changed over the last four decades and rely on tumor
resection and nonspecific combination chemotherapy, resulting in a 5-year
survival rate of 0-29% if clinically apparent metastases are present.
Although these tumors are rare in humans, with 900 cases annually, they
are highly prevalent in canines, with over 50,000 cases annually, and
have seemingly similar genetics. Osteosarcoma is associated with massive
genomic instability, making it problematic to identify driver genes using
human tumors or prototypical mouse models, many of which involve loss of
Trp53 function. To identify the genes driving osteosarcoma development
and metastasis, we performed a Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposon-based
forward genetic screen in mice with and without somatic loss of Trp53.
Common insertion site (CIS) analysis of 119 primary tumors and 134
metastatic nodules identified 232 sites associated with osteosarcoma
development and 43 sites associated with metastasis, respectively.
Analysis of CIS- associated genes identified numerous known and new
osteosarcoma-associated genes enriched in the ErbB, PI3K-AKT-mTOR, MAPK,
and ERK5 signaling pathways. We identified several oncogenes involved in
axon guidance, including Sema4d and Sema6d, which we functionally
validated as oncogenes in human osteosarcoma. We have now begun
pre-clinical testing of inhibitors of our top actionable targets to treat
osteosarcoma, namely SEMA4D and CSF1R. Further, we have begun to validate
top candidate metastasis genes using the CRISPR nuclease system in
immortalized osteoblasts and osteosarcoma cell lines. Preliminarily we
have found that loss of candidate osteosarcoma metastasis genes ANAPC1 or
TOAK1 increases the migration capacity of immortalized osteoblasts, while
loss of EXOC1 or GRLF increases their ability for anchorage independent
growth in soft agar assay. Results of these ongoing studies will be
presented.

