Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of a panel of cell-based and
patient-derived chordoma tumor models


Background: Chordoma is a rare cancer (0.08 per 100k/yr) that originates
from the notochord and develops in the skull and spine. Treatment options
for chordoma include resection and local radiation therapy; however,
recurrence rates following treatment are high and the majority of
patients ultimately succumb to the disease. Currently there are no
approved chemotherapy options for chordoma, and effective treatment
options for patients with recurrent or advanced disease are limited.
Recent molecular analyses of chordoma have revealed multiple tractable
therapeutic targets, providing rationale for new systemic therapies.
However, lack of relevant, validated chordoma models has limited
preclinical evaluation. To address this need, the Chordoma Foundation and
START have collaborated to establish, bank and characterize chordoma
tumor models derived from patient samples and established cell
lines.Methods: Chordoma patients undergoing resection or biopsy
procedures are identified and consented by the Chordoma Foundation under
an IRB-approved protocol; tissue is shipped to START and implanted into
immune-deficient mice for patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model
establishment and banking. Similarly, models from immortalized chordoma
cell lines have been established and banked, along with established PDX
chordoma models from START or collaborators. Banked PDX models are
anonymously linked to available patient clinical information. All
chordoma models are subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC) to confirm
histology and presence of brachyury, a protein highly expressed in
chordoma tumors. Following validation, models are used at START for drug
sensitivity studies and available to investigators for characterization
studies.Results: To date, clinical samples from five chordoma patients
have been implanted and two PDX models designated CF322 and CF345 have
been established. In addition, xenograft models from the UCH-1 and UCH-2
chordoma cell lines have been established at START. PDX models previously
developed at START (ST087) and UCSF (SF8894) have also been validated and
banked. Drug sensitivity studies have been initiated these two and the
U-CH1 models evaluating agents selected and prioritized through a peer
review process established by the Chordoma Foundation. Nominations for
additional test agents from academic and industry collaborators are
reviewed on a rolling basis and evaluation of selected therapies is
funded by the Chordoma Foundation.Conclusion: We have established a
collaboration to create, bank and characterize a panel of preclinical
chordoma tumor models originating from patient samples and established
cell lines. To date we have generated three chordoma models available for
drug sensitivity studies. This panel of models is intended to serve as a
shared resource to the chordoma research community to enable more rapid
preclinical evaluation of therapeutic hypotheses.

