Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effect of selective progesterone receptor modulator
(ulipristal acetate) on endometrial cancer cell lines


Background: Endometrial cancer is the most common malignancy of the
female reproductive tract and the third most common cause of death from
women's cancer. Risk factors of endometrial cancer include high levels of
estrogen, obesity, diabetes mellitus, breast cancer, long term use of
tamoxifen, late menopause, high blood pressure, and increasing age.
Although the exact mechanisms in endometrial carcinogenesis due to
chronic exposure are unclear, it is though that the pro-proliferative and
DNA-damaging effects of estrogen and its metabolites, related with and
insufficient counterbalance by progesterone, promote the
hyper-proliferation and transformation of cells. Selective progesterone
receptor modulator (SPRM) is an agent that acts on the progesterone
receptor. Ulipristal acetate (UA) is one of SPRM and other SPRM, such as
Mifepristone, showed inhibitory effect on various endometrial cancer cell
lines. UA has been available as an emergency contraception and a
treatment for uterine leiomyoma. The effect of UA on leiomyoma is
decreasing neovascularization, proliferation, and viability.Objective:
This study was undertaken to investigate antitumor effect of UA and to
explore the effect of combination treatment with chemotherapy drug in
endometrial cancer.Method: Inhibitory concentration (IC), proliferation
assay, and migration assay were performed using Ishikawa, HEC-1-A,
HEC-1-B, and/or patient-derived primary cancer cells (PCC). Different
concentration of UA were treated in endometrial cancer cell lines and
PCCs for the each assay. The CellTiter-Glo assay were performed to
investigate IC50 in cell lines and PCCs. Crystal violet staining and
wound healing assay were performed to examine cell proliferation and
migration.Results: UA inhibited cell viability of endometrial cancer cell
lines and PCCs at high concentration, most abviously 10uM in
dose-dependent manner. In combination treatment assay with paclitaxel, UA
showed synergistic anti-tumor effect with low-dose of paclitaxel on cell
lines and PCCs.Conclusions: We showed that combination treatment of UA
and paclitaxel effectively than single treatment by low dosage. In
summary, we are actively exploring new effective applicable drugs for
endometrial cancer, and our data suggest that UA may have therapeutic
value with chemo-combination treatment of patients with endometrial
cancer.

