Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: No cell left behind: Residual ovarian spheroids drive recurrence
and are sensitive to the pro-oxidant elesclomol


Sphere forming cells persist in the ascitic fluid of patients with
high-grade serous ovarian cancer after first-line therapy and likely
contribute to relapse and metastasis. These residual tumor spheres, which
are enriched for cancer cells by up to 95% based on detectable TP53
mutations, are slow growing, resistant to platinum-based chemotherapy,
and remain a large obstacle towards durable remission. Screening
established, rapidly dividing monolayer cell lines in proliferation
assays has failed to produce chemotherapeutics capable of eradicating
this slow growing population. To identify a consolidation therapy that
targets these residual tumor cells we screened nearly 2000
mechanistically annotated, approved and investigational drugs in three
cell lines (PEO1, PANC1, A375M) cultured in spheroid and conventional
monolayer. To elucidate targetable genes and pathways responsible for
spheroid maintenance we performed a whole-genome RNAi screen against PEO1
in both culture conditions. Our pharmacological and genetic profiling
provided mechanistic insight into the baseline changes that occur when
cells are grown in three dimensional, anchorage independent conditions
and identified susceptibilities specific to spheroid populations.
Consistent with residual disease, cultured spheres were resistant to many
common chemotherapeutics, most notably proteasome inhibitors, but were
highly sensitive to the pro-oxidant elesclomol. We verified elesclomol's
activity in ex vivo cancer spheroids extracted from the ascitic fluid of
patients with advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancer using a simple,
culture-free technique. Expression profiling of cultured and ex vivo
spheres revealed broad downregulation of genes involved in cell cycle
signaling (AURKA, AURKB, PLK1, CDK1, CCNA2, CCNB1, CCNB2, GMNN, CHEK1).
Treatment with elesclomol induced expression of chaperone proteins (HSP6,
HSP7, HSPA1A, HSPA1B, DNAJA4, DNAJB1), metallothionein proteins (MT1F,
MT1M, MT1P2, MT1X, MT2A), and genes involved with the oxidative stress
response (HMOX1, ABCB1, SLC7A11) consistent with increased reactive
oxygen species caused by high intracellular Cu2+. To pursue this drug as
a consolidation therapy in vivo, we evaluated elesclomol's toxicity,
pharmacokinetic properties, and efficacy in a murine model for recurrent
high-grade serous ovarian cancer. By targeting residual tumor cells with
elesclomol after successful treatment with platinum-based therapeutics we
hope to prevent recurrence.

