Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic consequences of MDMX (MDM4) oncoprotein expression
knockdown in MDMX-amplified breast cancer cells


The tumour suppressor p53 is activated by cellular stress to induce cell
cycle arrest and/or apoptosis. Although the TP53 gene is frequently
mutated in cancer, approximately half of human cancers express wild type
and functional p53. However, p53 activity is often suppressed by its
negative regulators, MDM2 and MDMX. Small molecule antagonists have been
developed to inhibit p53-MDM2 binding to release the growth inhibitory
and/or pro-apoptotic functions of p53. Previous studies have indicated
that MDMX amplification and/or increased protein expression may be
associated with resistance to MDM2-p53 binding antagonists. However,
specific inhibitors for MDMX have yet to be developed and an
MDM2/MDMX-p53 co-inhibitor (RO-5963) does not show better efficacy
against high MDMX expressing cells than single target MDM2 inhibitors. To
better understand the cellular function and therapeutic potential of
targeting MDMX, we have investigated the downstream transcriptomic
consequences of knocking down MDMX expression.Knockdown of MDMX protein
expression, demonstrated by Western blot analysis, was achieved in
MRK-nu-1 MDMX amplified and TP53 wild-type breast carcinoma cells using
both lentiviral shRNA and siRNA. MRK-nu-1 cell growth suppression was
observed after knockdown of MDMX. Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array
2.0 was used to detect differences in the expression of full genes and
alternatively spliced forms between negative control and MDMX knockdown
groups. Transcriptome Analysis Console 3.0 software was used to analyse
the microarray data to identify significant changes in gene expression,
alternative splicing and associated functional pathways. Alterations in
mRNA expression for a selected panel of genes was confirmed by qRT-PCR.A
greater degree of MDMX expression knockdown was achieved with the siRNA
(>95%) than the lentiviral shRNA (>50%) This was reflected by increased
suppression of growth and larger changes in gene expression patterns with
the siRNA knockdown. Although a similar set of genes was affected by both
the siRNA and shRNA knockdown, the magnitude of changes was greater
following the more pronounced knockdown with siRNA. The expression of a
number of p53 transcriptional target genes was found to be altered,
including CDKN1A, MDM2, CCNG2, RRM2B, BTG2, ZMAT3 and FAS consistent with
a role for MDMX in suppression of p53 function in these MDMX amplified
cells.

