Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosyltransferase ST6Gal-I protects against chemotherapy induced
DNA damage and subsequent apoptosis in pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells


ST6Gal-I is a sialyltransferase that adds 2-6 linked sialic acids to cell
surface proteins as they pass through the trans-Golgi. Sialic acids,
being negatively charged, are able to alter the function of selected cell
surface receptors, which leads to dysregulation of various downstream
cellular pathways. Overexpression of ST6Gal-I has been observed in
various cancers including ovarian and pancreatic cancer. We have
previously shown that knockdown of ST6Gal-I expression increases ovarian
cancer cell susceptibility to the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin. In the
present study we further investigate whether resistance to additional
drugs such as gemcitabine, the front line treatment for pancreatic
cancer, is affected by ST6Gal-I activity. MiaPaCa-2 and BxPC3 pancreatic
cancer cell lines, having high ST6Gal-I expression, were employed for our
studies. To elucidate the mechanistic role of ST6Gal-I in gemcitabine
resistance we created stable ST6Gal-I knockdown lines of MiaPaCa-2 and
BxPC3 cells. Gemcitabine induced cell death was more pronounced in the
knockdown cell lines, indicated by heightened activation of caspase-3.
Gemcitabine is metabolized to a nucleoside analogue, gemcitabine
triphosphate, which induces apoptosis by promoting DNA damage. Increased
single stand DNA damage in the knockdown cells was confirmed using
alkaline comet assay. Gemcitabine treatment led to greater activation of
DNA damage markers and response elements (H2AX, phospho CHK1, phospho
CHK2), along with increased levels of cleaved caspase-3 in the knockdown
cells as compared to empty vector control cells. We next developed a
stable gemcitabine resistant MiaPaCa-2 cell line by growing parental
cells in gemcitabine. We selected for the population of cells that
survived and were able to replicate in gemcitabine containing media.
ST6Gal-I levels were found to be increased in the stable gemcitabine
resistant lines relative to parental cell lines, suggesting that cells
with high ST6Gal-I expression selectively survive gemcitabine treatment.
By measuring the levels of genes involved in activation over those
responsible for inactivation of gemcitabine, we were able to obtain a
gemcitabine sensitivity predictive ratio for MiaPaCa-2 and BxPC3 ST6Gal-I
knockdown, empty vector, parental and stable gemcitabine resistant cell
lines. This ratio has been described previously in literature as a metric
for gauging gemcitabine resistance. According to the ratios obtained,
ST6Gal-I knockdown enhanced drug sensitivity whereas high expression of
ST6Gal-I offered protection against gemcitabine induced apoptosis.
Collectively these data indicate that upregulation of ST6Gal-I imparts
tumor cell survival through prevention of gemcitabine induced DNA damage.

