Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microPET/CT imaging of the mobilization of CD11b+ cells


Objectives: Mobilization of immune cells is often associated with
prognosis and treatment response for many diseases. The objective of this
study was to test whether mobilization of CD11b+ myeloid cells could be
noninvasively imaged by PET/CT. Methods: Anti-mouse CD11b antibody was
labeled with 64Cu. Immunocompetent mice with
12-o-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced acute inflammation in
the ears, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation in the lung, mice
bearing 3 different syngeneic murine tumors (4T1 mammary carcinoma, CMS4
sarcoma, and CT26 colon carcinoma), and mice bearing ID8 ovarian cancer
undergoing photothermal therapy were imaged with [64Cu]-labeled
anti-CD11b. microPET-CT imaging and biodistribution were obtained at 24 h
after intravenous injection of the radiotracer. Subpopulations of bone
marrow cells, cells from spleen, and cells from the disease sites were
analyzed by flow cytometry and/or immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining.
Results: 64Cu-labeled anti-CD11b bound specifically to CD11b+ myeloid
cells. microPET-CT images showed significantly higher uptake of
64Cu-DOTA-anti-CD11b antibody at the inflammatory sites and tumors
undergoing photothermal therapy. In addition, microPET-CT images also
revealed mobilization of CD11b+ cells from bone marrow to secondary
lymphoid organs (spleen and/or lymph nodes). Interestingly, mice bearing
4T1 carcinoma displayed a markedly different imaging/distribution pattern
compared to mice bearing CMS4 and CT26 tumors, characterized by a
significant increase in blood pool and liver activities with
corresponding reduction in the uptake of the radiotracer in the bone
marrow and the spleen in different stages of tumor development. These
findings were evaluated in the context of flow cytometry and IHC
analyses. Conclusions: The differential distribution pattern of
64Cu-labeled anti-CD11b in different disease models could be attributed
to mobilization of CD11b+ cells. PET/CT may be used to image systems
response of immune cells to disease development and treatments.
(Supported in part by the John S. Dunn Foundation)

