Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved statistical approaches that account for pseudoprogression
in preclinical studies of RRx-001 with immunotherapies


Background and ObjectiveImmuno-oncology agents are associated with
apparent tumor growth due to immune infiltration leading, in some cases,
to misinterpretation of radiological scans that can result in premature
discontinuation of effective therapeutic agents. In the clinic, this
resulted in the introduction of modified immune-related response
criteria. Preclinically, in the absence of radiology or
immunohistochemistry, traditional tumor growth delay may similarly lead
to misinterpretation of progression even in the context of a true
response. More powerful statistical strategies are therefore required to
distinguish between true and pseudoprogression.RRx-001 is a novel
immuno-epigenetic agent in Phase 2 with promising single agent and
combination activity that is associated with clinical pseudo progression
in some cases. Previously, we tested the hypothesis that RRx-001 +
anti-PD-L1 would increase the complete response rate in a myeloma
preclinical model. Time-to-event statistical analyses methods that
account for the study design features and capture the longitudinal and
panoramic aspect of pseudo progression were used to test superiority of
the combination in lieu of traditional, mean-based mixed effects modeling
approaches that did not show statistical significance. Nonparametric
p-values for the difference of cumulative incidence rates of time to 50%
tumor growth reduction and its associated restricted mean survival times
are illustrated.Methods and ResultsAnalysis of the raw data growth curves
from a study comparing RRx-001, anti-PD-L1 alone and in combination in
mice with J558L myeloma tumors showed an initial increase followed by a
reduction in size suggesting a pseudoprogressive response. In light of
this observation, the study-end probability of tumor volume reduction
(50%) was chosen as a suitable endpoint. The difference in the
Kaplan-Meier estimate for this endpoint between the combination and anti
PD-L1 alone was 50% (95% CI: 10.8%, 89.2%). The two-sided nonparametric
(Cox model) p-value was 0.0124, a statistically significant finding in
favor of the combination group as compared to the PD-L1 group
alone.ConclusionTumor flare or pseudo progression describes a transient
increase in tumor volume due to immune cell infiltration and
inflammation/edema, which resolves over time. Pseudo progression is
visualizable in the clinic with radiological scans; however,
pre-clinically it is difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish between
pseudo and true progression with traditional statistical methods.
Kaplan-Meier description of time-to-volume reduction (50%) coupled with
Cox's proportional hazards model follows the data longitudinally and
therefore permits an analysis of immune infiltration resolution, and make
it an improved method for analysis of pre-clinical experiments with
immuno-oncology agents.

