Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro assessment of tumor relapse in a 3D tumor microtissue
model


One of the most pressing problems in the treatment of cancer is tumor
relapse. Although many tumors regress in response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy, residual tumor cells are detected in most cancer patients
post-treatment. These residual tumor cells are thought to remain dormant
for years before resuming growth, resulting in tumor recurrence.
Considering that recurrent tumors are most often responsible for patient
mortality, there exists an urgent need to study signaling pathways that
drive tumor dormancy/recurrence. Current in vitro assays based on
monolayer cultures do not provide the required time frame to study tumor
recurrence.We developed a new method to study tumor relapse in a 3D in
vitro tumor microtissue model. HCT116 colorectal tumor microtissues were
produced and dosed with 3 reference compounds, Taxol (cell division
inhibitor), Staurosporine (protein kinase inhibitor) and Doxorubicin (DNA
synthesis inhibitor). Based on an initial range finding to determine IC20
and IC50 values, tumor growth was monitored via size profiling and
viability (intra-tissue ATP content) over 10 days. Three different
conditions were tested: (i) continuous treated tumor microtissues, (ii)
microtissues which were supplemented with the drug for 5 days and (iii)
non-treated tumor microtissues. Growth differences couldn't be observed
comparing IC20 concentrations, however growth profiles significantly
varied comparing IC50 concentrations. Whereas a 5-day treatment of Taxol
was leading to a complete growth inhibition after removing the drug,
Staurosporine treated tumor microtissues relapsed even with a similar
growth kinetic as the untreated control group. Pulsed treatment of
Doxorubicin was leading to a slower growth kinetic as compared to the
control but not to a complete reminiscence. Based on the individual
growth profiles relative to the continuous treated and non-treated groups
we calculated a relapse index (ReI, patent pending) to enable
classification of compounds and compound combinations according to their
risk for tumor relapse.Here we present a novel in vitro tumor relapse
assay method based on a 3-dimensional tumor microtissue model, to enable
compound classification based on their efficiency to prevent tumor
relapse.

