Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of endometrial cancer mutants of the E3
ubiquitin ligase adaptor protein, SPOP


The purpose of this study is to functionally annotate endometrial cancer
(EC) specific mutants of SPOP (Speckle-type POZ protein). SPOP is the
substrate adaptor for the E3 ligase complex CUL3-SPOP-RBX1, which is
responsible for mediating the ubiquitination, and subsequent proteasomal
degradation of a number of protein substrates including the SRC3
(NCOA3/AIB1) oncoprotein. Our laboratory has previously shown that SPOP
is frequently mutated in serous and clear cell ECs, two clinically
aggressive subtypes of EC. Importantly, the vast majority of SPOP mutants
localized within the MATH domain, which is responsible for substrate
binding. We hypothesize that EC associated SPOP mutations encode
loss-of-function mutants that abolish or attenuate substrate
degradation.To test this hypothesis, we initially focused our attention
on five SPOP mutations we uncovered in ECs (E47K, S80R, P94A, M117I and
R121Q). HEK293 cells were transiently co-transfected with a HA-tagged
SRC3-expressing construct and a MYC-tagged construct expressing either
vector alone, wildtype SPOP, or mutant forms of SPOP. Protein lysates
from transfected cells were subjected to Western blotting to measure
exogenous levels of HA-SRC3 and MYC-SPOP. Cells exogenously expressing
wildtype SPOP or the E47K, P94A, M117I or R121Q mutants exhibited lower
levels of HA-SRC3 than cells expressing the vector control. In contrast,
cells expressing the S80R mutant had elevated levels of HA-SRC3 compared
to cells expressing either wildtype SPOP or the vector control.
Co-immumoprecipitation experiments are being performed to assess the
substrate binding capacity of SPOP mutants.Our findings indicate that the
SPOP-S80R mutation, which is recurrent in EC, has an impaired ability to
down-regulate SRC3 protein levels compared to wildtype SPOP.Ongoing and
future studies aim to elucidate the mechanism that underlies the effect
of SPOP-S80R, and to functionally annotate additional SPOP mutations in
EC.

