Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Factors related to cervical cancer screening differences between
regions around Bagamoyo, Tanzania


Background: With cervical cancer being among the most common cancers in
East Africa among women, it is important to look at the factors related
to referral differences in Tanzania, especially in rural areas where
there is little to no access to cervical cancer screening clinics (CCS).
Cervical cancer is related to HIV because a woman is 13.3 times more
likely to develop cervical abnormalities if she is HIV positive. There
are more HIV-positive women that attend CCS than HIV-negative women. This
leads to more research to discover the variation in screening rates
between HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients within the same village,
as well as the variation in the screening rates between different
villages.Purpose: This study aims to determine the multi-level factors
related to differences in cervical cancer screening frequencies between
villages in Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and providers perception of barriers to
screening at the Bagamoyo District Hospital (BDH). Factors identified
that influence CCS attendance are HIV prevalence, distance to BDH, number
of clinics, and female population.Methods/Design: This mixed method
design includes data obtained from the Tanzania Ministry of Health, the
Bagamoyo District Medical Officer, and BDH medical records, as well as
additional data from questionnaires conducted with health care providers,
doctors or nurses, employed at BDH. The questionnaires included written
informed consent. Data obtained from CCS medical records were used to
estimate the frequency of women screened from 42 villages. ANOVA analysis
was used to compare the percent of women screened from each village to
the identified risk factors, HIV prevalence, distance, access to clinics,
and population. Chi-square analysis was conducted in order to determine
associations between type of health care provider and previously
identified barriers to screening.Discussion: This is the first study to
examine providers perceived barriers to screening in relation to
previously identified factors related to differences in cervical cancer
screening rates. Further analysis of patient perceived barriers to
screening should be conducted in order to better understand differences
in screening rates.Funding: Funding was received from the National Cancer
Institute through the Cancer Epidemiology Education in Special
Populations program.

