Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manumycin-A suppresses exosome biogenesis and chemosensitizes CRPC
cells to enzalutamide through inhibition of Ras/Raf/ERK1/2 signaling
pathway


Background: Emerging evidence suggests that there is an urgent need for
new strategies to combat prostate cancer (PC) that is unresponsive to
therapy. In recent years major emphasis has been placed on the role of
exosomes (Exo) in cancers. Exosomes are membrane-bound vesicles produced
by all cell types under physiologic and pathological states. The
objective of the present study was to identify via high throughput
library screens compounds that selectively inhibit Exo biogenesis and
release by PC cells and further examine if they chemosensitize
castration-resistant PC (CRPC) cells to Enzalutamide (ENZ), an
FDA-approved second generation antiandrogen drug. The ultimate goal is to
incorporate functionally validated compounds for advanced PC therapy.
Manumycin-A (MA), a natural, well-tolerated microbial metabolite and a
potent experimental tumoricide, has been identified as one of the lead
compounds in the initial screens.Results: A time-course, dose-dependent
analysis revealed that MA up to 250 nM is not toxic to C4-2B or RWPE1
cells. The MA-mediated inhibition of Exo secretion was evident by
decreased expression of Exo markers (ALIX, TG6101, and tetraspanins; CD9,
CD63, CD81) as well as early (Rab5) and late (Hrs) endosome markers in
C4-2B cells, with no effect observed in RWPE1 cells. Interestingly, the
MA-mediated inhibition of Exo biogenesis was coupled with inhibition of
Ras activation. MEK selective inhibitor (U0126), but not the p38 MAPK
(SB203580) or JNK (SP600125) inhibitor, suppressed the expression of Exo
markers, indicating that Ras-MEK pathway is involved in MA's mediated
inhibition of exosome biogenesis and secretion. Subsequent analysis
revealed that MA inhibited p-cRaf, pMEK and pERK in C4-2B cells, but not
in RWPE1 cells)further attesting to direct role of Ras/Raf/ERK1/2 pathway
in mediating MA inhibition of Exo biogenesis and secretion by C4-2B
cells. Treatment of C4-2B cells with ENZ and MA combination further
inhibited cell survival than either drug alone, suggesting that MA may
chemosensitize CRPC cells to ENZ.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that
at low, non-cytotoxic concentrations, Manumycin is a suitable candidate
to suppress exosome biogenesis and secretion and enhances sensitivity of
CRPC cells to ENZ cytotoxicity. Further preclinical analysis is required
to examine its in vivo therapeutic efficacy of MA against CRPC when
administrated in combination with antiandrogen drugs.

