Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High incidence of MAC387 positive cells in the carcinoma tissues
of inflammatory breast cancer patients correlate with the detection of
multiple human Cytomegalovirus genotypes and invasive properties of the
disease


Introduction: Previously we showed that the incidence of multiple human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) genotypes in the carcinoma tissues of inflammatory
breast cancer (IBC) patients plays essential role in the disease
progression. Primary HCMV infection to monocytes induces differentiation
and biological turnover of monocytes to macrophages. In addition infected
macrophages serves as mobile vectors for virus spreading and
dissemination to different organs mainly by transendothelial migration.
In addition we screened for the infiltration of CD14+ and CD68+
monocytes/macrophages markers in the carcinoma tissues of IBC versus
non-IBC patients we showed that of CD14+ cells highly infiltrate tumor
microenvironment (TME) of IBC patients compared to non-IBC.Aims: In the
present study we aim to 1) Assess the level of expression of MAC387
protein by monocytes/macrophages infiltrating TME of IBC versus non-IBC
patients; 2) Test the correlation between the density of infiltrated
MAC387+ cells and the incidence of different HCMV genotypes in carcinoma
tissues of IBC versus non-IBC tissues. Since MAC387 found to be more
common in cancers characterized by high metastatic properties we will
also 3) determine whether the expression of MCA387 correlate with
lymph-node metastasis and lymphovascular invasion in IBC versus non-IBC
breast cancer patients.Materials and Methods: A total of 135 breast
cancer patients (91 non-IBC and 44 IBC) were enrolled to the present
study during the period of January 2012 to September 2015 from Ain Shams
university Hospitals. Detection of MAC387 marker was assessed by
immunohistochemistry and HCMV genotypes were detected using multiplex PCR
methodology.Results: MAC387+ positive cells were more prevalent in IBC
tissues than non-IBC tissues (p = 0.4). Incidence of higher number of
MAC387+ cells were positively correlate with higher number of metastatic
lymph nodes in both IBC and non-IBC patients r = 0.807 and 0.779
respectively. Moreover, Incidence of higher number of MAC387+ cells found
to be positively correlate with lymphovascular invasion in IBC patients r
= 0622. Detection of multiple HCMV genotypes was statistically higher (p
= 0.04) in IBC tissues in comparison with non-IBC tissues. Moreover,
triple negative non-IBC and IBC tissues showed higher incidence of
multiple HCMV genotypes in comparison with hormonal positive non-IBC and
IBC tissues. of the monocytes/macrophages MAC387+ positive cells were
more prevalent in IBC tissues showed multiple HCMV genotypes in
comparison with IBC tissues showed single HCMV genotype (p =
0.46).Conclusion: MAC387+ positive cells were more prevalent in IBC
tissues and correlate with presence of multiple HCMV genotypes and high
invasive properties of the disease.

