Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic subclone heterogeneity of the human colon cancer
initiating cell compartment


A subpopulation of tumor-initiating cells (TIC) drives colorectal cancer
(CRC) progression in serial xenotransplantation. Strikingly, the CRC TIC
compartment itself is heterogeneous and comprised of a hierarchy of
long-term (LT-) TIC, tumor transient amplifying cells (T-TAC) and delayed
contributing (DC-) TIC. Whether this functionally heterogeneous TIC
compartment is genetically homogenous or whether distinct genetic
subclones drive the functional heterogeneity of the TIC compartment is
yet unknown. To address this question, we performed high coverage (91-126
fold) whole genome sequencing on primary CRC patient tumors (n = 3),
corresponding serially passaged TIC enriched spheroids as well as
spheroid derived serial xenografts. Sequenced samples harbored between
22.800 and 232.000 synonymous or non-synonymous single nucleotide
variants (SNVs). In addition, all samples contained multiple focal or
large-scale somatic copy number alterations (CNAs). Clustering of SNVs as
well as subclonal copy numbers from serial xenografts and spheroids were
used to define SNV- and CNA-based subpopulations. Next, cellular
fractions of identified subpopulations were determined and combined
applying maximal parsimony to create models of the minimal number of
subclones present in each sample. Using this strategy, we found that
multiple subclones were present in each sample analyzed. Subclone
heterogeneity was maintained during serial in vitro passaging and serial
xenografting. Importantly, tumor initiation in xenografts was driven by
at least 3 distinct genetic subclones whose relative contribution
dynamically changed over time. Strikingly, in serial samples from the
same patients, different genetic subclones grew out in vivo and in
vitro.To test whether functional heterogeneity of the TIC compartment is
related to the presence of genetic subclones, we assessed the
contribution of different TIC subtypes - LT-TIC, T-TAC and DC-TIC - at
early and late time points of xenografting using secondary genetic
marking. Therefore, 1105 cells derived from early and late generation
xenografts were transduced with an integrating lentiviral vector, thereby
generating a stable barcode-like genetic mark which differs in each
transduced cell. Following serial transplantation of transduced cells for
3 mouse generations, tumors were harvested and lentiviral integration
sites were determined using highly sensitive LAM-PCR and high-throughput
sequencing. Assessing the relative contribution of LT-TIC, T-TAC and
DC-TIC revealed that the functional heterogeneity of the TIC compartment
was preserved despite profound genetic subclone dynamics in serial
xenotransplantation. These results strongly indicate that multiple
genetic subclones drive long-term tumor formation and that functional
heterogeneity of the CRC TIC compartment is not based on specific genetic
subclones.

