Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cationic liquid crystalline nanoparticle for the delivery
of synthetic RNAi-based therapeutics


Small interference RNA (RNAi)-based therapeutics have been used to
silence expression of targeted pathological genes. However, short
half-life, poor cellular uptake, and non-specific distribution of small
RNAs call for the development of novel delivery systems to facilitate the
use of RNAi as a new class of therapeutics. We developed a novel cationic
liquid crystalline nanoparticle (CLCN) with microfluidic-facilitated
encapsulation of hydrophilic biomolecules for efficiently delivering
synthetic RNAi-based therapeutics including siRNAs, PNAs, and micro-RNA
mimics. CLCNs were prepared by mixing under high speed homogenization a
lipophilic phase with a hydrophilic phase containing an
emulsifier/stabilizer such as poloxamer. CLCNs were assembled with
synthetic small siRNA molecules in nuclease free water to create
CLCN/siRNA complexes. The homogenous and stable CLCNs and CLCN-siRNA
complexes dispersed in nuclease free water displayed sizes under 100 nm
and positive charges between 25-35 mV on the CLCN surface as demonstrated
by the NanoTracking and Zeta potential measurements. The gel retardation
assay indicated that the binding between the carrier and the siRNA was
strong enough to withstand dissociation during electrophoresis. No
cytotoxicity was detected in both lung cancer and normal cells treated
with various concentrations of CLCNs (from 0.01 to 100 M) by in vitro
cell proliferation assay. The CLCNs were taken up by human cells though
endocytosis after binding with the cell membrane and traveling from early
endosomes to the lysosome after 24 h treatment as shown by intracellular
trafficking analysis with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The
presence of the fluorescent CLCN/siRNA complexes in the cytoplasm was
observed as early as 2 h post treatment by confocal fluorescence imaging
analysis. A significant inhibition of gene expression was detected in
both EGFP-stable clones and transiently-transfected lung cancer H1299
cells treated with CLCNs/siEGFP complexes 24 hour after transfection
compared to the untreated and non-specific CLCN-siRNA controls.
Biodistribution analysis showed that the CLCNs were successfully
delivered to various organs including liver and lung and into the
subcutaneous human lung cancer H1299 tumor xenografts in mice 24 h after
systemic administration by tail vein. These results suggest that CLCNs
are suitable for the delivery of small synthetic RNAi-based therapeutics
in vitro and in vivo. CLCNs are a unique and advanced delivery system
capable of protecting siRNA from degradation and efficiently delivering
siRNA to the cytoplasm where effective gene silencing is achieved.(This
study is partially supported by NIH/NCI grants Lung SPORE 5P50CA070907
and R01CA176568, a CPRIT Grant and a MDACC Moonshot Program Grant.

