Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell cisplatin measurements by ICP-MS


Cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin are the most widely used class of
cancer chemotherapy drugs in the Western world. Many cancers are
initially sensitive to platinum treatment but drug resistance frequently
occurs. Cellular uptake of cisplatin is related to tumor burden, thus
lower intracellular cisplatin levels are associated with a decreased
tumor response. Traditional methods to assess cisplatin uptake in cells
involves digesting a cell population and measuring the total platinum
content. This approach does not reflect the distribution and individual
cellular variation of cisplatin uptake. Here, we present a new method,
single cell inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (SC-ICP-MS) to
quantitate the platinum concentration within individual cells.
Experiments were performed using the A2780 cisplatin-sensitive and the
corresponding cisplatin-resistant A2780-CP70 ovarian cancer cell lines.
Time course experiments were performed to measure the change of cisplatin
uptake over time. Serum starvation experiments were also performed to
examine if differences in cisplatin uptake were dependent on the cell
cycle. SC-ICP-MS was performed by injecting cell suspensions and
analyzing the platinum 195 isotope. Individual cellular cisplatin levels
were collected and a histogram representing the cell population was
generated using the instrument software (Syngistix Nano Application).
Other metals, such as zinc, iron, and copper, were analyzed to measure
the variation between cell lines after treatment. We observed a
heterogeneous distribution of cisplatin concentrations within the sample
reflecting that cisplatin uptake differs from cell to cell. Serum
starvation affected the uptake of cisplatin within cells, changing the
cisplatin distribution curve. SC-ICP-MS was also effective in measuring
other metals within individual cells and differences were observed
between the A2780 and A2780-CP70 cell lines. In conclusion, single cell
ICP-MS analysis allows for the quantitation of cisplatin within
individual cells. The heterogeneous distribution of cisplatin uptake more
closely reflects what occurs within tumor cells. SC-ICP-MS allows for the
development of strategies to increase cisplatin uptake, translating to
better clinical responses.

