Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of BET inhibitor INCB054329 and LSD1 inhibitor
INCB059872 is synergistic for the treatment of AML in vitro and in vivo


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease characterized by the expansion
of a hematopoietic stem cell like population caused in part by a block of
myeloid differentiation. In AML an alteredepigenetic landscape, often
arising from genetic lesions in epigenetic regulators, enforces an
oncogenic expression profile and suppresses myeloid differentiation.
Indeed, a screen foressential genes in the murine MLL-AF9 retroviral
model of leukemia identified the epigenetic regulators BRD4 and LSD1 as
potential therapeutic targets. Furthermore, independent studies have
demonstrated that inhibition of BRD4 or LSD1 by small molecules induced
myeloid differentiation and suppressed leukemic stem cell phenotype in
AML models. Recently it has been demonstrated that combinations of
inhibitors that target distinct epigenetic regulators can exhibit
synergistic effects on target gene transcription and cancer cell growth.
Therefore we investigated the potential combinatorial effects of a novel
FAD-directed LSD1 inhibitor, INCB059872, together with the BET inhibitor,
INCB054329. The effects of single agent LSD1 and BET inhibitors or their
combination were assessed using human AML models in vitro and in vivo.
INCB054329 as monotherapy inhibited cell proliferation and induced
apoptosis in human AML cell lines, while INCB059872 induced cellular
differentiation in these cell lines as determined by the induction of
myeloid differentiation markers, CD86 and CD11b. The combination of
INCB054329 and INCB059872 enhanced myeloid differentiation and apoptosis
in human AML cell lines compared with the single agents. Interestingly,
c-myc expression was down-regulated to greater extent with the
combination of both compounds compared to either agent alone. Enhanced
anti-tumor efficacy with favorable tolerability was observed in human AML
xenograft models when both agents were administered simultaneously or
sequentially, with INCB059872 dosing regimens preceding INCB054329
administration demonstrating the greatest efficacy. These ongoing studies
demonstrate that concurrent inhibition of two distinct families of
epigenetic regulators, BET and LSD1, is active in preclinical AML models,
and provide a rationale for the clinical evaluation of this novel,
epigenetic doublet therapy in AML.

