Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer stem cell metastasis and mitochondrial
respiration is dependent on the the ISG15-mediated ubiquitin-like
modification process known as ISGylation


We recently discovered that CSCs of distinct solid tumors (e.g.
pancreatic, colon, and liver) contain intracellular vesicles coated in
the ATP-dependent transporter ABCG2, which act as a sink for the
accumulation of riboflavin (vitamin B2). Using autofluorescence and other
CSC markers, such as CD133, we have begun to dissect CSCs at the genetic
and protein level. Using RNAseq to transcriptionally distinguish CSCs
from non-CSCs, we observed that pancreatic CSCs of different primary PDAC
tumors exhibit a transcriptional gene activation signature belonging to
the Type I interferon (IFN) signaling pathway. In particular, CSCs
up-regulate the interferon-stimulated gene 15, a 165 amino acid (17kDa)
protein that is induced by Type I IFN treatment and functions to ISGylate
proteins, a ubiquitin-like modification process whereby ISG15 can be
covalently linked to cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins. We have discovered
that CSCs not only upregulate the expression of monomeric ISG15, but
numerous proteins within CSCs are ISGylated, the level of ISGylation
correlates with their metastatic capacity and knockdown of ISG15 ablates
pancreatic CSCs functions, such as self-renewal, migration and invasion
in vivo and mitochondrial respiration. Thus, our data indicate that the
ISGylayion pathway is active in CSCs and plays an important role in the
stem-like properties of these cells. We have also elucidated the
mechanism underlying the differential regulation of ISG15 in CSCs versus
non-CSCs. Specifically, using over expression lentiviral vector systems
and pharmacological inhibitors (i.e. BRD4 inhibitor JQ-1), we show that
MYC controls the expression of miR22, a micro-RNA that targets, among
others transcripts, a number of Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs) that
are essential for intracellular IFN signaling, including ISG15
expression. CSCs express low levels of MYC and miR-22, relieving the
inhibitory block on IRFs and subsequent ISG15 signaling. As expected,
over expression of MYC increases miR-22 levels and blocks IRF-mediated
ISG15 expression. While the intricacies of these complex and distinct
pathways still need to be unraveled at the CSC level, our data suggest
that MYC may be a key universal player in these pathways, and targeting
ISG15 in CSCs may represent a unique approach to altering the biology of
CSCs.

