Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subtype-specific radiation response in human breast cancer and
potential therapeutic effect of FAS death receptor modulation


Breast cancer is the most common malignancy diagnosed among women
worldwide and represents a heterogeneous group of subtypes. Radiation
therapy is an important component of multimodal treatment for women with
breast cancer. However, little is known about radiation response among
these subtypes. Recent clinical data suggests that distinct patterns of
response to systemic therapy may exist in association with each
phenotype. Therefore, understanding the intrinsic variation of radiation
response in breast cancer subtypes is important in prescribing
individualized radiotherapy that maximizes the therapeutic ratio.Our
previous studies have identified marked changes in gene expression in
breast patient tumors and breast tumor cell lines in response to
radiation. Among candidate genes, FAS was consistently and significantly
induced after radiation in luminal breast tumors and cell lines.
Modulation of FAS in basal breast cancer cell lines favorably impacted
radiation response. In this study, we further investigated the role of
FAS modulation and radiation response in a mouse model of breast cancer.
MCF7 (luminal), HCC1954 (HER2+) or SUM159 (basal) cells were implanted
orthotopically into the dorsal mammary fat pad of nude mice. These mice
were then treated with different doses of radiation. Our results showed
that radiation treatment inhibited MCF7, and to a less extent HCC1954
tumor growth in a dose-dependent manner, while SUM159 tumors were
resistant to radiation. The estimated TCD50 value was 19.30 Gy for MCF7
and 44.88 Gy for SUM159. FAS was induced in MCF7 tumors after radiation
but showed no change in SUM159 tumors. To investigate whether FAS
modulation can affect radiation response, we silenced FAS in MCF7 tumors
and activated FAS in SUM159 tumors. We found that silencing of FAS did
not negatively impact radiation response in MCF7 tumors, possibly due to
compensation by other apoptotic pathways. On the other hand, FAS
activating antibody in combination with radiation delayed SUM159 and
HCC1954 tumor growth (p = NS).In conclusion, these results suggest that
there is intrinsic variation in radiation response among breast cancer
subtypes. FAS concurrent with radiation slows tumor growth in the
radiation resistant subtypes, but the effect was not significant.
Alternative subtype-specific modulators of radiation response are under
investigation.

