Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel oncolytic adenovirus expressing tumor microenvironment
modulators that activates myeloid cells, lymphocytes and endothelial cells


Immunotherapy is becoming a cornerstone in cancer treatment of many
indications. So far, pancreatic cancer has shown little response to so
called checkpoint blockade antibodies. However, animal data suggests that
activating immunotherapies releases the effect of checkpoint blockade
also in pancreatic cancer. The tumor microenvironment (TEM) supports the
growth of the tumor cells and consists of stroma cells, fibroblasts,
blood vessels and immune cells. In some tumor lesions, such as those in
pancreatic cancer, the TEM is dense and comprises most of the lesion. The
TEM regulates immune activity via its high content of M2 macrophages,
myeloid derived suppressor cells and T regulatory cells. Further, the
dysfunctional blood vessels in lesions are not optimal for recruiting
lymphocytes. With these aspects in mind, LOAd703 was developed. LOAd703
is an oncolytic adenovirus carrying TEM modulators.LOAd703 was
constructed from the ICOVIR system of oncolytic adenoviruses in which
replication depends on a dysfunctional, hyperphosphorylated
retinoblastoma pathway. The genome was further altered by removing
E3-6.7K and gp19K, changing the serotype 5 fiber to a serotype 35 fiber
to target CD46 expressed by most tumors, as well as by adding a
CMV-driven transgene cassette with the human transgenes for TMZ-CD40L and
4-1BBL. Hence, the transgenes will be expressed in both tumor and stroma
while oncolysis is initiated in the tumor cells. We demonstrate herein
that LOAd703 infection of a panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines
efficiently induced tumor cell death within 48-72 hrs post infection
while LOAd703 infection of dendritic cells demonstrated an increased
maturation of myeloid cells including dendritic cells (DCs). These DCs
could in turn potently activate and promote expansion of both T- and NK
cells. Further, LOAd703 infection of endothelial cells (HUVEC) induced
upregulation of molecules involved in lymphocyte attachment, rolling and
transmigration. In conclusion, LOAd703 is a novel oncolytic virus that
targets both the tumor and its TME and a clinical trial is underway to
elucidate its effect in pancreatic cancer.

