Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-life example of biobanking: results of the PATH Biobank


Introduction: Since 2002, PATH Foundation has kept a biobank collecting
high-quality fresh frozen breast cancer specimens adhering to uniform
SOPs at seven certified breast cancer centres in Germany. Research groups
from academia and industry can obtain samples after application and
review. PATH Biobank is a not-for-profit organisation and asks for a cost
recovery fee in exchange for sample allocation to sustainably finance the
expenses it incurs.Material and methods: The PATH Biobank consists of a
centralized database and a decentralized bio repository. The samples are
collected and stored at seven institutes for pathology at certified
German breast cancer centres. Tumour tissue, along with normal (benign)
adjacent tissue and blood serum aliquots are processed, labelled and
stored according to uniform SOPs. Informed consent to biobanking and the
use of the samples and data for research is obtained from the donors
individually during pre-operation discussions.Results: Since 2004, more
than 8,600 breast cancer patients have given their informed consent to
the storage and analysis of their tissue and blood serum for research
purposes. Breast cancer tissue samples from 59% of donors could be stored
due to size of the surgically removed tissue specimen. In addition,
normal adjacent tissue is available from 62% of donors and blood serum
aliquots can be derived from 92% of patients.Using the annotating data,
96% of donors can be classified into the intrinsic molecular breast
cancer subtypes in accordance with the St. Gallen Criteria. In 2008, PATH
Biobank started to support research groups by providing breast cancer
samples and data as well as informing the public about the projects
on-line. In 2015 three co operations resulted in scientific
publications.One landmark collaborations started in 2012 and has been
studying the frequency and background of defined mutations in breast
cancer. A number of 701 tissue samples have been used for this study. All
samples were subject to quality testing, only 11% failed due to less than
5% tumour content. Tumour content depended on clinical conditions and
staging (ranging from 34% failure in samples derived from neo adjuvantly
treated patients to 2% in cases with staging UICC IV). Additional results
concerning the quality of samples from PATH Biobank will be
presented.Conclusions: For breast cancer research and biomarker studies,
PATH Biobank can be a valuable resource.

