Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rationale for treatment of colorectal cancer with mitomycin C
and crizotinib


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related
death in men and women in the United States. Microsatellite instability
(MSI) is found in approximately 15% of sporadic colorectal cancers and in
the majority of Lynch syndrome patients. MSI has been correlated to
deficiency in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes and therefore MSI-High
tumors exhibit higher mutation rates then non-MSI-High tumors. We
recently reported on 26 MSI-High and 558 non-MSI-High CRCs that were
profiled at Caris Life Sciences (Shagisultanova et al., 2015 ASCO Annual
Meeting Abstract No. e14684 Association of increase in BRCA2 gene
mutations in microsatellite instable (MSI-H) colorectal cancer (CRC) with
increased c-MET expression.). Immunohistochemistry and genomic analyses
were performed in the BRCA-mutant versus BRCA wild-type MSI-High tumors.
BRCA2 mutations were highly enriched (50%) in MSI-High CRC. MSI-High
tumors with BRCA2 frameshift mutations had high c-MET expression. c-MET
overexpression is known to be associated with aggressive metastatic CRC.
We hypothesized there may be a synergistic drug interaction between drugs
that are used to treat BRCA2-deficient tumors and c-MET inhibitors. We
further hypothesized there may be a mechanistic link between
BRCA2-deficiency, double-strand breaks following DNA damage, and c-MET
overexpression. Mitomycin C (MMC) is an anti-cancer chemotherapeutic
agent, which causes DNA damage by inducing double strand breaks (DSBs)
through DNA cross-linking. Tumors deficient in genes encoding for
proteins involved in DNA repair such as BRCA2 show hypersensitivity to
MMC. Crizotinib is a small molecule inhibitor of c-MET and ALK receptor
tyrosine kinases. In the present studies, we tested CRC cell lines for
sensitivity to MMC plus crizotinib. CRC cell lines treated with MMC
activated a DNA damage response as measured by up-regulation of -H2AX.
Upon BRCA2 siRNA-mediated knockdown colorectal cancer cells became more
sensitive to MMC shown by cleaved-PARP as a measure of apoptosis.
Crizotinib inhibited the activation of c-MET in CRC cell lines treated
with Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF). The combination treatment of
colorectal cancer cells with crizotinib and MMC led to increased
apoptosis (cleaved-PARP) compared to each drug alone. Combination
treatment with increasing concentrations of both drugs in a CellTiter-Glo
Cell Viability assay demonstrated a synergistic effect. However, we found
no evidence for c-MET upregulation upon effective BRCA2 knockdown in the
absence or presence of DNA damage. Although there is no mechanistic link
between BRCA2 mutation and c-MET overexpression, c-MET is frequently
overexpressed in CRC in general and BRCA2 is frequently mutated in CRC
especially in MSI-High cases. The combination of crizotinib with MMC
appeared synergistic regardless of whether CRC cell lines were MSI-High
or non-MSI-High. Our results prompt the clinical testing of the
combination of MMC and crizotinib in advanced CRC.

