Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fumarate hydratase deficiency redirects glucose metabolism of
hypoxic cancer cells into the pentose phosphate pathway


Hypoxia is a common feature of all solid cancers and strongly correlated
with poor prognosis. As an adaptive response to hypoxia, cancer cells
reprogram their metabolism by increasing glycolysis and reductive
carboxylation at the expense of mitochondrial respiration, a phenomenon
orchestrated by the transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)
-1. Mutations in the gene encoding for the mitochondrial enzyme fumarate
hydratase (FH), found in the hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell
carcinoma (HLRCC) syndrome, lead to a similar phenotype despite the
presence of O2, a phenomenon due to normoxic stabilization of HIF-1
(pseudohypoxia). Here, we report for the first time that FH
loss-of-function (LOF) redirects glucose metabolism into the pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP) in non-RCC cells subjected to severe hypoxia
(O2Hypoxia is a common feature of all solid cancers and strongly
correlated with poor prognosis. As an adaptive response to hypoxia,
cancer cells reprogram their metabolism by increasing glycolysis and
reductive carboxylation at the expense of mitochondrial respiration, a
phenomenon orchestrated by the transcription factor hypoxia inducible
factor (HIF) -1. Mutations in the gene encoding for the mitochondrial
enzyme fumarate hydratase (FH), found in the hereditary leiomyomatosis
and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) syndrome, lead to a similar phenotype
despite the presence of O2, a phenomenon due to normoxic stabilization of
HIF-1 (pseudohypoxia). Here, we report for the first time that FH
loss-of-function (LOF) redirects glucose metabolism into the pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP) in non-RCC cells subjected to severe hypoxia (O2<
.02%). We show that this metabolic shift favors the buildup of
biosynthetic precursors supporting hypoxic cell growth and
proliferation.HCT-116 (colon), HeLa (cervix) and H460 (lung)
adenocarcinoma cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors encoding
for shRNAs targeting FH. Immunoblot analysis showed that FH LOF did not
induce pseudohypoxia in these cells. In contrast, HLRCC-derived UOK262
cells showed accumulation of HIF-1 under normoxia which was reversed upon
FH re-introduction. A comprehensive analysis utilizing a RT-qPCR array to
profile the mRNA expression of 84 HIF-1 target genes, further confirmed
that FH LOF did not result in a pseudohypoxic phenotype in HCT-116 cells.
An unbiased analysis of 250 metabolites detected by liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry followed by quantitative
enrichment analysis, identified glycolysis and the PPP among the most
enriched metabolic pathways in hypoxic FH knockdown cells (PHypoxia is a
common feature of all solid cancers and strongly correlated with poor
prognosis. As an adaptive response to hypoxia, cancer cells reprogram
their metabolism by increasing glycolysis and reductive carboxylation at
the expense of mitochondrial respiration, a phenomenon orchestrated by
the transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) -1. Mutations in
the gene encoding for the mitochondrial enzyme fumarate hydratase (FH),
found in the hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC)
syndrome, lead to a similar phenotype despite the presence of O2, a
phenomenon due to normoxic stabilization of HIF-1 (pseudohypoxia). Here,
we report for the first time that FH loss-of-function (LOF) redirects
glucose metabolism into the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) in non-RCC
cells subjected to severe hypoxia (O2< .02%). We show that this metabolic
shift favors the buildup of biosynthetic precursors supporting hypoxic
cell growth and proliferation.HCT-116 (colon), HeLa (cervix) and H460
(lung) adenocarcinoma cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors
encoding for shRNAs targeting FH. Immunoblot analysis showed that FH LOF
did not induce pseudohypoxia in these cells. In contrast, HLRCC-derived
UOK262 cells showed accumulation of HIF-1 under normoxia which was
reversed upon FH re-introduction. A comprehensive analysis utilizing a
RT-qPCR array to profile the mRNA expression of 84 HIF-1 target genes,
further confirmed that FH LOF did not result in a pseudohypoxic phenotype
in HCT-116 cells. An unbiased analysis of 250 metabolites detected by
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry followed by quantitative
enrichment analysis, identified glycolysis and the PPP among the most
enriched metabolic pathways in hypoxic FH knockdown cells (P< 510-8).
Since the PPP provides precursors for synthesis of nucleic acids, we
analyzed the effect of FH LOF on cell cycle progression and found an
inhibition of hypoxia-induced cell cycle arrest in HCT-116 and HeLa
cells.Our study reveals novel insights into the effect of FH
loss-of-function in cancer cells and indicates a stark contrast between
the pseudohypoxic phenotype described in kidney cancer cell lines
obtained from HLRCC patients (i.e, UOK-262) and a HIF- independent
mechanism of metabolic rerouting in colon, lung and cervix cancer cell
lines. Our data show that FH LOF promotes an anabolic phenotype in
hypoxic cancer cells that could be exploited to enhance the therapeutic
response targeting this resistant subset of cancer cells.

