Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective pilot study of kinetics of high sensitivity troponin
T (hs-TnT) and amino terminal (nt-proBNP) in breast cancer patients (pts)
treated with doxorubicin (A) or trastuzumab (T)


Introduction: A and T are associated with the development of cardiac
dysfunction. The kinetics of cardiac biomarkers early after A or T
treatment (Rx) is undefined.Methods: We studied hs-TnT (detection limit:
3 ng/ml, myocardial infarction threshold 14 ng/ml) and nt-proBNP
(detection limit: 5 pg/ml) levels just prior to (baseline), and on days
+1, +2, +3 and +7 during the first and second cycle in breast cancer pts
treated with A (n = 11) or T (n = 11). Baseline and peak values for each
cycle, baseline to baseline, peak to peak, time to peak, and baseline
corrected area under the curve (AUC) were calculated. Study No.
NCT01771549Results: Group (grp) A pts were younger, 51 18 years, than T
grp pts, 60 13 years. Three pts in A grp and 4 pts in T grp used
antihypertensives. Baseline ejection fraction (EF) was 52-68% (A grp) and
56-69% (T grp). Hs-TnT was undetectable in 5/11 A grp, and 2/11 T grp pts
at baseline. By cycle 2 day +1, all A pts had a detectable level of
hs-TnT (p = 0.03) compared to 7/11 T pts. Median time to peak level for
hs-TnT was 1.5 days for the A grp and 1.2 days for the T grp (NS). In the
A grp, significant transient increase in nt-proBNP were also seen
(Table). In the T grp, a significant rise in nt-proBNP was not seen in
cycle 1 but was seen on cycle 2 day +1 and cycle 2 peak. AUC values were
positive for hs-TnT in A pts but not in T pts, and were positive for
nt-proBTNP for both A and T. Only 1 pt in A grp had symptomatic EF
decline (47%) three months from start of A. None of T grp pts had EF
decline.Conclusion: A, but not T was associated with increase in pre-Rx
(cycle 2 only), peak, and AUC hs-TnT levels for cycles 1 and 2 with peak
values occurring 1.5 days post-Rx. This study evaluating serial kinetics
of cardiac biomarker in pts receiving A or T therapy, suggests that
assessment of pre- and day +2 post-Rx values could be a means of
quantifying cumulative myocardial injury over the chemotherapy
course.*Roche Diagnostics Corp, Indianapolis, IN provided assay reagent
kits.


