Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial strategies for glioblastoma using brain
tumor-initiating cells: targeting the JAK/STAT and EGFR pathways


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), characterized by an aggressive clinical
course, therapeutic resistance, and striking molecular heterogeneity,
remains incurable. Recent evidence, from our group and others, indicates
that the JAK2/STAT3 pathway is an important mediator of tumor cell
survival, growth, and invasion in GBM. We investigated the efficacy of a
novel JAK2 inhibitor, pacritinib, in brain tumor initiating cell (BTIC)
lines to evaluate its potential use in the treatment of GBM patients. In
a Phase III study of patients with myelofibrosis, pacritinib demonstrated
manageable toxicity and clinically and statistically improved patient
spleen volume and reported outcomes. Treatment with pacritinib resulted
in on-target JAK2/STAT3 inhibition at 1-2M and dramatically reduced BTIC
proliferation, regardless of endogenous MGMT promoter methylation or
EGFR, PTEN, and TP53 mutational status. Pacritinib in combination with
temozolomide, the current standard of care agent for GBM, prolonged
survival over either drug alone in orthotopically xenografted NOD-SCID
mice. We tested the hypothesis that combinatorial targeting of the
JAK2/STAT3 pathway and other oncogenic drivers would be effective in GBM.
A large number of GBMs have EGFR alterations and, despite poor clinical
translation to date, EGFR inhibition remains of therapeutic relevance.
Interestingly, EGFR inhibition leads to activation of survival-signalling
pathways such as STAT3, diminishing the effectiveness of EGFR inhibition.
We find that concurrent inhibition of JAK2/STAT3 and EGFR signalling may
be an effective, clinically relevant therapeutic strategy for GBM. We
examined the in vitro actions of pacritinib on BTICs in combination with
clinically relevant EGFR inhibitors (erlotinib, afatinib, lapatinib and
AZD9291). Combinatorial treatment with pacritinib and EGFR inhibitors
showed striking responses, with lowered IC50s and BTIC viability. The
combinatorial actions of EGFR and STAT3 inhibition were particularly
effective in BTIC lines with EGFR activating vIII and missense point
mutations. On-target activity was demonstrated with reduced phospho-EGFR,
phospho-STAT3 and effectors of both pathways. In vivo pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic studies demonstrated that pacritinib and the EGFR
inhibitors afatinib and AZD9291 penetrate the brain and have on-target
activity. Ongoing in vivo studies using orthotopic xenograft BTIC models
will determine whether combinatorial inhibition of these two pathways
will provide survival benefit. Further studies are aimed at investigating
whether combinatorial inhibition of other pro-oncogenic pathways, using
the BTIC model both in vitro and in vivo, may be effective strategies in
GBM.

