Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A computational algorithm to predict tumor growth and cancer stem
cell proportion in-vitro and in-vivo from single-cell observations


We have developed a new mathematical algorithm and corresponding computer
software that uses observations of single cell behavior to predict the
growth of the cancer stem-like cell proportion in larger cancer cell
groups. Cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been implicated in ovarian
cancer tumor growth, chemotherapy resistance, and disease recurrence.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) is a primary discriminator of CSCs in
ovarian cancer as well as in other cancer types. Unfortunately, the
rarity and ability of CSCs to rapidly differentiate makes them difficult
to study in-vitro and in-vivo. Microfluidic capture devices now allow us
to grow and evaluate single ovarian cancer cells in isolated culture. We
deployed microfluidic devices to evaluate the different self-renewal and
asymmetric division patterns of ALDH+ and ALDH(-) ovarian CSCs. We
analyzed data gathered from arrays of single cell chamber observations
and found that purified ALDH+ cells were more proliferative than ALDH(-)
cells in both cell-line (n = 112, p We have developed a new mathematical
algorithm and corresponding computer software that uses observations of
single cell behavior to predict the growth of the cancer stem-like cell
proportion in larger cancer cell groups. Cancer stem-like cells (CSCs)
have been implicated in ovarian cancer tumor growth, chemotherapy
resistance, and disease recurrence. Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) is a
primary discriminator of CSCs in ovarian cancer as well as in other
cancer types. Unfortunately, the rarity and ability of CSCs to rapidly
differentiate makes them difficult to study in-vitro and in-vivo.
Microfluidic capture devices now allow us to grow and evaluate single
ovarian cancer cells in isolated culture. We deployed microfluidic
devices to evaluate the different self-renewal and asymmetric division
patterns of ALDH+ and ALDH(-) ovarian CSCs. We analyzed data gathered
from arrays of single cell chamber observations and found that purified
ALDH+ cells were more proliferative than ALDH(-) cells in both cell-line
(n = 112, p < 0.001) and primary (n = 41, p = 0.008) ovarian cancer
specimens. Importantly, ALDH+ cells could produce both ALDH+ and ALDH(-)
cells, whereas ALDH- cells were only able to produce ALDH- cells. Based
on this hierarchy-defining data, we developed an easy to use computer
algorithm on the freely-available software R to predict cancer cell
population growth in-vitro and in-vivo. In our algorithm, size changes of
cell populations are simulated by drawing from observed events. We
compared the predictions from our hybrid microfluidics chip and
computational algorithm with validation experiments in-vivo and in-vitro
for both cell line and primary ovarian cancer cells. We found a superb
correlation between observed and predicted in-vitro total and CSC counts
for both cell line and primary ovarian cancer cells (correlation r =
0.98, p We have developed a new mathematical algorithm and corresponding
computer software that uses observations of single cell behavior to
predict the growth of the cancer stem-like cell proportion in larger
cancer cell groups. Cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been implicated in
ovarian cancer tumor growth, chemotherapy resistance, and disease
recurrence. Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) is a primary discriminator of
CSCs in ovarian cancer as well as in other cancer types. Unfortunately,
the rarity and ability of CSCs to rapidly differentiate makes them
difficult to study in-vitro and in-vivo. Microfluidic capture devices now
allow us to grow and evaluate single ovarian cancer cells in isolated
culture. We deployed microfluidic devices to evaluate the different
self-renewal and asymmetric division patterns of ALDH+ and ALDH(-)
ovarian CSCs. We analyzed data gathered from arrays of single cell
chamber observations and found that purified ALDH+ cells were more
proliferative than ALDH(-) cells in both cell-line (n = 112, p < 0.001)
and primary (n = 41, p = 0.008) ovarian cancer specimens. Importantly,
ALDH+ cells could produce both ALDH+ and ALDH(-) cells, whereas ALDH-
cells were only able to produce ALDH- cells. Based on this
hierarchy-defining data, we developed an easy to use computer algorithm
on the freely-available software R to predict cancer cell population
growth in-vitro and in-vivo. In our algorithm, size changes of cell
populations are simulated by drawing from observed events. We compared
the predictions from our hybrid microfluidics chip and computational
algorithm with validation experiments in-vivo and in-vitro for both cell
line and primary ovarian cancer cells. We found a superb correlation
between observed and predicted in-vitro total and CSC counts for both
cell line and primary ovarian cancer cells (correlation r = 0.98, p <
0.0001). Furthermore, this approach appropriately predicted changes in
cell growth in the presence of the CSC-promoting growth factor EGFL6 both
in vitro and in vivo, over time frames of up to 28 days. The single cell
division based sampling algorithm developed here allows for rapid and
inexpensive means to predict in-vivo ovarian tumor growth based on
microfluidic chip culture and can easily be adapted to evaluate new
therapeutic options across other cancer subtypes.

