Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib impact on kinome profiles of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from renal cell carcinoma patients: Do molecular
effects correlate with clinical data


Introduction: Sunitinib, a potent multi-tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitor,
is a standard first-line treatment for metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(mRCC). In addition to its antiangiogenic activity, sunitinib is known to
have immune-modulating properties especially on regulatory T-cells and
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. However, data is sparse about sunitinib
impact on peripheral lymphocytes and new data is needed to gain insights
into the angiogenesis and immunity bidirectional link. This study aims to
fill such a gap by investigating the clinical and intracellular
modifications of sunitinib on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
from nave mRCC patients.Methods: Initially, a retrospective study was
conducted in 88 mRCC patients treated with first-line sunitinib therapy
to assess the evolution of lymphocyte count (expressed as a ratio between
Day 21 and Day 0 i.e. D21/D0) during the first cycle of treatment. A new
prospective study was carried out to determine kinomic profiles in PBMC
from 21 nave mRCC patients and 12 healthy volunteers. TK activity
profiles of PBMC lysates were generated on TK PamChip microarrays. The ex
vivo effect of sunitinib and its active metabolite SU12662 were also
determined in PBMCs. All data were analyzed using BioNavigator
software.Results: The retrospective preliminary study showed that an
increased D21/D0 lymphocytes ratio was significantly associated with a
shorter Progression Free Survival (PFS) in multivariate analysis (p =
0.0023). In the prospective study, the phosphorylation level in PBMCs
from mRCC patients was significantly lower than in healthy volunteers for
74 peptides (pIntroduction: Sunitinib, a potent multi-tyrosine kinase
(TK) inhibitor, is a standard first-line treatment for metastatic renal
cell carcinoma (mRCC). In addition to its antiangiogenic activity,
sunitinib is known to have immune-modulating properties especially on
regulatory T-cells and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. However, data is
sparse about sunitinib impact on peripheral lymphocytes and new data is
needed to gain insights into the angiogenesis and immunity bidirectional
link. This study aims to fill such a gap by investigating the clinical
and intracellular modifications of sunitinib on peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from nave mRCC patients.Methods: Initially, a
retrospective study was conducted in 88 mRCC patients treated with
first-line sunitinib therapy to assess the evolution of lymphocyte count
(expressed as a ratio between Day 21 and Day 0 i.e. D21/D0) during the
first cycle of treatment. A new prospective study was carried out to
determine kinomic profiles in PBMC from 21 nave mRCC patients and 12
healthy volunteers. TK activity profiles of PBMC lysates were generated
on TK PamChip microarrays. The ex vivo effect of sunitinib and its active
metabolite SU12662 were also determined in PBMCs. All data were analyzed
using BioNavigator software.Results: The retrospective preliminary study
showed that an increased D21/D0 lymphocytes ratio was significantly
associated with a shorter Progression Free Survival (PFS) in multivariate
analysis (p = 0.0023). In the prospective study, the phosphorylation
level in PBMCs from mRCC patients was significantly lower than in healthy
volunteers for 74 peptides (p<0.05). Ex vivo exposure to sunitinib or
SU12662 led to a decreased phosphorylation level for majority of peptides
in PBMCs from mRCC patients. Moreover, sunitinib had a stronger
inhibitory profile than SU12662 for 80 peptides (pIntroduction:
Sunitinib, a potent multi-tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitor, is a standard
first-line treatment for metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC). In
addition to its antiangiogenic activity, sunitinib is known to have
immune-modulating properties especially on regulatory T-cells and
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. However, data is sparse about sunitinib
impact on peripheral lymphocytes and new data is needed to gain insights
into the angiogenesis and immunity bidirectional link. This study aims to
fill such a gap by investigating the clinical and intracellular
modifications of sunitinib on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
from nave mRCC patients.Methods: Initially, a retrospective study was
conducted in 88 mRCC patients treated with first-line sunitinib therapy
to assess the evolution of lymphocyte count (expressed as a ratio between
Day 21 and Day 0 i.e. D21/D0) during the first cycle of treatment. A new
prospective study was carried out to determine kinomic profiles in PBMC
from 21 nave mRCC patients and 12 healthy volunteers. TK activity
profiles of PBMC lysates were generated on TK PamChip microarrays. The ex
vivo effect of sunitinib and its active metabolite SU12662 were also
determined in PBMCs. All data were analyzed using BioNavigator
software.Results: The retrospective preliminary study showed that an
increased D21/D0 lymphocytes ratio was significantly associated with a
shorter Progression Free Survival (PFS) in multivariate analysis (p =
0.0023). In the prospective study, the phosphorylation level in PBMCs
from mRCC patients was significantly lower than in healthy volunteers for
74 peptides (p<0.05). Ex vivo exposure to sunitinib or SU12662 led to a
decreased phosphorylation level for majority of peptides in PBMCs from
mRCC patients. Moreover, sunitinib had a stronger inhibitory profile than
SU12662 for 80 peptides (p<0.05). The ex vivo sunitinib effect was
statistically correlated with the IMDC (Heng) prognostic model and D21/D0
lymphocytes ratio and 53 and 16 peptides, respectively were found to be
significant. Less ex vivo inhibition was associated with both a poor
prognosis according to Heng and an increased D21/D0 lymphocytes
ratio.Conclusions: Our retrospective study shows a decreased lymphocyte
count on D21 after sunitinib initiation is a favorable prognostic factor
in mRCC patients. The kinomic analysis of TKs in PBMCs after ex vivo
exposure to sunitinib correlates with both Heng prognostic score and
lymphocyte D21/D0 ratio, suggesting that PBMCs could be an interesting
biological matrix to seek future biomarkers regarding clinical efficacy
of sunitinib. Further investigations are underway to determine the
involvement of signaling pathways contributing to the inter-individual
variability in kinomic profiles of PBMCs from mRCC patients treated with
sunitinib.

