Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYB promotes pancreatic tumor associated-desmoplasia by
up-regulating Sonic hedgehog and adrenomedullin


Pancreatic cancer (PC) stands as the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States. Unfortunately, even with the
emergence of tumor-targeted therapies, the 5-year survival rate of PC
continues to remain very dismal ( 7.0%). The presence of dense
desmoplastic region at the tumor site is a prominent pathological
characteristic of PC, and tumor-associated desmoplasia is suggested to
limit the therapeutic efficacy by acting as a physical barrier for drug
delivery. In addition, it plays pivotal roles in promoting the survival
and aggressive phenotypes of tumor cells. Therefore, it is of utmost
importance that we identify novel gene targets and associated molecular
mechanisms accountable for the development of desmoplasia in pancreatic
tumors. Our recent study provided first evidence for a role of MYB, an
oncogenic transcription factor, in pancreatic tumor growth and
metastasis. Upon histological examination of orthotopic tumor xenografts
derived from MYB-overexpressing and -silenced pancreatic tumor cells, we
noticed a positive association of MYB expression with the extent of
desmoplastic reaction. This finding was further confirmed by staining the
tumor xenograft sections with Collagen-I, fibronectin and -SMA, the
well-characterized markers of desmoplasia. In a co-culture experiment, we
observed that MYB-overexpressing pancreatic tumor cells promoted greater
proliferation of pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) as compared to the
MYB-silenced cells further supporting a role of MYB in desmoplasia. From
the mechanistic standpoint, we identified MYB to be novel direct
regulator of Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and Adrenomedullin (ADM) expression in
PC cells as confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis.
Treatments of pancreatic tumor (high or low MYB) and stellate cells
co-culture with specific inhibitors and/or recombinant SHH and ADM
demonstrated that both SHH and ADM cooperatively mediated the effect of
MYB on PC and stellate cells via autocrine and/or paracrine mechanisms.
Together, our studies suggest that MYB promotes malignant phenotype of PC
not only by directly impacting the tumor cells, but also by altering the
tumor microenvironment.

