Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel dual HDAC & PI3K inhibitor, CUDC-907, for MYC-driven
malignancies


MYC family genes are among the most frequently deregulated oncogenic
drivers in human cancer. Pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC activity and
blockade of the PI3K pathway have both been shown to suppress MYC-induced
transcription.HDAC activity is critical for MYC gene regulation, as MYC
represses transcription of target genes through recruitment of HDACs.
HDAC inhibitors have been shown to restore expression of genes suppressed
by MYC family members and to induce rapid downregulation of expression of
MYC itself.The PI3K pathway plays a central role in regulating MYC at the
post-transcriptional level. Activation of PI3K signaling leads to
activation of AKT, which phosphorylates and inhibits GSK3. As GSK3
normally phosphorylates MYC which facilitates the degradation of MYC,
activation of PI3K signaling leads to increased stability of MYC, whereas
PI3K inhibitors decrease MYC stability. A recent study has demonstrated
addiction to MYC signaling and hypersensitivity to PI3K inhibition in
PTEN-deficient diffuse large B-cell (DLBCL) cell lines, suggesting that
MYC-driven cancers may be particularly sensitive to PI3K inhibition. As
HDACs and PI3K regulate MYC protein levels and functions through
nonoverlapping mechanisms, simultaneous HDAC and PI3K inhibition may
further enhance MYC suppression.CUDC-907 is an orally bioavailable,
small-molecule dual HDAC and PI3K inhibitor that primarily inhibits class
I and II HDACs and the PI3K, , and isoforms. CUDC-907 shows greater
anti-tumor activity in vitro than single-target HDAC or PI3K inhibitors,
especially in MYC-dependent cell types, such as DLBCL and NUT midline
carcinoma (NMC). In preclinical testing, CUDC-907 treatment leads to a
dose-dependent decrease in MYC protein levels, and is also more potent in
decreasing MYC than the HDAC inhibitor panobinostat and the pan-PI3K
inhibitor pictilisib alone or in combination. Significant antitumor
effects have been consistently observed in MYC-driven DLBCL xenograft and
genetically engineered mouse models exposed to CUDC907. In particular,
certain MYC translocation (Daudi), double-hit (concurrent MYC and BLC2
translocation, WSUDLCL2 and DOHH2), double-expresser (expression of MYC
and BCL2 proteins, U2932) xenograft models, and the E-Myc transgenic
mouse model achieve tumor growth inhibition of 100%, 69%, 56%, 97% and
72%, respectively.These findings raise the possibility that hematologic
and solid tumors driven by aberrant overexpression of MYC family genes
(e.g., MYC-altered DLBCL and NMC) might be more responsive to
simultaneous HDAC and PI3K inhibition with CUDC-907 than they are to
single-target therapy. Clinical Phase 1 studies are currently testing
CUDC-907 in patients with relapsed/refractory (R/R) DLBCL and advanced
MYC-aberrant solid tumors. Preliminary data are encouraging and support
the planned Phase 2 study in R/R MYC-altered DLBCL, as well as further
testing in other MYC-driven malignancies.

