Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PORCN prolongs metastasis free survival in a mouse
model of Ewing sarcoma


Metastatic disease is the most important factor in determining the
survival of patients with Ewing sarcoma (ES). Although intensive
cytotoxic chemotherapy has improved the survival of patients with
localized disease, the survival rate for patients with metastatic disease
remains dismal, and the most pressing unmet need in ES is to prevent and
treat metastasis better. The Wnt signaling pathway is a key regulator of
a number of cellular functions associated with metastasis, including
proliferation, motility, and stem cell self-renewal. A single enzyme,
Porcupine (Porcn), mediates post-translational palmitoylation of Wnt
ligands, and it's activity is required for secretion of all 17 Wnt
ligands, making it an attractive target for a pan-Wnt inhibitor. We have
studied the effect of LGK974, a potent, selective, Porcn inhibitor, on
Ewing sarcoma metastasis. In vitro, we have observed that LGK974 does not
affect proliferation or sarcosphere formation, but inhibits migration of
ES cell lines through the suppression of expression of multiple
transcriptional regulators of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). In
our orthotopic implantation/amputation mouse model, single agent LGK974
treatment leads to significant delay in formation of lung metastasis
following amputation of the affected leg, without a significant effect on
primary tumor growth. This delay leads to a significant post-amputation
survival benefit in multiple xenografts. In LGK974 treated xenografts,
the expression of multiple EMT related transcription factors were
observed to be suppressed. Furthermore, in tail vein injection models,
LGK974 did not produce a survival benefit, suggesting that LGK974 effects
Ewing sarcoma metastasis by inhibiting early steps in the metastatic
cascade, such as migration and invasion. Our findings strongly implicate
Wnt signaling in the early steps of ES metastasis and demonstrate that
LGK974 has the potential to significantly improve the survival of ES
patients through the specific inhibition of metastasis.

