Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical model of human melanoma for evaluation of targeted
drug treatment and for immunotherapy validation


Malignant melanoma accounts for less than 5% of skin cancer cases, yet it
represents 75% of deaths from skin cancer. The high mortality rate is due
to the malignant, metastatic nature of the disease and resistance to
chemotherapeutic treatments. Most mouse melanoma models have not fully
recapitulated the histopathology of the disease and its metastatic
nature. At NCI's Center for Advanced Preclinical Research (CAPR), we have
adapted the HGF/SF; CDK4R24C transgenic mouse model to an optimized
allograft transplant model for preclinical therapeutic studies in primary
and metastatic melanoma. This genetically engineered mouse-derived
Allograft (GDA) model recapitulates the features of the original GEM,
including the epithelioid histopathology and key marker expression of
human melanoma. It is an efficient and tractable tool for monitoring of
both tumor growth and therapeutic responses in primary and metastatic
melanoma in the context of a normal immune system. Additionally, aberrant
expression of c-Met and upregulation of the downstream signaling pathway
in HGF-GDA tumors is relevant for targeted therapeutics in melanoma.
Thus, the model is a useful platform for evaluating therapies that target
tumor cells and/or immunomodulatory pathways in intervention or adjuvant
settings. Although drugs such as the c-Met inhibitor crizotinib and the
MEK inhibitor trametinib were potent in cell culture, PD analyses of
short-term (4-6 hour) treatment with small molecule therapies indicated
that treatment incompletely suppresses the pathway in vivo compared to
the corresponding primary cell line, and does not inhibit tumor growth.
Therefore the HGF-GDA can be exploited to examine combination treatments
that either prevent feedback activation of downstream pathway nodes in
vivo, or modify alternate pathways, such as immunomodulatory targets.
Hence, we are currently exploring rational combinations of
oncogene-targeted therapy with immune-targeted therapy, for example,
combined trametinib and anti-CTLA4 antibody treatment. In the HGF-GDA,
complete response was observed in a subgroup of mice treated with
anti-CTLA-4, i.e. established tumors fully regressed, yet the durable
response and increased survival time (based on tumor volume) was not
enhanced by concurrent treatment with trametinib. Future treatment
studies will involve alternative regimens. Additionally, since
metastasis, not the primary tumor, leads to progression of melanoma in
patients, we have characterized a primary tumor resection model in which
only metastatic disease is treated. Lung metastases develop after
resection of the HGF-GDA primary tumor, whichmay be treated in an
intervention or adjuvant setting. Therefore we evaluated the effect on
survival of the same combination therapy (trametinib and anti-CTLA-4) we
previously used to treat the primary tumor, but as adjuvant treatment for
the metastatic melanoma model.

