Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRI31215, a novel inhibitor of oncogenic HGF/MET signaling


Constitutive activation of MET signaling, frequently observed in cancer,
triggers signaling by AKT, ERK 1/2 and STAT3, and promotes survival,
proliferation, migration and invasion of cancer cells. Accordingly, MET
amplification or overexpression of its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF), are associated with tumor aggressiveness, resistance to therapy
and poor prognosis in many cancer patients. Cancer cells can secrete HGF
which triggers autocrine HGF/MET signaling, however, fibroblasts are the
predominant source of HGF and activate MET expressed on tumor cells in a
paracrine manner. Cancer cells and fibroblasts secrete HGF as an inactive
precursor, pro-HGF. A crucial step in the regulation of HGF/MET signaling
is the proteolytic processing of the inactive precursor, pro-HGF, to its
active form by one of the three serine proteases, matriptase, hepsin or
HGF activator (HGFA). This is the rate-limiting step in the HGF/MET
signaling pathway, controlled by the inhibitors of HGF activation,
hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitors 1 and 2 (HAI-1/2).We
synthesized a novel small molecule, SRI31215, a triplex inhibitor of
matriptase, hepsin and HGFA, mimicking the biological activity of
HA1-1/2. We confirmed that SRI31215 inhibits the proteolytic activation
of pro-HGF and blocks HGF-induced MET activation and signaling by AKT,
ERK 1/2 and STAT3. SRI31215 blocked fibroblast-induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and prevented scattering and
migration of cancer cells. Finally, we demonstrated that SRI31215
sensitized HGF-producing colon cancer cells to epidermal growth factor
receptor inhibitors (EGFRi) and inhibited fibroblast-mediated,
HGF-dependent, resistance to EGFRi in colon cancer. Thus, SRI31215 blocks
signaling between cancer cells and fibroblasts and inhibits the
tumor-promoting activity of cancer associated fibroblasts.Taken together,
our data demonstrate that inhibitors of HGF activation, such as SRI31215,
represent a novel approach to curb the growth and metastatic spread of
tumor cells that are addicted to HGF/MET signaling and to overcome
primary and acquired resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy.

