Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel 4-(pyrimidin-2-yl)morpholines targeting the
colchicine-binding site of tubulin


Microtubules are dynamic polymers and integral components of the
cytoskeleton. They play important roles in the regulation of cellular
signaling, motility, maintenance of cell shape, secretion, intercellular
transport and spindle formation during mitosis.1 As a consequence, small
molecules that interfere with the dynamics of microtubules have been
recognized as powerful tools for the treatment of cancer.2, 3A systematic
structure-activity relationship (SAR) study starting from
morpholino-substituted biheteroaryls with moderate microtubule disrupting
activities allowed the optimizations of biological activity, metabolic
stability, and drug-like properties. Interestingly, the type of core
(aryl, pyridine or pyrimidine) was of importance, as well as the
regioisomeric arrangement of the pyrimidine nitrogens. Pyrimidines
substituted with four- or five-membered N-heterocycles proved to be
superior both in terms of biological activity and metabolic stability.
Finally, optimization of the heteroaryl substituent of the pyrimidine
derivatives culminated in the identification of a novel series of
substituted 4-(pyrimidin-2-yl)morpholines targeting microtubule
polymerization in the nM range.Selected compounds potently inhibit
cellular microtubule polymerization with EC50 values of 20-90 nM. This
was confirmed by phosphorylation of Histone3, nuclear DNA condensation,
and cell cycle arrest in G2/M or induction of cell death across multiple
cell lines. Moreover, substituted 4-(pyrimidin-2-yl)morpholines were
shown to be poor substrates for P-gp multi-drug resistance pumps, and
therefore caused efficiently mitotic arrest and cell death in
colchicine-resistant cells.The co-crystal structure of tubulin with
selected compounds showed that 4-(pyrimidin-2-yl)morpholines bind to the
colchicine pocket located between the and subunits of the -tubulin dimer.
Relevant inhibitor contact residues include Lys352, Met259, Ala316,
Leu248, Val238, Tyr202 and Cys241 of -tubulin. Moreover, two water
molecules link the morpholine oxygen to the -tubulin bound GTP.
Conformational changes induced by inhibitor binding suggest that free or
plus end -tubulin is targeted by this compound series.Pre-clinical
studies characterized a lead compound selection with excellent stability
in human hepatocytes, and human, mouse and rat microsomes. Overall, these
compounds qualify as a novel class of microtubule destabilizing agents
that target the colchicine-binding site, and which warrant further
investigations currently in progress (PK studies, xenograft tumor mouse
models).1) Walczak, C. E, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2000, 12, 52-56.2)
Risinger, A. L.; Giles, F. J.; Mooberry, S. L, Cancer Treat. Rev. 2009,
35, 255-261.3) Downing, K. H.; Nogales, E., Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
1998, 8, 785-791.

