Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Standardization of technologies for CTC, ctDNA and miRNA
enrichment, isolation and analysis for liquid biopsies during the first
year of IMI's CANCER-ID


Within the European Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) consortium
CANCER-ID (www.cancer-id.eu), scientists at academic, clinical and
industrial sites across Europe and in the US joined forces to evaluate
innovative technologies in the field of liquid cancer biopsies. This
project aims at implementing standard operating procedures (SOPs) for
pre-analytical sample handling, enrichment, isolation and analysis of
Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs), circulating free tumor DNA (ctDNA) and
microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel blood-based biomarkers, with a focus on
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) and HER2-treatment refractory breast
cancer. In order to determine sensitivity and specificity of different
technologies for CTC isolation and analysis (e.g. detection of mutations,
amplifications, protein phosphorylation), complex samples comprising a
mixture of NSCLC or breast cancer cell lines spiked in healthy donor
blood were distributed to different CANCER-ID partner sites. These cell
lines have been selected based on their molecular/genetic properties to
reflect clinically relevant subtypes of the disease and have been further
characterized in terms of cell-surface marker expression and cell size
distribution. The use of complex spiked samples better models the
heterogeneity of real-life patient material. Furthermore, healthy donor
and patient derived plasma samples are investigated using different
technology platforms to validate tumor-specific miRNA or ctDNA profiles
that might characterize molecular tumor subtypes. To this end,
differences in exosome-derived versus free circulating miRNAs are of
special interest. As for CTCs the development of ctDNA and miRNA
standards that can be used to compare and validate different technologies
are in the focus of this effort. In summary, our results pave the way for
the next phase of CANCER-ID, which includes the analysis of cancer
patient samples in clinical studies using different technologies and
thereby advance the concept of liquid biopsy particularly in indications
in which conventional tissue biopsies are difficult to obtain.

