Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D enhances erlotinib response in EGFR-mutant non-small
cell lung cancer


Background. Despite remarkable initial therapeutic responses, most
patients develop resistance to the first generation of EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), erlotinib and gefitinib, within one year of
treatment initiation. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is one of
the key mechanisms of resistance to EGFR TKIs. We recently demonstrated
that vitamin D promotes epithelial phenotype in NSCLC cells. We
hypothesized that we could prevent/overcome EMT-driven resistance by
combining vitamin D with EGFR TKIs.Methods. EGFR-mutant, erlotinib
sensitive HCC827 cells were treated with: vehicle control, 100nM
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3), 1ng/ml TGF-, or 1,25(OH)2D3+TGF-
for 14 days. Expression of EMT markers was determined by q-RT PCR and
immunoblot. Sensitivity to erlotinib was analyzed by MTT assay. For the
in-vivo study, HCC 827 tumor xenografts were established in vitamin-D
deficient mice. Mice were stratified based on tumor volume to receive
diets containing 25 IU vitamin D3/kg (deficient) or 10,000 IU vitamin
D3/kg (supplemented). Erlotinib treatment (12.5 mg/kg) was initiated two
weeks after the diet switch and administered 5 days per week for the
duration of the study. Tumors were collected two weeks after the diet
switch (baseline), 48 hours after the erlotinib initiation (acute
response) and upon treatment failure (outgrowth).Results. Vitamin D
attenuated expression of mesenchymal markers in the presence of TGF-
in-vitro and opposed TGF- driven resistance to erlotinib. Erlotinib EC50
values were 9.85 nM, 122 nM and 3.83 nM for vehicle, TGF-, and
1,25(OH)2D3+TGF- treated cells, respectively. In-vivo, vitamin D
supplementation enhanced acute response to erlotinib. We documented a
greater decrease in tumor volume after 48h of erlotinib initiation (1.1%
of baseline 19.3% in vitamin D deficient diet and 25.9% 29.5% in
supplemented diet). Greater efficacy was accompanied by increased
suppression of STAT3 phosphorylation and decreased vimentin expression in
the vitamin D supplemented group. Although we observed a trend towards a
longer progression-free survival in animals maintained on vitamin D
supplemented diet (8 vs 5.5 weeks), statistical significance was not
achieved. The outgrowth tumors in both groups maintained their epithelial
phenotype but exhibited a significant increase in the expression of AXL
tyrosine kinase. However, outgrowth tumors from the vitamin D
supplemented group had lower AXL expression than those from the vitamin D
deficient group.Conclusion. Vitamin D supports epithelial phenotype
in-vitro and enhances acute response to erlotinib in-vivo, possibly, by
suppressing STAT3 signaling. Vitamin D supplementation also attenuates
overexpression of AXL tyrosine kinase in erlotinib resistant tumors. The
clinical implication of our work is that patients diagnosed with EGFR
mutant NSCLC who receive erlotinib may benefit from vitamin D
supplementation.

