Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eriocalyxin B (EriB), a natural diterpenoid, inhibits VEGF-induced
angiogenesis by suppressing VEGFR2 signaling


Introduction: Angiogenesis, the formation of new capillaries from
existing blood vessels, is an essential requirement for tumor growth and
metastasis. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), one of the most
potent angiogenic factors, is crucial for the promotion of new vascular
sprout formation in vessel stabilization. Previous studies showed that
the inhibition of angiogenesis via targeting on VEGF is a promising
strategy for the suppression of tumor growth as well as metastasis.
Eriocalyxin B (EriB), a natural diterpenoid isolated from Isodon
eriocalyx Dunn, exerts anti-tumor activities1,2. Here, the aim of the
present study was to determine the effect of EriB on angiogenesis both in
vitro and in vivo.Methods: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) were used to demonstrate the anti-angiogenic activities of EriB
and its underlying mechanisms. The transgenic zebrafish Tg(fli1:EGFP)y1,
in which the endothelial cells express enhanced Green Fluorescent
Proteins (eGFP), was also applied to evaluate the effect of EriB on
angiogenesis in vivo.Results: Our results in HUVECs showed that EriB
exerted no inhibitory effect on cell viability and cell proliferation.
However, it could significantly inhibit VEGF-induced cell viability and
cell proliferation. In addition, the decreased tube formation, cell
migration and cell invasion were also observed. Flow cytometry analysis
demonstrated that EriB could induce cell cycle arrest at G1 phase by
interference with cyclinD1/CDK4/pRb pathway. Investigation of the signal
transduction revealed that EriB was involved in the suppression of VEGFR2
signaling. Results from the zebrafish model demonstrated that EriB
treatment could inhibit the formation of sub-intestinal vessels. Besides,
genome wide mRNA expression profiling of zebrafish after EriB treatment
revealed the alteration of various angiogenic genes. The expressions of
several genes such as kdr, pcdh15b, cdkn1a, loxl1, etc. were evaluated by
quantitative real-time PCR.Conclusions: The present study reported the
activities of EriB as a novel anti-angiogenic agent. Thus, EriB has the
potential of modulating tumor angiogenesis, which may be useful in the
treatment of human cancers.References:1. Li, L., et al. (2014).
Eriocalyxin B-Induced Apoptosis in Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma Cells
Through Thiol-Containing Antioxidant Systems and Downstream Signalling
Pathways. Curr Mol Med 14(5): 673-689.2. Zhang, Y. W., et al. (2010).
Eriocalyxin B induces apoptosis in lymphoma cells through multiple
cellular signaling pathways. Exp Hematol 38(3): 191-201.

