Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a novel, mono-specific, antibody against short
Isoform of DCLK1 (DCLK1-S): a novel biomarker of colon carcinogenesis in
patients


Double-Cortin Like Kinase I (DCLK1) marks colon cancer stem cells in
mouse colons. Adenomas (Ads)/human colorectal cancers (hCRCs) express low
to high levels of DCLK1. We recently reported that the canonical long
isoform (DCLK1-L), transcribed from 5()-promoter, is mainly expressed in
normal human colons, while a novel short isoform (DCLK1-S), transcribed
from IntronV ()-promoter, is expressed in colonic tumors, with >80% hCRCs
expressing significant levels of DCLK1-S (OConnell et al., Sci Rep,
2015). We additionally reported that CRC patients, expressing high levels
of DCLK1-S, had significantly lower overall survival compared to low
expressers (OConnell et al., Sci Rep, 2015), suggesting
prognostic/diagnostic value of measuring DCLK1-S levels in Ads/CRCs.
Since expression of DCLK1-S by CRCs was recently discovered by us,
commercial antibodies (Ab) are not available for specifically identifying
DCLK1-S in Ad/Carcinoma samples of patients for diagnostic/prognostic
purposes. We succeeded in generating a monospecific polyclonal Ab against
the few unique amino-acid sequences of DCLK1-S. By immunohistochemistry
and western blot analysis, the Ab was confirmed to be specific for
DCLK1-S, with no cross-reactivity for DCLK1-L, and little or no
background. The DCLK1-S-Ab did not stain normal human colonic crypts,
confirming absence of DCLK1-S in normal colons. In colorectal Ads,
DCLK1-S was mainly located in the cytoplasm, with Double-Cortin Like
Kinase I (DCLK1) marks colon cancer stem cells in mouse colons. Adenomas
(Ads)/human colorectal cancers (hCRCs) express low to high levels of
DCLK1. We recently reported that the canonical long isoform (DCLK1-L),
transcribed from 5()-promoter, is mainly expressed in normal human
colons, while a novel short isoform (DCLK1-S), transcribed from IntronV
()-promoter, is expressed in colonic tumors, with >80% hCRCs expressing
significant levels of DCLK1-S (OConnell et al., Sci Rep, 2015). We
additionally reported that CRC patients, expressing high levels of
DCLK1-S, had significantly lower overall survival compared to low
expressers (OConnell et al., Sci Rep, 2015), suggesting
prognostic/diagnostic value of measuring DCLK1-S levels in Ads/CRCs.
Since expression of DCLK1-S by CRCs was recently discovered by us,
commercial antibodies (Ab) are not available for specifically identifying
DCLK1-S in Ad/Carcinoma samples of patients for diagnostic/prognostic
purposes. We succeeded in generating a monospecific polyclonal Ab against
the few unique amino-acid sequences of DCLK1-S. By immunohistochemistry
and western blot analysis, the Ab was confirmed to be specific for
DCLK1-S, with no cross-reactivity for DCLK1-L, and little or no
background. The DCLK1-S-Ab did not stain normal human colonic crypts,
confirming absence of DCLK1-S in normal colons. In colorectal Ads,
DCLK1-S was mainly located in the cytoplasm, with <10% in the nucleus,
while in adenocarcinomas (AdCAs), intense staining of DCLK1-S was
observed in both cytosol and nucleus, demonstrating a stage-specific
increase in staining during Ad-AdCA sequence of colon carcinogenesis,
with increasing localization in the nucleus. DCLK1-S-Ab and a DCLK1-L
specific Ab was also used to investigate localization of the long vs
short isoforms of DCLK1 in cells by immuno-electron microscopy,
demonstrating important differences in their sub-cellular localization,
which maybe reflective of differential biological effects. The DCLK1-S-Ab
is currently being used by us to measure relative expression of DCLK1-S
in Ad samples in a retrospective study, in collaboration with colleagues
in the departments of pathology and biostatistics, for purposes of
examining the usefulness of the Ab for prognostic purposes. Conclusion:
We have generated a specific antibody against the novel short isoform of
cancer stem cell marker, DCLK1, which will allow us for the first time to
detect this novel cancer specific molecular biomarker in colonic tumors
for prognostic purposes. Rather than lengthy and cumbersome processing,
as required for most molecular markers, the Ab will allow physicians, in
any setting, to make informed decisions, such as time to colonoscopy for
patients, which is currently based on mostly morphological/pathological
parameters, and can result in missing or over scoping patients.

