Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The intersection of the PI3K/mTOR and HIPPO pathways: a potential
therapeutic target for medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor;
it is genetically defined into 4 subgroups which defines the clinical
course of the disease. Despite current treatment modalities such as
surgical resection, radiation, and chemotherapy, there are still
significant morbidities and adverse side-effects. Recently defined
genetic pathways could possibly offer a better management and treatment
of patients with MB. The HIPPO signaling pathway has recently been shown
to intersect with PI3K and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathways to modulate
mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), an important regulator in cell
growth and migration. The aim of this study is to elucidate the
interaction of Hippo and Akt/mTOR signaling pathways with SHH pathways in
MB, and define the potential downstream targets of therapy by using
combined inhibitors. In order to achieve our goals, we evaluated the
expression of activated AKT/mTOR in MB tumors using immunohistochemistry
(IHC), along with the expression of transcriptional co-activators
yes-associated protein (YAP), a down-stream effector of the HIPPO
pathway. Scratch and chemotactic migration were used to assess the
motility of MB cells following treatment with inhibitors of the
aforementioned pathways. Cell cycle analysis and proliferation were
measured using EdU and MTT techniques, respectively. YAP-SiRNA treatment
was used to inhibit HIPPO pathway. MicroRNA-29, which mediates the mTOR
pathway by modulating PTEN levels, was investigated. Results
demonstrated: 1. A significant number of MBs expressed activated
pAKTSer473 and pmTORSer2448, along with YAP, the downstream effector of
the HIPPO pathway; 2. Treatment with inhibitors of PI3K/AKT (LY294002)
and mTOR (rapamycin), given with EGF, significantly reduced cellular
motility; 3. SHH inhibitor cyclopamine given with LY294002 or rapamycin
significantly reduced cellular motility; 4. Cell proliferation was
suppressed by inhibition of the HIPPO pathway using 3 unique 27mer
duplexes of YAP1 siRNA treatments; 5. Combined treatment of cyclopamine
with either LY294002 or rapamycin caused maximum suppression of cellular
growth. In conclusion, these results demonstrate that the Hippo and
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways are over-expressed in MB, and that the combined
targeting of mTOR/HIPPO pathway with SHH inhibitor may provide
alternative strategies for the treatment of MB, and offers a targeted
therapy for improved prognosis.

