Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the one-carbon metabolism protein MTHFD2 for cancer
therapy: Exploiting the unique redox status of cancer cells


Two well-established hallmarks of cancer are the need for nucleotides to
support continuous cell proliferation and the requirement for cancer cell
redox balance. In that respect cancer cells are characterized by an
increased rate of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production which can be
toxic to cancer cells. In this sense, cancer cells often display an
increased ROS scavenging capacity, through antioxidants and NADPH that
prevents ROS levels from reaching cytotoxic levels. Mitochondrial
methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 2 (MTHFD2) is a critical
component of one-carbon metabolism and promotes the reaction of 5,
10-methylene tetrahydrofolate to 10-formyl tetrahydrofolate which is
coupled to purine synthesis and the production of NAD(P)H. In its role,
MTHFD2 is required for maintaining nucleotide biosynthesis and cancer
cell redox balance. Recent studies have shown that MTHFD2 expression is
elevated in many cancers compared to normal tissue and expression is
correlated with poor survival in breast cancer. In order to validate
MTHFD2 as a potential cancer target we show that genetic knockdown of
MTHFD2 led to impaired cancer cell survival and proliferation. In breast
cancer cells MTHFD2 inhibition caused a decrease in NADPH, an increase in
the levels of oxidized glutathione and also promoted the expression of
DNA damage and death markers specifically in cancer cells with high
MTHFD2 protein expression. Interestingly, ROS-scavenging antioxidants
reversed these phenotypes in the presence of MTHFD2 knockdown. Normal
cells and low MTHFD2 expressing breast cancer cells had a higher
tolerance for the inhibition of the protein. Based on our data, MTHFD2
inhibition leads to the impairment of cancer cells antioxidant capacity
and ROS-mediated cell death. Therefore, MTHFD2 inhibition may have
clinical potential for the treatment of patients with breast cancer, and
potentially various other cancers.

