Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting breast cancer dormant CTC phenotypes


Tumor relapse is a clinically relevant problem in breast cancer where
patients are asymptomatic because disseminated cells appear to become
dormant for periods longer than 20 years and are undetectable by current
clinical tools. Uncovering phenotypes of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) -
the seeds of intractable metastasis-offers the promise to dissect CTC
heterogeneity in relation to metastatic competence, to predict biomarker
assessment, and to significantly improve monitoring and treatment of
cancer. However, little is known about CTC biology and how CTCs differ in
their capacity to circulate while maintaining a metastatic potential. We
hypothesized that EpCAM-negative breast cancer CTC subsets exist, and
avoid organ arrest with extreme efficiency by the concomitant presence of
quiescence and stem cell properties. We collected peripheral blood of
clinically diagnosed breast cancer patients with or without brain
metastasis, and performed multiparametric flow cytometry to isolate
EpCAM-negative CTC subsets with stem-cell properties (CD44+/CD24-), along
with combinatorial expression of two neoplastic markers: urokinase
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and integrin beta1 (int 1).
EpCAM-negative CTCs were further interrogated at a single-cell level
employing DEPArray platform. Second, we were able to culture FACS-sorted
CTC subsets, selected for six cell-surface expression markers
(CD45-/EpCAM-negative/CD44+/CD24-/uPAR+/-/int 1+/-), as long-term
in-vitro 3D CTC tumorspheres. Third, CTC subsets were interrogated for
biomarker profiling and biological characteristics. We identified
adhesive, proliferative and invasive properties of 3D CTC tumorspheres
which were distinct per uPAR/int 1 combinatorial expression. Lastly, we
performed next-generation whole-genome sequencing and mutation analyses
to discover unique genomic signatures of uPAR/int 1 CTC subsets and
verified as putative CTCs originally disseminated from primary breast
tumor. Additional investigations are being pursued assessing the
molecular and genomic characterization of uPAR/int 1 CTC subsets
comprehensively. Clinical relevance of this research includes that this
may enhance abilities to prospectively identify patients who may be at
high-risk of developing breast cancer brain metastasis.

