Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNA signature in group 4 medulloblastoma patients


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in childhood.
Four main clinically and molecularly distinct MB subtypes have been
identified: WNT, SHH, Group 3, and Group 4. Among them, Group 4 MB (G4MB)
appears to have the most skewed age ratio, is predominant in males and
shows an intermediate prognosis. In spite of being the most frequent
(35%), it is also the least understood of all the subgroups. Diagnosis is
based on patients clinical symptoms and neuro-imaging techniques with
high risk of false positive and/or late tumor discovery. The early
detection of the disease is essential to reduce both cancer mortality and
long time therapy related toxicity. To date, there is no reliable marker
for G4MB that could facilitate the early diagnosis and allow the
evaluation of the response to radio and chemotherapy treatment.
Therefore, the discovery of new biomarkers as a specific signature of
G4MB patients, potentially useful as diagnostic factor, would be
extraordinarily worthwhile.MicroRNAs are single-stranded non coding RNA
molecules of 19-24 nucleotides in length involved in the
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, whose expression is
strongly deregulated in several types of tumors. Recent studies have
shown that microRNAs are released into the bloodstream and are stably
detectable thanks to their association with extracellular vescicle, or
complex with RNA-binding protein that protect them from RNAse
degradation. The minimally invasive liquid biopsy flanked to the
reliability and specificity of microRNAs in cancer detection indicates
circulating microRNAs not only as promising biomarkers to get early
diagnosis, but also to follow treatment response and detect
recurrence.Here we report a high-throughput screening of microRNAs in
G4MB plasma samples before surgery and during follow-up. Two different
approaches (DeepSeq and Low Denstity Array) were used to detect the
differentially expressed circulating microRNAs in 4 patients and in 4
age- and sex- matched healthy donors. Baseline microRNA expression
profiling allowed us to disclose a signature of 34 miRNAs able to
identify patients versus healthy children. Moreover, selected microRNAs
were validated by RT-qPCR technology on a wider cohort of G4MB patients
(n = 8) and healthy donors (n = 8). Specifically, we identified two
important oncogenic microRNA clusters (miR-17/92 and miR-106b/25)
significantly upregulated in G4MB plasma patients. Therapy reduced the
expression of these microRNAs up to levels of healthy donors.In
conclusion we identified circulating microRNA signature in G4MB.

