Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A retrospective analysis of the spectrum of genetic variations
associated with hereditary cancers in Indians


The hereditary cancer burden in India is on the rise due to an increase
in awareness of the disease, decrease in the cost of genetic testing and
opportunities for genetic counseling. More and more individuals from high
risk families are undergoing genetic testing to assess their likelihood
of developing the disease. On the other hand, the clinical community is
facing a significant challenge on how to interpret and classify a variant
as disease-causing or benign. This is because a large fraction of the
variants identified in the affected individuals from India have not been
reported in hereditary disease databases such as the Breast cancer
Information Core (BIC), Clinvar and Swissvar. These variants of unknown
significance (VUS) present in individuals from high risk families create
a great deal of uncertainty on clinical follow up and disease management.
We performed a retrospective analysis on more than 300 affected cases of
hereditary ovarian and breast cancer tested at our genomics center in the
last three years. We compiled all the known pathogenic variants and
compared their distribution in the Indian cohort with what has been
reported worldwide. The most prevalent mutation in BRCA1 p.Glu23Valfs*17
(185delAG) was detected at a frequency of 20.34% in line with what has
been found worldwide. In addition, frameshift mutations in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 were most frequently detected in breast and ovarian cancer in line
with previous findings. Additionally, our analysis identified 13 novel
previously unreported and potentially pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes. Variants were also detected in several moderate penetrance
genes such as CHEK2, BARD1 and ATM involved in DNA damage response and in
MSH2 and MSH6 genes regulating epigenetic control through chromatin
modification. In this study, we report novel pathogenic variants in genes
associated with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in the Indian
population.

