Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rational approach for the discovery of inhibitors of NSD2 for
the treatment of multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy which accounts for
approximately 10% of hematologic malignancies. Despite the introduction
of new therapeutic agents, MM remains incurable and nearly all patients
ultimately relapse. About 20% of MM are due to a chromosomal
translocation t(4;14) leading to overexpression of the NSD2 histone
methyltransferase. NSD2 catalyzes dimethylation of lysine 36 on histone
H3 (H3K36me2) and is associated with transcriptionally active regions.
Several studies have shown that in MM harboring the translocation
t(4;14), oncogenic programming is dependent on the methyltransferase
activity of NSD2. Thus, NSD2 inhibitors are potential therapeutics for
this devastating cancerUsing the AlphaLisa technology, we screened
240,000 compounds coming from our proprietary library. The assay was
based on the detection of H3K36me2 on nucleosome by a specific antibody.
False positives hits were removed by a technological counterscreen, and
compounds with redox or metal contamination activity were excluded. For
confirmation purposes, an orthogonal counter-screen based on 3H SAM
incorporation was performed. The IC50 obtained for one of the best
compounds across the AlphaLisa and 3H SAM incorporation are very similar,
showing values of 0.15 M and 0.29 M respectively for compound 1.Binding
affinities measured by MST and SPR for compound 1 were consistent with
the IC50 observed in the biochemical assays KD = 0.19 M for MST and 1.7 M
by SPR. This compound was also shown to be a good binder by NMR (STD),
and further experiments are planned to elucidate the selectivity and MOA
of this series.To our knowledge, no NSD2 inhibitor have been identified
to date despite several screening efforts performed by other groups. We
believe that our hits are promising starting points to generate potent
and selective NSD2 inhibitors.

