Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) and anti-TAAs autoantibodies as biomarkers in immunodiagnosis of
human osteosarcoma by serological proteome analysis


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common highly malignant primary solid
bone-tumor. Despite its relatively low incidence rate among overall
cancers, it remains one of the most harmful primary malignant tumors in
childhood and adolescence. Although some tumor markers like mutant p53
can be potentially used as biomarker to detect OS, the sensitivity and
specificity are not optimal, especially for early diagnosis. The
establishment of a methodology to identify patient with early stage of OS
remains to be investigated. There has been a growing interest in using
serum autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) as
serological cancer biomarkers, which stems from the notion that anti-TAA
antibodies are sensors or reporters of molecular events associated with
tumorigenesis. The objective of this study is to identify and
characterize the targeted TAAs as biomarkers in OS, and further to
analyze the frequency and specificity of autoantibodies in OS patients.
In this initial study, we have tested 35 sera from OS patients, 12 sera
from Osteochondroma (OC) patients and 32 age-matched normal human sera
(NHS), for the presence of autoantibodies to the TAAs from extracted
protein antigens from U2-OS culture cells in 1-D Western blot and by
indirect immunofluorescence (IIF). Autoantibodies were detected in 34 of
35 (97.1%) sera from patients with OS, which were significantly higher
than that in NHS (12.5%, 4/32). In contrast, there is no significate
association between OC and NHS group, which implies that the OS sera may
encompass more specific autoantibodies than OC sera. Interestingly, 35%
(7/20), 25% (5/20), 20% (4/20) and 35% (7/20) OS sera were identified by
1D Western blotting analysis containing antibodies against unknown
cellular protein antigens around 35 kD, 45 kD, 55 kD and 60 kD
respectively. Additionally, no reactivity with the 45 kD and 55 kD
protein was detected in 32 NHS. In the further study, these cellular
proteins targeted by serum antibodies in OS will be identified by using
serological proteome analysis (SERPA) approach. This preliminary data
supports that autoimmune responses to certain cellular proteins maybe a
by-product in the transformation to OS, and further studies of novel
targeted proteins in OS may provide insights into how these proteins
might be involved in malignancy.Key Words: Osteosarcoma (OS),
Tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), Serological proteome analysis (SERPA),
Cancer early detection, Immunodiagnosis

