Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling immunotherapy in ex vivo organ culture of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC)


PD1-PDL1 interaction is one mechanism of tumor evasion of the immune
system, and inhibitors of this interaction can allow cancer cell killing
by cytotoxic T cells. In NSCLC as well as in most other cancers, the
clinical benefit from such inhibitors is far from universal; around 20%
of tumors respond to this treatment. Response of tumors to anti-cancer
agents depends on interactions of epithelial tumor cells and the
microenvironment, including stromal cells such as fibroblasts, immune
cells and extracellular matrix. Studying cell signaling and
drug-sensitivity of cancer should take into consideration the different
compartments of an individual tumor. Regarding immunotherapy,
manipulating regulators of PDL1 expression might augment the activity of
these drugs, or possibly be active as an immunotherapy on its own.
Specifically, little is known about the impact of chemotherapy,
radiotherapy or targeted agents on the expression and activity of the
PD1-PDL1 signaling in human cancer. Combining such treatments with
immunotherapy is a potentially promising approach that is currently
investigated clinically. However, the number of potential combinations is
vast, and no valid and convenient experimental model exists to test
candidate treatments and combinations. Experimental procedures: Ex vivo
organ cultures (EVOC) were directly established from fresh NSCLC tissues,
as a model that recapitulates real tumor and its microenvironment,
including immune cells. Tissue elements were mechanistically dispersed to
cell clumps (30-100 cells per clump), or cut to one cubic mm pieces and
placed in culture. LDH release was used as a surrogate of cell death.
Samples were analyzed by formalin fixation and paraffin embedment,
sectioning and hematoxilin and eosin visualization of cells. PDL1 mRNA
and protein levels were measured by RT-PCR and western blots. Results:
Cell viability of NSCLC EVOC is maintained over a time window of at least
4-7 days. Cytotoxic drugs evoke cell death. PDL1 mRNA and protein levels
are elevated in NSCLC EVOC in response to inflammation signals as
Interferon gamma. Glucocorticoid steroidal drugs causes reduction in PDL1
mRNA and protein in NSCLC EVOC. Cisplatin treatment causes elevation in
PDL1 protein. Variability in basal and induced PDL1 protein levels was
detected in response to inflammation signals in EVOCs generated from
different patients. Conclusions: Our results indicate the feasibility of
EVOC for NSCLC and the potential to use it as a model to study the impact
of immunotherapy agents, alone or in combination with other therapeutic
tools such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy.

