Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG oncogenic activation leads to the endoplasmic reticulum stress
and cell survival mechanisms


Introduction: High levels of the ERG expression due to gene fusions
(predominantly TMPRSS2-ERG) is frequently detected in prostate cancer
(CaP) in Western countries. Better understanding of the roles of the ERG
oncogenic functions in CaP initiation and/or progression will enhance its
utility as the therapeutic target. Transgenic mice generated to
understand role of ERG in the CaP development have shown focal
proliferative and dysplastic PIN lesions and adenocarcinoma in older
mice. The present study was aimed towards understanding the molecular
mechanism underlying the role of ERG in early stages of oncogenic
transformation of prostate epithelium.Methods: Morphological analyses of
mouse prostate glands were performed by H&E staining and by electron
microscopy. Luminal cell surface markers were evaluated by FACS analysis.
Luminal cells were assessed for their potential to proliferate and form
spheres by prostate sphere formation assay. Effects of ERG on ER stress
and UPR marker proteins were analyzed in transgenic mice prostates and
ERG expressing cell culture models. Representative ER stress pathway in
ERG-positive human prostate cancer was analyzed by CPDR-Affymetrix
GeneChip data from well and poorly differentiated tumors.Results:
Histological examination of ERG-Tg mouse prostates revealed increased
luminal cell death due to apoptosis. Subsequently, TEM analysis revealed
significant morphological differences such as increased numbers of
lysosomes, autophagosomes, concentric membrane bodies with ribosomes, and
lipid droplets in the cytoplasm of transgenic secretory luminal
epithelial cells. Epithelial cells of ERG-Tg mouse prostates showed
increase in CD49f (low) and Sca-1 (med) population with increased sphere
formation capability and resistance to induced cell death. ERG-Tg mouse
prostate tissues and LNCaP-ERG transfectants showed increased expression
of ER stress sensors and UPR proteins. Further, in human prostate tumors,
a strong correlation was also observed between expression of the ERG and
P4HB/PDI, an ER stress response protein.Conclusions: A critical of
function of ERG in early prostate tumorigenesis may involve ER stress
resulting into the activation of UPR, autophagy and cell survival through
clonal selection. These observation also define potential new therapeutic
targets in CaP-ERG network.Funding: This research in part was supported
by the National Cancer Institute R01CA162383 (S. S.) and USU-CPDR funds.

