Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK12/13 inhibition cooperates with the Ewing sarcoma oncoprotein
EWS/FLI to attenuate homologous recombination repair in Ewing sarcoma
cells


A therapeutic challenge in pediatric oncology is the paucity of readily
druggable genetic events in many of the childhood malignancies. These
tumors are frequently defined by sentinel abnormalities involving
transcription factors in an otherwise quiet genomic landscape. One
approach to treating these tumors would involve direct targeting of the
aberrant transcription factor; however, this is a drug discovery
challenge. A second approach would be to identify synthetic lethal
relationships in the context of the aberrant transcription factor. THZ1,
a covalent and potent inhibitor of CDK7, CDK12, and CDK13, kinases
involved in transcriptional regulation, recently emerged as a targeted
strategy to impair aberrant transcription. Extensive profiling of THZ1
against a diverse panel of >1,000 cancer cell lines revealed that the
pediatric solid tumor, Ewing sarcoma, was exceptionally sensitive to this
compound. We found that the anti-proliferative effects of THZ1 in Ewing
sarcoma can be attributed primarily to CDK12/13 inhibition. Treatment of
Ewing sarcoma cells with THZ531, a covalent and selective CDK12/13
inhibitor, decreased the phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II, induced apoptosis, and markedly decreased colony formation
capacity of Ewing sarcoma cell lines. In contrast, treatment with a
selective CDK7 inhibitor had minimal effect. EWS/FLI is the transcription
factor fusion protein that typically drives tumor establishment and
maintenance in Ewing sarcoma tumors. Based on prior reports of this
compound class inhibiting a small subset of highly expressed genes
critical to tumor maintenance, we expected that these inhibitors would
disrupt oncogenic EWS/FLI-driven transcription as the mechanism of
inducing cell death. Surprisingly, however, global gene expression
profiling revealed that THZ531 did not selectively repress EWS/FLI or
EWS/FLI target genes. Rather, we observed that THZ531 preferentially
repressed genes involved in DNA damage repair. Consistent with this
finding, we found that THZ531 induced defects in DNA damage repair and
highly synergized with DNA damaging agents that induce lesions repaired
by homologous recombination (HR). Furthermore, we found that suppression
of EWS/FLI attenuated sensitivity to THZ531 and the PARP inhibitor
olaparib and abrogated synergy observed with this drug combination. Thus,
we conclude that EWS/FLI establishes tumor cell synthetic lethality to
CDK12/13 inhibitors by imparting sensitivity to DNA repair defects. This
work establishes a novel mechanism of action of CDK12/13 inhibitors and
gives further credence to the role of EWS/FLI in DNA damage response.
Ongoing work is dedicated to the in vivo testing of THZ1 alone, and in
combination with olaparib, as a novel targeted therapy for the treatment
of Ewing sarcoma.

