Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New models of breast and lung cancer bone metastases for
preclinical efficacy testing


IntroductionClinically, bone is a very common site of metastatic spread
in many cancers. In breast, and in particular cases of advanced estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) cancers, the propensity of bone involvement is
85%. Similarly in lung cancer, 30-40% of patients with advanced disease
develop bone metastases, and as recent advances in lung cancer therapies
improve survival, the number of patients living with bone metastases is
expected to increase. At the same time there is a paucity of especially
ER+ and osteoblastic animal models available for the nonclinical
evaluation of new treatment strategies. We present herein the development
of four mouse models of breast and lung cancer suitable for screening of
new therapies.Experimental proceduresHuman breast cancer cell lines
BT-474 and MFM-223 and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines
NCI-H226luc and NCI-H322 were used. BT-474 is ER+, i.e. luminal B subtype
and MFM-223 is basal subtype with androgen receptor (AR) expression. H226
originates from squamous cell carcinoma and H322 from adenocarcinoma of
the lung. The different cell lines were inoculated in the tibia of female
nude or NOD.scid mice. Half of the BT-474 inoculated mice had a s.c. slow
release 17-beta estradiol pellet implanted. The formation of bone lesions
was monitored by X-ray imaging. For H226 transfected with luciferase,
tumor growth was also followed by bioluminescence imaging (BLI). Finally,
tumor growth and type of bone lesion, i.e. ostelytic or oestoblastic, was
confirmed by histology.ResultsDevelopment of bone lesions was successful
in 100% and 90% of animals, with or without hormonal supplementation
respectively, four weeks after inoculation of BT-474 cells. Bone lesions
were detected earlier in mice with estradiol pellet and were of lytic
type. In contrast, bone lesions in mice without hormonal supplementation
were strongly osteoblastic. For MFM-223, bone lesions were observed 4-6
weeks after inoculation and the success rate was 60% in nude mice and 70%
in NOD.scid mice. For both lung cancer cell lines, 100% of the mice
developed bone lesions and were detectable already two weeks after
inoculation. H226luc cells developed osteoblastic-mixed lesions and H322
cells induced lytic lesions. Very interestingly, H226luc cells also
formed lung metastases in all animals, as evidenced by BLI. Some lung
metastases were also found in H322 inoculated mice.ConclusionsTwo new
osteoblastic models are added to the current scarce selection and
altogether four new bone lesion models representing different subtypes of
breast and lung cancer were successfully established. The different types
of bone reaction in these models offer a platform for studying the
underlying pathways resulting in response to treatment in osteoblastic
vs. osteolytic tumor microenvironment.

