Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4/CDK6 inhibition in childhood B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia:
a new strategy to mediate glucocorticoid sensitivity


Unrestrained cell proliferation and cell cycle deregulation are common
features in almost all human cancers. Among the CDKs that tightly control
cell cycle progression, cyclin D-dependent kinases, CDK4 and CDK6 are
considered important oncogenic drivers in many cancers. Although many
reports successfully described CDK4/CDK6 inhibitors against a broad range
of carcinomas, few studies have been performed on leukemia.Deletion and
methylation of CDK4/CDK6 inhibitor CDKN2A, are frequently observed in
B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) and gene expression analysis
performed in a cohort of childhood patients showed that cyclin D1, CDK4
and CDK6 are highly expressed. Moreover, Reverse Phase Protein Arrays
(RPPA) analysis showed that cyclin D1 expression is higher in High
Risk-MRD patients. These results suggest specific inhibition of cyclin
D/CDK4/CDK6 axis as an attractive strategy to improve the effects of
standard chemotherapy on B-ALL patients.The aim of this study was to
evaluate the effect of dual inhibition of CDK4/CDK6 in B-ALL. To this
purpose we treated two B-ALL dexamethasone resistant cell lines, SEM and
RCH-ACV, and two B-ALL dexamethasone sensitive cell lines, RS4;11 and
NALM6, with ribociclib, a highly specific CDK4/6 inhibitor.As expected,
treatment with ribociclib induced a strong cell cycle arrest in G1 phase
in a time-dose dependent manner along with a dose-dependent decrease in
phosphorylated Rb and increase of the expression of cell cycle inhibitors
p21 and p27. Moreover, a strong dose-dependent reduction of clonogenic
potential was observed in SEM cell line, by CFU assay. No significant
reduction in cell viability was observed.However, ribociclib exposure
strongly synergized (CIUnrestrained cell proliferation and cell cycle
deregulation are common features in almost all human cancers. Among the
CDKs that tightly control cell cycle progression, cyclin D-dependent
kinases, CDK4 and CDK6 are considered important oncogenic drivers in many
cancers. Although many reports successfully described CDK4/CDK6
inhibitors against a broad range of carcinomas, few studies have been
performed on leukemia.Deletion and methylation of CDK4/CDK6 inhibitor
CDKN2A, are frequently observed in B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL)
and gene expression analysis performed in a cohort of childhood patients
showed that cyclin D1, CDK4 and CDK6 are highly expressed. Moreover,
Reverse Phase Protein Arrays (RPPA) analysis showed that cyclin D1
expression is higher in High Risk-MRD patients. These results suggest
specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4/CDK6 axis as an attractive strategy
to improve the effects of standard chemotherapy on B-ALL patients.The aim
of this study was to evaluate the effect of dual inhibition of CDK4/CDK6
in B-ALL. To this purpose we treated two B-ALL dexamethasone resistant
cell lines, SEM and RCH-ACV, and two B-ALL dexamethasone sensitive cell
lines, RS4;11 and NALM6, with ribociclib, a highly specific CDK4/6
inhibitor.As expected, treatment with ribociclib induced a strong cell
cycle arrest in G1 phase in a time-dose dependent manner along with a
dose-dependent decrease in phosphorylated Rb and increase of the
expression of cell cycle inhibitors p21 and p27. Moreover, a strong
dose-dependent reduction of clonogenic potential was observed in SEM cell
line, by CFU assay. No significant reduction in cell viability was
observed.However, ribociclib exposure strongly synergized (CI<1) with
dexamethasone in SEM and RCH-ACV resistant cell lines with a strong
decrease of proliferation and a significant increase of apoptotic cell
death. Immunoblot analysis showed a decrease in phosphorylated Rb, the
activation of caspase-9 and the cleavage of the effector caspase-3
starting from 48 h of co-treatment, in agreement with the appearance of
annexin-V positive cells.The synergistic effect of
ribociclib-dexamethasone combination was confirmed on primary cultures
derived from pediatric patients affected by B-ALL.We are actually
investigating on the mechanism of this synergistic activity, and the
effect of CDK4, CDK6 and cyclin D1 silencing will be presented.
Preliminary experiments show a modest increase in glucocorticoid receptor
expression after ribociclib treatment or CDK6 silencing in RCH-ACV
cells.Our findings support the concept that pharmacologic inhibition of
CDK4/CDK6 may represent a useful therapeutic strategy to control cell
proliferation in B-ALL and provide new insight in understanding potential
mechanisms of glucocorticoid resistance.

