Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune checkpoint inhibition by anti-PD-1 or CD137 co-stimulation
enhances cytotoxicity towards CD30+ tumors mediated by the bispecific
tetravalent CD30/CD16A TandAb AFM13


AFM13 is an NK-cell engaging CD30/CD16A bi-specific tetravalent TandAb
antibody currently in Phase 2 clinical development in Hodgkin Lymphoma
(HL) and CD30+ malignancies. Immune checkpoints inhibitors have
demonstrated clinical efficacy in a variety of cancers, including HL.
NK-cells are also regulated by a number of check-points, prompting us to
investigate the combination of AFM13 with several immuno-modulatory
antibodies. In previous experiments we were able to demonstrate higher
efficacy of AFM13 than several immuno-modulatory antibodies in
monotherapy and strong synergy between AFM13 and an anti-PD-1 antibody in
vitro, as well as in vivo PDX models with human CD30+ HL tumors. In order
to investigate the underlying immunological mechanisms we employed the
same PDX model by implanting tumor fragments derived from surgical
specimens of HL patients in immuno-deficient mice. After establishing
tumors, mice were reconstituted with autologous patient-derived PBMC and
treated with AFM13 alone and in combination with anti-PD-1 weekly for a
total of three weeks. Tumor size, tumor-infiltrating human lymphocytes,
myeloid cells and intra-tumoral cytokines were evaluated on days 30, 44,
and 58, i.e. 2, 16 and 30 days after treatment start. While monotherapy
with AFM13 was reproducibly more potent than anti-PD-1, significant
synergy was observed when both agents were combined. Analysis of the
tumors on day 58 revealed a strong correlation between tumor growth
inhibition and levels of tumor-infiltrating NK-cells, T-cells, myeloid
cells and intra-tumoral cytokines such as IFNg. In contrast to anti-PD-1
monotherapy, which only induced T-cell infiltration, AFM13 monotherapy
was able to induce infiltration of NK- and T-cells in the tumors, however
the combination further enhanced infiltration of both, NK- and T-cells.
AFM13 resulted in stronger infiltration of macrophages than anti-PD-1,
which was also increased by the combination of both agents, therefore
further supporting cross-talk between innate and adaptive immunity.
Furthermore, tumor analyses at earlier time-points (days 30 and 44)
showed that the initial immune response is characterized by NK-cell
infiltration and activation, as well as infiltration of macrophages,
whilst the adaptive immune response by T-cells and activated dendritic
cells was more pronounced on day 58. Combining AFM13 and anti-PD-1
augments infiltration and activation of all immune subpopulations.In
conclusion, our data support strong synergistic anti-tumor efficacy when
AFM13 is combined with anti-PD-1 checkpoint blockade in HL PDX models,
mediated by tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, macrophages and dendritic
cells, and provide strong evidence for cross-talk between innate and
adaptive immunity induced by AFM13-recruited human NK-cells.

