Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imprime PGG synergizes with anti-angiogenic antibodies to
repolarize the immune microenvironment, suppressing xenograft tumor
growth in vivo


Anti-angiogenic antibodies (Ab) such as bevacizumab (VEGF) and
ramucirumab (VEGFR2) suppress tumor growth by disrupting the leaky,
tortuous vasculature characteristic of growing tumors. Recent work now
indicates that these Ab may also promote a shift from an
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment to one more permissive for
immune recognition and tumor eradication. These data suggest that
combining anti-angiogenic Abs with immunotherapies, particularly those
that may also drive repolarization of the immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment, may enhance therapeutic efficacy.Imprime PGG (Imprime)
is a glucan PAMP (Pathogen Associated Molecular Pattern) that has
demonstrated promising efficacy in phase 2 randomized clinical trials
with the bevacizumab (bev)-based therapy. Preclinical mechanistic work
has shown that Imprime can promote repolarization of the suppressive M2
macrophages and MDSCs that typically reside within the tumor
microenvironment. We now show that, when combined with DC101 (murine
anti-VEGFR2 Ab), Imprime significantly enhances the inhibition of H441
human NSCLC xenograft tumor growth in athymic nude mice. Moreover, we
also show that the combination of Imprime plus DC101 promotes a more
pronounced and significant shift in myeloid function than either agent
alone. Specifically, mice treated with Imprime plus DC101 had reduced
numbers of immunosuppressive, splenic MDSCs and an increase in the number
of CD68+F4/80+ cells expressing the critical co-stimulatory marker CD86,
indicating an increase in activated splenic macrophages. Tumor associated
macrophages from these mice also showed significantly increased
expression of CD86. qRT-PCR analyses of these tumor tissues likewise
revealed that the combination specifically elicited a profound shift in
the polarization state of the microenvironment, increasing M1 markers
(TNF, iNOS, IL-6) and decreasing M2 markers (CD206, IL-10, TGF and
CCL22). Similarly, in H1299 NSCLC xenograft-bearing mice, the addition of
Imprime to bev also elicited a profound shift in the polarization state
of myeloid cells. Macrophages and neutrophils from spleen and tumor
tissue of mice treated with the combination showed significant
upregulation of CD86. Moreover, when compared to mice treated only with
bev, splenic MDSCs from Imprime plus bev treated mice showed increased
iNOS expression and reduced Arg-1 expression- a shift typifying the M1
polarization state. These data reveal that the addition of Imprime to
anti-angiogenic Ab therapy prompts a substantial shift in the tumor
immune microenvironment in situ and enhances the efficacy of
anti-angiogenic therapy.

