Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility of surgical orthotopic implantation for establishment
of patient-derived liver metastatic uveal melanoma xenograft model in NSG
mouse


The prognosis of metastatic uveal melanoma (UM) is extremely poor.
Approximately 90% of patients with metastatic UM die from hepatic
metastasis. Controlling hepatic metastases has been a rational approach
to extend survival. This raises an urgent need to develop a novel mouse
model for further investigation. Patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX)
mouse model provides potential benefit through a personalized medicine
approach. This model may be useful for predictions of clinical outcomes,
drug efficacy and biomarker identification. Most PDX models, including UM
PDX models, are made by ectopic subcutaneous implantation. Subcutaneous
PDX models have some obstacles in translational research due to
differences in anatomic microenvironment from tumor origin, low
engraftment rate, and slow tumor growth. Our goal was to develop an
orthotopic PDX model of liver metastatic UM which would overcome these
difficulties.In developing our model, we first compared the differences
in growth in a liver with a subcutaneous site using two UM cell lines
(UM001 and UM004) in NSG mice, to ascertain which site is a more suitable
tumor microenvironment. Second, we investigated the feasibility of
surgical orthotopic implantation (SOI) of tumor masses to develop a
practical liver tumor xenograft mouse model with UM cell lines in 20
mice. Finally, we tried to establish an orthotopic PDX mouse model of
liver metastatic UM in 5 mice. We also evaluated concordance for tumor
characteristics between pre-implant and post-implant tumors.Our results
showed that the liver was a more suitable microenvironment to grow the
two UM cell lines compared to the subcutaneous site. UM001 engrafted in
the liver, whereas it did not engraft in the subcutaneous site. UM004
displayed more rapid growth in the liver compared to the subcutaneous
site. A new SOI of tumor chunk was created to develop a practical liver
tumor xenograft model. Donor tumors, which were generated in the liver
after injecting UM cell lines, were surgically transplanted into the
liver of recipient mice. The new SOI was successfully performed in all 20
mice without adverse events. Recipient mice formed tumors in the liver
after SOI. For comparison, the tumor chunks of UM cell lines were also
implanted subcutaneously, in which we were able to show that the growth
was more rapid in the liver. Both donor and recipient tumors had matching
tumor characteristics in histological and proteomic analysis. We
established an orthotopic PDX mouse model of liver metastatic UM with a
new SOI method. The success rate of engraftment was 80% (4/5) within 6
months. Tumor characteristics of both patient's original tumors and
xenograft mouse tumors matched in histological, genomic and proteomic
analysis.This new SOI method can establish a patient-derived liver
metastatic uveal melanoma xenograft model in NSG mouse at a highly
successful rate.

