Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 protein expression by
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in bladder cancer in vitro


Several types of cancer, including transitional cell carcinoma (TCC)
overexpress several receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), including the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), c-kit receptor,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), as well as the vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR). Receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (RTKIs) are used as targeted therapies for patients diagnosed
with cancer with high expression of RTKs. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is
highly expressed in bladder cancer as well other types of cancers and is
one of the key proteins during tumorigenesis. In this study, we validated
the effects of RTKIs, Masitinib (AB1010) and Axitinib on cell
proliferation of human (UMUC-3 and T24) and canine (K9TCC#1Lillie,
K9TCC#2Dakota, and K9TCC#5Lilly) bladder TCC cells. Using WB analysis,
tested human and canine TCC cells, except T24 cells, expressed PDGFR and
c-kit receptors. There was no detectable EGFR and VEGFR expressions in
any of tested cells by WB analysis. The K9TCC#1Lillie and K9TCC#5Lilly
cells had a high expression of COX-2, however K9TCC#2Dakota and human T24
had moderate expression of COX-2, and no COX-2 expression was detected in
UMUC3 cells by WB analysis. Both RTKIs, Masitinib and Axitinib inhibited
cell proliferation of the tested human and canine bladder TCC cells in a
dose-dependent manner by MTS and apoptosis assays. Interestingly, both
tested RTKIs, Masitinib and Axitinib increased COX-2 protein expressions
in tested canine TCC cells. Combined treatment of RTKIs with COX-2
inhibitors decreased cell proliferation of tested TCC cells more
effectively as either treatments alone. Our results indicate a possible
role of COX-2 signaling pathway in developed RTKIs-resistance in bladder
cancer cells in vitro. Co-treatment of RTKIs with COX-2 inhibitors might
indicate better clinical outcomes in treatments of patients diagnosed
with bladder cancer.

