Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of ABC transporters through HGF/c-MET activation
results in anti-cancer drug resistance in SCLC


Upregulation of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-MET pathway causes drug
resistance to anti-cancer agents such as epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) with
EGFR mutation and cytotoxic agents in small cell lung cancer (SCLC), but
the roles and mechanisms of c-MET in drug-resistant cancer cells are not
clarified. We studied to reveal the role of c-MET overexpression in the
resistant lung cancer cell lines and to demonstrate whether
MET-inhibition could restore drug sensitivity in anti-cancer drug
resistant cell lines via ABC transporters down-regulation. In this study
we used the 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothesin (SN-38)-resistant cell line
(PC-6/SN-38) that was derived from the human SCLC cell line PC-6. We
compared the expression levels of the purposed genes by quantitative
real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and western blotting (WB). MTS
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-
2H-tetrazolium, inner salt) assay was used to measure cell viability of
the resistant cells compared with the parental cells. Inhibition of c-MET
activation was performed by c-MET inhibitors, PHA665752 and Crizotinib or
small interfering RNA against c-MET. We found MET inhibitors (4 or 8M)
reduced cell growth and restored drug sensitivity (2M) of resistant
cells, PC-6/SN38, compared to parental cells. To reveal the mechanisms of
c-MET in drug resistance we examined ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporters expression in PC-6/SN-38 compared to the parental cells by
qRT-PCR, and found the mRNA level of ABCG2, which effluxes SN-38 as
substrate, in PC-6/SN-38 cells was extremely increased and another ABC
transporters that do not efflux SN-38 were not. Recently we reported
PC-6/SN-38 cells had c-MET overexpression, and c-MET inhibition in
resistant cells such PC-6/SN-38 resulted in restoration drug resistance.
Based on this report we examined c-MET inhibition by c-MET inhibitor and
small interfering RNA against c-MET in PC-6/SN38, and qRT-PCR and WB were
performed to investigate alteration of ABCG2 expression, and found both
two c-MET inhibition reduced ABCG2 expression. In addition, to
demonstrate c-MET upregulation in resistant cells is addicted to the
ligand HGF, PC-6 cells were incubated with HGF treated for 3 weeks and
made PC-6/HGF, then continued to incubate with HGF and SN-38 was added
two times in a week. Although c-MET expression is equal in PC-6 and
PC-6/HGF, after SN-38 treatment c-MET was overexpressed. Furthermore,
serum HGF level in SCLC patients correlated with clinical course. We
demonstrated upregulation of ABC transporters via HGF/c-MET signaling
activation might be one of the mechanisms of acquired resistance to
cytotoxic anticancer agents in lung cancer cells. Decreased ABC
transporters expression through inhibition of c-MET activation might
overcome drug resistance to cytotoxic agents.

