Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation mechanism of oncogenic C-helix shifting mutations in
BRAF, EGFR, and HER2


Kinase domain mutations are frequent drivers of many different types of
cancer. While the effect of hotspot point mutations (such as BRAF V600E
or EGFR L858R) is well described, the mechanism of deletion mutations,
such as the recurrent EGFR exon 19 deletions is not fully understood. In
this work, we have discovered and characterized analogous deletions in
BRAF mutant patient samples of varying tumor types, with the highest
frequency (15 patients) in pancreatic cancer representing 5% of KRAS
wildtype patients in this data set. In addition, we have identified
additional patients (3) with similar deletions in HER2 that have been
previously reported at low frequency in breast cancer. The crystal
structure of the most frequent BRAF deletion, molecular modeling of lower
frequency BRAF deletions, and extensive molecular modeling in conjunction
with molecular dynamic simulations of the most frequent EGFR deletion
highlight the commonality of the mechanism of activation of this class of
oncogenic alterations. These deletions truncate the loop between the 3
strand and C-helix (3-C loop) of the kinase domain, forcing C into the
active (in) conformation, and constitutively activating these kinases.
Similar to BRAF V600E mutations, constitutive activity of these BRAF 3-C
deletions is CRAF-independent and dimer-independent. Because these
deletions genetically restrict the flexibility of this region of the
kinase domain, they render these kinases resistant to inhibitors such as
vemurafenib (for BRAF) or lapatinib (for EGFR and HER2) that bind in the
C out conformation. Functional characterization of the full spectrum of
deletion lengths explains the high prevalence of 5 amino acid deletions
in BRAF, EGFR, and HER2 in various cancers, with deletions of this length
resulting in the strongest activation of kinase activity likely due to
the optimal positioning of C. This work exploits the selective power of
oncogenic mutations to highlight a conserved mechanism of kinase
activation and underscores the importance of conformation-specific kinase
inhibitors to target mutationally activated kinases in cancer.

