Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptide probes binding to radiation-inducible cell surface GRP78
as a novel targeting strategy for various tumors


Traditional radiation therapy is often associated with significant
toxicity to normal cells that could limit the success of cancer therapy.
The greater understanding in the molecular differences between cancer
cells and normal cells has lead to targeted therapies in cancer
treatment. We have discovered novel radiation-inducible antigens in
cancer using phage-display peptide libraries. One such inducible-antigen
is Glucose regulated protein 78kDa (GRP78) that was shown to bind the
hexapeptide GIRLRG. GRP78 is known to regulate cellular stresses,
including hypoglycemia, hypoxia and the ER stress response. It is
over-expressed in different cancer subtypes and has been correlated to
their poor prognosis.In this study, we evaluated the cell surface
induction of GRP78 post irradiation (IR) on lung cancer (A549 and LLC),
glioma (D54 and GL261) and endothelial (HUVEC and 3B11) cell lines using
flow cytometry. Significantly higher surface expression of GRP78 was
observed in all cell lines. We determined the specificity of GIRLRG to
bind tumors in vivo using nano SPECT technology. GIRLRG was conjugated to
a 40KDa PEG (for longer circulation time) and radiolabelled with
111Indium (111In) using diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) as
the chelator. The A549 tumor bearing nude mice were irradiated (3Gy x 3
times) or sham irradiated prior to tail vein injections of 111In labeled
GIRLRG. The mice were imaged 48h and 96h post injection using nano
CT-SPECT imager. The SPECT images revealed that GIRLRG specifically bound
to the irradiated A549 tumors while little or no binding was seen in the
sham irradiated tumors. The post-SPECT imaging bio-distrubution also
revealed maximum uptake in irradiated tumors. We further evaluated tumor
binding of GIRLRG in Glioma (D54), esophageal cancer (OE33), cervical
cancer (HT3), and pancreatic cancer (BxPC3). The nano-SPECT imaging
showed that GIRLRG specifically bound to all the irradiated tumors
tested. Phosphor images of the tumor sections showed that GIRLRG
specifically bound to the tumors and not to normal tissues.In conclusion,
GIRLRG peptide has high affinity to GRP78 in vitro and in vivo.
Radiolabeled GIRLRG is a novel tool for imaging tumors and may be
developed further as a therapeutic agent to deliver cancer specific drugs
or therapeutic radioisotopes.

