Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel integration of genomic and morphological information reveals
tumor tissue heterogeneity


Cancer treatment decisions today are predominantly based upon decades-old
histological methods, which more recently have been combined with simple
phenotypic or molecular tests. To advance this paradigm, we have
developed a digital molecular morphology platform that integrates
histological images with next-generation sequencing (NGS) or PCR data.
This allows us to visualize DNA mutations and RNA expression levels
across a histological image, and to correlate mutational or expression
status to cell morphological features. Thus, providing a novel approach
to mapping tumor heterogeneity. The basic approach is to overlay a
microstructure on top of H&E-stained FFPE slides to create a large number
of tissue-bottomed micro-wells, which can be as small as a single cell or
contain clusters of cells. Reagents are added to the micro-wells and
biochemical reactions are carried out and analyzed in place (PCR) or
partially offline (NGS). In the case of NGS, barcodes are used to
reference the resulting sequence back to the tissue image. Software is
then used to analyze and visualize the resulting genetic information in
the context of the original histological image. Our initial work has
focused on FFPE cancer biopsies using targeted cancer genes and gene
panels. Here we demonstrate the use of this approach to measure and
visualize KRAS G12V mutational status in colorectal cancer tissues, using
both PCR and NGS detection modalities. We show that with this method we
are able to efficiently extract DNA from the tissue while maintaining a
leak-proof physical integrity from one micro-well to another. Further, we
are able to PCR-amplify DNA in the micro-wells for direct fluorescence
detection, or to create libraries for sequencing. Detection of KRAS G12V
correlates well with malignant morphological features in the H&E stained
tissue, and appears to present a more sensitive way to detect mutations
than PCR or NGS from bulk FFPE tissue alone. We are currently applying
this technology to a variety of research and clinical applications,
ranging from assessment of tumor heterogeneity and evolution, to
prediction of patient outcome, to post-operative NGS-based
characterization of surgical margins. This integration of cellular and
molecular data promises to more fully enable precision medicine to guide
the course of treatment and improve individual patient outcomes.

