Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sirt2 protein is required for activation of mTOR signaling in
colorectal cancer cells


The human sirtuin proteins (Sirt1-7) possess protein deacetylase
activities and are involved in the regulation of metabolism,
differentiation and cell survival. Sirt2 is upregulated in some cancers;
however, some studies have suggested its role as that of a tumor
suppressor. mTOR regulates many processes that control growth, including
protein synthesis, oxidative metabolism, glucose homeostasis, cell
growth, and lipogenesis. Deptor protein binds mTOR through the PDZ domain
and inhibits mTOR activity. Our previous studies have shown that mTOR is
a central regulator of colorectal cancer (CRC) cell proliferation and
survival. The purpose of this study was to investigate: i) the regulation
of Deptor expression by Sirt2, and ii) the role of Sirt2 protein in mTOR
activation in CRC and normal intestinal cells. METHODS. Human CRC cell
lines, HT29 and Caco-2, the rat normal intestinal cell line, IEC-6, and
the human embryonic kidney cell line, HEK293, were transfected with siRNA
targeting Sirt2 or control nontargeting siRNA. Cells were also infected
with lentiviral vectors containing the control shRNA or shRNA to human
Sirt2; stably expressing cells were selected with puromycin. Sirt2
overexpression was achieved by infecting cells with an adenovirus
encoding Sirt2. Cell proliferation was assessed by counting the number of
viable cells. The expression of Sirt2, Deptor, p-Akt (S473), Akt, p-S6
(S235/236), S6, LC3B, Cyclin D1, c-Myc, and survivin was analyzed by
western blot. Deptor mRNA levels were determined by real time RT-PCR.
RESULTS. Knockdown of Sirt2 inhibited mTOR signaling, decreased
expression of cyclin D1, c-Myc, and survivin, and inhibited CRC cell
growth. In agreement with the inhibition of mTOR activation, knockdown of
Sirt2 significantly increased Deptor mRNA and protein expression in CRC
cells. Conversely, overexpression of Sirt2 decreased Deptor expression
and activated mTOR signaling. Knockdown of Sirt2 increased, while
knockdown of Deptor decreased, the protein expression of LC3B, an
autophagy marker, suggesting Sirt2 inhibition increases autophagy through
induction of Deptor. Knockdown of Sirt2 inhibited HT29 cell
proliferation; this inhibition was enhanced by treatment with 3MA, an
autophagy inhibitor. In contrast, knockdown or overexpression of Sirt2
did not affect either the expression of Deptor or the activation of mTOR
in HEK293 and IEC6 cells, suggesting a differential regulation of
Deptor/mTOR signaling by Sirt2 in CRC and normal intestinal cells.
CONCLUSIONS. We provide evidence that the Sirt2 protein increases mTOR
activity and contributes to CRC cell proliferation. Importantly, our
results indicate a novel role of Sirt2 in the activation of mTOR
signaling in CRC cells but not in normal intestinal cells and suggests
that targeted inhibition of Sirt2 could represent a novel and safe
strategy for the treatment of CRC.

