Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting micelles eradicate acute myeloid leukemia stem cells in
a patient-derived leukemia xenograft model


Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have a very poor prognosis
related to a high rate of recurrence rate drug-related toxicity. The
current standard 7+3 regimen, with cytarabine and an anthracycline such
as daunorubicin (DNR), can achieve complete remission in up to 70-80% of
patients, but the majority of patients ultimately suffer from relapse and
as many as 30% of patients die from drug-related toxicity during
induction therapy. The ability of leukemia stem cells (LSC) to survive
chemotherapy is primarily responsible for relapse, and eliminating LSC is
ultimately essential for cure. The goal of this project is to develop
novel LSC-targeting nanometer-scale micelles, called
disulfide-crosslinked CLL1-targeting micelles (DC-CTM), which can deliver
high concentrations of DNR into both leukemia and leukemia stem cells and
eradicate AML from the very root. In this project, we successfully
synthesized DC-CTM-DNR. The nanoparticles were 17+/- 6 nm in size and had
a payload of 2mg/ml DNR with 100% loading efficiency. DC-CTM were very
stable, while an intracellular reductive agent, Glutathione, could reduce
the disulfide bonds resulting in micelle dissociation after uptake.
Furthermore, using an AML patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model, we
showed that 1 mg/kg DC-CTM-DNR-treated mice had significantly less
leukemia burden in the bone marrow at week 2 and 4 than both DNR- and
PBS-treated mice. Although all mice developed end-stage leukemia by week
8, the DC-CTM-DNR-treated group had significantly smaller
leukemia-infiltrated spleens than the PBS group. We further evaluated the
effect of treatment on LSC in vivo by secondary transplantation of total
bone marrow cells from DNR- and DC-CTM-DNR-treated AML PDX bearing mice
into nave NSG mice. At 8 weeks post secondary transplantation, 100% (7/7)
and 37.5% (3/8) of mice developed leukemia in the bone marrow from the 1
mg/kg DNR- and DC-CTM-DNR-treated groups, respectively. Spleens from
secondary transplant mice in the DC-CTM-DNR group were significantly
smaller than the DNR group indicating less leukemia infiltration.
Collectively, DC-CTM-DNR exhibited superior anti-leukemia efficacy and
could eradicate LSC more effectively than free DNR. Lastly,
pharmacokinetic studies were performed with free DNR and DC-CTM-DNR in
rats. Consistent with previous results, DC-CTM-DNR had a longer T1/2a,
T1/2b, and accumulated under curve area, than free DNR. Toxicology
studies also confirmed that DC-CTM-DNR exhibited a superior toxicity
profile, with significantly less cardiotoxicity. In conclusion, we have
developed a novel LSC-targeting micelle delivery system that can
effectively target AML LSC and bulk leukemia cells with decreased
systemic toxicity. Ultimately, DC-CTM-DNR has the potential to
significantly enhance the complete remission rate and disease-free
survival time and decrease the relapse rate and treatment-related
mortality for patients with AML.

