Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR2 amplification in serous ovarian cancer


Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) signaling pathway plays an
important role in biology of cancer. Approximately 7% of ovarian cancer
(OC) exhibits FGFR1 amplification. Recently the overexpression of FGFR2
was found in 95% of clear cell OC. Up to date there is no data about
FGFR2 status in OC. 54 paraffin-embedded blocks from 18 patients with
serous OC were analyzed by FISH to identify FGFR2 amplification. Scoring
for amplification and polysomy level was adopted from previous studies
for gastric cancer (Su X, et al. BJC 2014). Material from each patient
had 3 samples: from primary tumor, from primary metastatic lesions, and
from relapse. Intratumoral FGFR2 amplification heterogeneity was assessed
in sections from all cases with FGFR2 amplification, and was defined as
the presence of areas with different FISH scores within the same tumor in
full sections.Amplification was observed in 3 patients (15.7%).
Interestingly, in one case amplification was observed in primary ovarian
tumor but not in the metastatic nor in relapse samples. In two other
cases the FGFR2 amplification was detected in relapse samples and in
primary metastatic samples but not in ovary. High-level polysomy (HLP)
was observed in 10 patients (55.5%). In all of those patients HLP was
revealed in the samples of relapse. In 3 patients HLP was found in all 3
samples, in 3 cases HLP was observed only after relapse, in 4 cases HLP
in metastasis sample was the same as in relapse sample, but it wasn't
observed in ovary samples. Eight of 13 FGFR2 amplified ovarian cancers or
tumors with HLP (61.5%) displayed intratumoral heterogeneity within full
sections. In 5 (27.8%) cases neither amplification nor high level
polysomy was observed. In conclusion, this is the first study of FGFR2
FISH in serous ovarian adenocarcinoma, demonstrating a FGFR2
amplification and HLP in primary tumor, primary metastases and relapse.
Furthermore, we found evidence for intratumoral heterogeneity of FGFR2
amplification and HLP in about 61.5% of ovarian cancers. This study was
supported by grant from the Oncoprogress Foundation.
FGFR2 amplification and high-level polysomy in patients with serous
cancer (13 patients)

