Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional studies of the prostaglandin E2 receptor EP4 in ovarian
cancer


Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gynecologic malignancy
in the United States. Most cases of ovarian cancer present in late stages
leading to recurrent disease which is incurable. Few effective targeted
therapies are available to treat ovarian cancer other than non-specific,
toxic chemotherapy. Ovarian cancer is often fatal due to innate or
acquired chemoresistance. Lipid mediators are linked to many pathological
processes including inflammation and cancer. The lipid prostaglandin E2
(PGE2) is synthesized by cyclooxygenases, COX-1 and COX-2, and elevated
expression of COX and increased PGE2 levels are functionally linked to
the progression of many cancers. PGE2 is exported from the cell where it
acts in a paracrine and autocrine manner by activating a family of four
G-protein coupled receptors (EP1-4) which are linked to different
intracellular signaling pathways. EP1 is coupled to calcium mobilization
and PKC; whereas, EP2 and EP4 activate PKA/cAMP, PI3K and ERK pathways.
EP3 generally inhibits cAMP levels. COX-1 has been shown to be
overexpressed in primary ovarian cancer as well as in many ovarian cancer
cell lines. The EP4 receptor is overexpressed and plays a mechanistic
role in various malignancies including breast and colon. Due to toxicity
concerns surrounding global inhibition of the COX enzymes and, in an
effort to identify new targeted therapies for the treatment of ovarian
cancer, our objective was to determine the expression as well as the
functional role of the PGE2 receptor EP4 in ovarian cancer. We
hypothesized that the EP4 receptor is overexpressed in ovarian cancer and
that binding of its cognate ligand, PGE2, will drive ovarian cancer
progression and that inhibition of the EP4-mediated signaling will lead
to inhibition of ovarian cancer growth and metastasis.In order to test
these hypotheses, we analyzed the expression of the EP4 receptor in a
human ovarian cancer tissue microarray (TMA) as well as human ovarian
cancer cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis of EP4 on the TMA
composed of varying histologies, including serous, endometrioid and clear
cell, as well as normal ovarian tissue revealed that EP4 was expressed in
38.7% of ovarian cancer patients; whereas, EP4 was not expressed in the
10 normal ovarian tissue samples. Additionally, in comparison to
immortalized human ovarian surface epithelial (HOSE) cells, EP4 is
overexpressed in many of the cell lines analyzed, including ES-2,
OVCAR-3, COAV-3, SKOV3, OVISE and Kuramochi cells. Treatment of these
cell lines with an EP4 antagonist resulted in decreased proliferation and
migration compared to vehicle control. Consistent with the
pharmacological data, treatment of ovarian cancer cell lines with siRNA
directed against the EP4 receptor lead to decreased proliferation and
migration. Based on these data, targeting of the PGE2 EP4 receptor should
be investigated further for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

