Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing NKD2 by promoter region hypermethylation promotes
esophageal cancer progression by activating Wnt signaling


Background: Despite the use of surgery or chemoradiotherapy to treat,
esophageal cancer, its prognosis still remains poor, with a 5-year
survival below 15%. Recent insights into the epigenetic mechanisms
associated with multi-step carcinogenesis provide new opportunities to
develop novel effective targeted therapies for esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma. Naked cuticle homolog 2 (NKD2) was found frequently methylated
in human breast cancer. The epigenetic changes and mechanisms of NKD2 in
human esophageal cancer remain unclear. Methods: Nine esophageal cancer
cell lines and 154 cases of primary esophageal cancer samples were
analyzed using methylation specific PCR, immunohistochemistry, western
blot, flow cytometry techniques and a xenograft mouse model. Results:
Loss of NKD2 expression and complete methylation were found in KYSE150
and TE1 cells. Reduced expression and partial methylation were observed
in KYSE30, KYSE70, KYSE410, KYSE140 and COLO680 cells. High level
expression and unmethylation were detected in KYSE450 and TE8 cells.
Re-expression of NKD2 was induced by 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine in NKD2
unexpressed or reduced cells. NKD2 was methylated in 53.2% (82/154) of
human primary esophageal cancer samples, and promoter region
hypermethylation was associated with reduced expression of NKD2
significantly (pBackground: Despite the use of surgery or
chemoradiotherapy to treat, esophageal cancer, its prognosis still
remains poor, with a 5-year survival below 15%. Recent insights into the
epigenetic mechanisms associated with multi-step carcinogenesis provide
new opportunities to develop novel effective targeted therapies for
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Naked cuticle homolog 2 (NKD2) was
found frequently methylated in human breast cancer. The epigenetic
changes and mechanisms of NKD2 in human esophageal cancer remain unclear.
Methods: Nine esophageal cancer cell lines and 154 cases of primary
esophageal cancer samples were analyzed using methylation specific PCR,
immunohistochemistry, western blot, flow cytometry techniques and a
xenograft mouse model. Results: Loss of NKD2 expression and complete
methylation were found in KYSE150 and TE1 cells. Reduced expression and
partial methylation were observed in KYSE30, KYSE70, KYSE410, KYSE140 and
COLO680 cells. High level expression and unmethylation were detected in
KYSE450 and TE8 cells. Re-expression of NKD2 was induced by
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine in NKD2 unexpressed or reduced cells. NKD2 was
methylated in 53.2% (82/154) of human primary esophageal cancer samples,
and promoter region hypermethylation was associated with reduced
expression of NKD2 significantly (p<0.01). NKD2 methylation was
associated with TNM stage and lymph node metastasis (pBackground: Despite
the use of surgery or chemoradiotherapy to treat, esophageal cancer, its
prognosis still remains poor, with a 5-year survival below 15%. Recent
insights into the epigenetic mechanisms associated with multi-step
carcinogenesis provide new opportunities to develop novel effective
targeted therapies for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Naked cuticle
homolog 2 (NKD2) was found frequently methylated in human breast cancer.
The epigenetic changes and mechanisms of NKD2 in human esophageal cancer
remain unclear. Methods: Nine esophageal cancer cell lines and 154 cases
of primary esophageal cancer samples were analyzed using methylation
specific PCR, immunohistochemistry, western blot, flow cytometry
techniques and a xenograft mouse model. Results: Loss of NKD2 expression
and complete methylation were found in KYSE150 and TE1 cells. Reduced
expression and partial methylation were observed in KYSE30, KYSE70,
KYSE410, KYSE140 and COLO680 cells. High level expression and
unmethylation were detected in KYSE450 and TE8 cells. Re-expression of
NKD2 was induced by 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine in NKD2 unexpressed or reduced
cells. NKD2 was methylated in 53.2% (82/154) of human primary esophageal
cancer samples, and promoter region hypermethylation was associated with
reduced expression of NKD2 significantly (p<0.01). NKD2 methylation was
associated with TNM stage and lymph node metastasis (p<0.01). The results
suggest that NKD2 is regulated by promoter region methylation and
methylation of NKD2 may serve as a prognostic marker in esophageal
cancer. Our further studies demonstrate that NKD2 suppresses cell
proliferation, colony formation, cell invasion and migration, as well as
induces G1/S check point arrest in esophageal cancer cells. NKD2
suppressed xenograft tumor growth and inhibited Wnt signaling in human
esophageal cancer cells. Conclusions: NKD2 is frequently methylated in
human esophageal cancer, and the expression of NKD2 is regulated by
promoter region methylation. NKD2 suppresses esophageal cancer
progression by inhibiting Wnt signaling both in vitro and in vivo.

