Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Keratin 13 drives the dissemination of bone and brain metastases
of human prostate and breast cancer cells


Introduction and Objective: Bone and brain metastases are prevalent in
human prostate and breast cancer patients. Keratin 13 (KRT13), a member
of the intermediate filament proteins and an epithelial stem cell
differentiation marker, induces cancer cell migration and progression
toward increased malignant state. The objectives of this study are: 1) to
determine KRT13 expression in human prostate and breast cancer and its
clinical correlation; 2) to determine the functional cell signaling role
of KRT13 in prostate and breast cancer cells using gene transfer
technology.Methods and Results: We evaluated KRT13 protein expression in
primary prostate cancer tissues from 44 cases with well-documented
overall survival by quantitative quantum dot immuno-labelling. We found
that KRT13 expression in primary prostate cancer correlated with patient
overall survival and bone metastasis (pIntroduction and Objective: Bone
and brain metastases are prevalent in human prostate and breast cancer
patients. Keratin 13 (KRT13), a member of the intermediate filament
proteins and an epithelial stem cell differentiation marker, induces
cancer cell migration and progression toward increased malignant state.
The objectives of this study are: 1) to determine KRT13 expression in
human prostate and breast cancer and its clinical correlation; 2) to
determine the functional cell signaling role of KRT13 in prostate and
breast cancer cells using gene transfer technology.Methods and Results:
We evaluated KRT13 protein expression in primary prostate cancer tissues
from 44 cases with well-documented overall survival by quantitative
quantum dot immuno-labelling. We found that KRT13 expression in primary
prostate cancer correlated with patient overall survival and bone
metastasis (p<0.05). We next evaluated KRT13 protein expression in 36
prostate and 58 breast cancer tissue specimens by immunohistochesmistry
(IHC) and found that KRT13 is overexpressed in breast cancer bone (5/8)
and brain (7/10) metastases and prostate cancer bone (6/12) metastasis
specimens (pIntroduction and Objective: Bone and brain metastases are
prevalent in human prostate and breast cancer patients. Keratin 13
(KRT13), a member of the intermediate filament proteins and an epithelial
stem cell differentiation marker, induces cancer cell migration and
progression toward increased malignant state. The objectives of this
study are: 1) to determine KRT13 expression in human prostate and breast
cancer and its clinical correlation; 2) to determine the functional cell
signaling role of KRT13 in prostate and breast cancer cells using gene
transfer technology.Methods and Results: We evaluated KRT13 protein
expression in primary prostate cancer tissues from 44 cases with
well-documented overall survival by quantitative quantum dot
immuno-labelling. We found that KRT13 expression in primary prostate
cancer correlated with patient overall survival and bone metastasis
(p<0.05). We next evaluated KRT13 protein expression in 36 prostate and
58 breast cancer tissue specimens by immunohistochesmistry (IHC) and
found that KRT13 is overexpressed in breast cancer bone (5/8) and brain
(7/10) metastases and prostate cancer bone (6/12) metastasis specimens
(p<0.05). KRT13 expression in primary prostate and breast cancer
specimens is associated with decreased patient overall survival based on
our data as well as publicly available Oncomine gene expression datasets.
To elucidate the mechanisms by which KRT13 promotes cancer invasion,
migration and metastasis, we genetically overexpressed KRT13 in human
prostate CWR22 Rv1 and LNCaP, and human breast MCF7 and MCF10A cells,
with respectively high or low malignant potential. KRT13-overexpressing
prostate and breast cancer cells increase differential expression of
genes associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT;
E-Cadherin and Vimentin), stemness (Nanog), neuromimicry (Chromagranin A
and Synaptophysin), osteomimicry (RANKL) related genes as analyzed by
qRT-PCR, western blot, and IHC. KRT13 also promotes increased cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro, and bone and brain
metastases in vivo.Conclusion: These results suggest that KRT13 drives
prostate and breast cancer bone and brain metastases via osteomimicry and
neuromimicry associated genes resulting in downstream cell signaling
network convergence between EMT, stemness, cell growth, and survival
pathways.Funded in part by NCI-P01-CA098912

