Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer therapy using polyion micelles co-loaded with
cyclopamine and paclitaxel


Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is an important regulator during
the initiation and progression of pancreatic cancer, and sustained
activation of this pathway contributes to excessive deposition of tumor
stroma and maintenance of tumor-initiating cells. Cyclopamine, a potent
inhibitor of the SHH pathway, has shown promising antitumor efficacy.
However, cyclopamine is insoluble in water and is highly toxic, and
cyclopamine monotherapy did not effectively inhibit tumor growth in a
range of preclinical pancreatic cancer models. We hypothesized that
polyion complex polymeric micelles that simultaneously deliver
cyclopamine and paclitaxel (M-CPA/PTX) would display greater efficacy
against pancreatic tumor than micelles loaded with cyclopamine alone
(M-CPA) or paclitaxel alone (M-PTX). We tested this hypothesis in cell
cultures and in an orthotopic human pancreatic cancer Miapaca-2 xenograft
model and a genetically engineered mouse model of pancreatic ductal
carcinoma (PDAC), the KPC model. Our results showed that M-CPA
interrupted the SHH pathway by antagonizing the smoothened receptor,
reduced expression of Gli-1 transcription factor, and inhibited
proliferation of Miapaca-2 cells and stroma-producing human pancreatic
stellate cells. In Miapaca-2 cells, M-CPA decreased the fraction of
CD133+ cells (cancer stem cells) and decreased tumorsphere formation,
whereas M-TXL increased the fraction of CD133+ cells and tumorsphere
formation. M-CPA negated the stimulation of human pancreatic stellate
cells by exogenous SHH ligands. In vivo, M-CPA/PTX reduced tumor cell
proliferation, depleted tumor stroma, and increased tumor vasculature
density, leading to effective inhibition of tumor growth in Miapaca-2
xenografts. In the KPC model, M-CPA/PTX significantly prolonged media
survival of mice with PDAC compared to non-treatment control mice. In
conclusion, M-CPA/PTX was an effective strategy to treat pancreatic
cancer. (supported in part by the Viragh Family Foundation and the John
S. Dunn Foundation)

