Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking Ezrin can inhibit HGF/Met signaling-induced metastasis


Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF) binds its receptor Met and induces
autophosphorylation of MET, which in turn activate appropriate signaling
pathways. Aberrant HGF/Met signaling promotes tumor progression by
facilitating cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and metastasis.
Previously, we found that constitutive HGF/Met signaling promotes
melanoma metastasis through a nonautocrine mechanism in engineered mouse
models (Cancer Res, 2002); however, the molecular mechanisms by
downstream of HGF/Met signaling that induce metastasis are not known. We
recently identified the cytoskeletal organizer Ezrin as a key metastatic
regulator using an HGF transgenic mouse model (Nature Medicine, 2004),
implicating Ezrin is in HGF/Met signaling-induced metastasis. We
hypothesize that HGF/Met signaling promotes metastasis by regulating
expression of Ezrin. To test hypothesis, we are: 1) evaluating the
relationship between ezrin expression and HGF/Met signaling; 2)
validating the role of Ezrin in HGF/Met signaling -induced metastasis; 3)
elaborating mechanisms underlying this HGF/Met signaling-mediated
regulation of Ezrin expression; 4) evaluating the clinical therapeutic
utility of blockage of Ezrin function in preclinical mouse models. We
found that HGF is able to stimulate the expression of Ezrin. Moreover,
analysis of the established model systems with HGF and Met alone or HGF
with Met demonstrated that Ezrin expression correlated with activated
HGF/Met signaling, suggesting that HGF/Met signaling regulates the
expression of Ezrin. Interestingly, we showed that HGF/Met signaling
could activate transcription factor Sp1 through the MAPK pathway. We
further found that activated Sp1 could directly bind to the promoter of
the Ezrin gene and regulate the transcription of Ezrin. Notably,
knockdown of Ezrin expression by shRNAs inhibited the metastasis induced
by both HGF/Met autocrine and notautocrine signaling in syngeneic host
and HGF GEM hosts. We also used small molecule drugs in preclinical mouse
models to confirm that Ezrin is at least one of downstream molecules
mediating HGF/Met signaling-induced metastasis in melanoma. We conclude
that Ezrin is a key downstream substrate involved in the regulation of
HGF/Met signaling-induced metastasis. We demonstrate a link between Ezrin
and HGF/Met/MAPK/Sp1 activation in the metastatic process. Our data
indicate that Ezrin represents a promising therapeutic target for
patients with activated HGF/Met signaling.

