Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying causal risk factors of metabolic syndrome for renal
cell carcinoma. A Mendelian randomization approach


Epidemiological studies have convincingly demonstrated that several
factors of the metabolic syndrome (MetS) are associated with the risk of
Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC)These factors often occur together and it is
therefore challenging to disentangle their individual causal relevance in
the etiology of RCC. In order to circumvent this limitation, we have
applied a Mendelian randomization (MR) approach whereby genetic markers
are evaluated in relation to RCC risk as unconfounded markers of the
individual MetS factors.We focused on MetS parameters from which genetic
instruments could be identified from large-scale genome-wide association
studies (GWAS). The following MetS factors were instrumented using
multiple gene-variants: general and central obesity (body mass index
(BMI) and waist-to-hip ratio), elevated blood pressure (systolic and
diastolic blood pressure), dyslipidemia (high and low density
cholesterol, total cholesterol, and triglycerides), hyperglycemia
(fasting glucose and glucose levels at 2 hours after glucose intolerance
tests), and hyperinsulinemia (fasting insulin). Genetic proxies for these
parameters were identified from GIANT, ICBP, GLGC and MAGIC
Consortia.Summary statistics on RCC risk for instrumental SNPs of each
MetS factor, including OR estimates and standard errors, were available
from GWAS coordinated by the International Agency for Research on Cancer,
the US National Cancer Institute, the Institute for Cancer Research UK,
and the MD Anderson Cancer Center US. Together these studies comprised a
total of 12,104 RCC cases and 24,999 controls from European origin that
were genotyped using different genotyping platforms. Imputation was
conducted on each dataset and only SNPs with an imputation quality higher
than 0.6 were considered for the analyses. The causal effect of each MetS
parameter on RCC risk was subsequently estimated using the MR
likelihood-based approach, assuming a linear relationship between the
risk factor and the outcome and a bivariate normal distribution for the
genetic association estimates.The MR risk analysis using genetic
instruments of the individual MetS factors indicated that elevated BMI
(P: 110-08) and fasting insulin (P: 710-04)increased the risk of RCC,
whereas elevated post-load glucose levels were associated with a lower
risk (P: 210-3). The odds ratio per standard deviation increase were
estimated at 1.58 (95% CI: 1.35-1.86) for BMI, 1.77 (95%CI: 1.27-2.46)
for fasting insulin, and 0.62 (95%CI: 0.46-0.83) for post-load glucose.
No associations were seen for genetic instruments of blood pressure or
lipids.These results provide a clear support for a causal role of obesity
in RCC etiology, and suggest that factors related to hyperglycemia and/or
hyperinsulinemia may be involved in the causal pathway. This study may
guide future efforts aiming to clarify the biological mechanisms whereby
the metabolic syndrome influences RCC pathogenesis.

