Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of transcriptomic and metabolomic data reveals a
central role for EGR1 in regulating survival and cellular metabolism in
endocrine-resistant breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women. About 70%
of all breast cancers are estrogen receptor alpha positive (ER+) and are
treated with antiestrogens. However, endocrine resistance is prevalent in
the clinic and the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. MYC is
overexpressed in endocrine resistant ER+ breast cancers, which suggests
that the metabolomic profile of endocrine resistant breast cancers may
contain features that are distinct from sensitive cells. We integrated
data from transcriptomics and metabolomics analysis of ER+ MCF7-derived
breast cancer cells that are antiestrogen sensitive (LCC1) or resistant
(LCC9; resistant to ICI182,780). To validate our model, we tested a
gene-metabolite network associated with EGR1 (early growth response 1),
which was significantly higher in LCC1 cells compared with LCC9 cells. In
ER+ human breast tumors treated with endocrine therapy, higher EGR1
expression was associated with a more favorable prognosis. In both LCC1
and LCC9 cell lines, compared to respective controls, knockdown of EGR1
decreased cell proliferation, ER and MYC protein levels while
overexpression of EGR1 did not change these. Comparison of metabolite
profiles in LCC9 cells following knockdown or overexpression of EGR1
showed interruption of several biochemical pathways such as glycolysis,
lipid metabolism, glutathione, and polyamine metabolism. Treatment with
tolfenamic acid (TOL), a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
known to target EGR1, decreased EGR1 protein levels and had an additive
effect with ICI182,780 in inhibiting cell proliferation in LCC9 cells.
Collectively, these findings indicate that down-regulated EGR1 is an
important regulator of the aberrant cellular metabolic pathways specific
to endocrine resistance, and targeting EGR1 may be an effective
therapeutic approach in inhibiting growth of these tumors. Furthermore,
high levels of EGR1 may serve as a favorable prognostic marker in some
endocrine resistant tumors.

