Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) as an alternative to tumor biopsies
for precision oncology: The Jules Bordet Institute experience


BackgroundIn the era of precision medicine, data obtained from sequencing
the cancer genome of a patient can be integrated into clinical
decision-making. Liquid biopsy using ctDNA is a non-invasive tool, which
can circumvent unfeasible or unrepresentative tumor biopsies and allow
continuous monitoring of the disease thereby contributing to rational
drug delivery.Experimental proceduresPrecision-f is a feasibility
molecular screening study that enrolled 34 patients with metastatic
melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and colorectal cancer (CRC).
Results from targeted gene sequencing (TGS) of metastatic biopsies were
presented at AACR 2015. The patients had a blood draw concomitantly with
the metastatic biopsy for plasma isolation. Similar to biopsies, somatic
mutations (substitutions, small insertions and deletions) were assessed
using the Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2, designed to amplify 207
amplicons covering 2800 COSMIC mutations from the 50 most commonly
reported oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes with a sensitivity of 1%.
All mutations identified in the biopsy and/or plasma samples using TGS
are currently being validated using Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR)
technology.ResultsEvaluable ctDNA-derived sequencing data were available
for 32 patients. The sequencing results between biopsies and plasma were
fully concordant in 63% (20/32) of the patients. TGS of ctDNA failed to
detect clinically relevant mutations (EGFR, PIK3CA, KRAS and BRAF)
identified in the metastatic biopsies in 19% (6/32) of the patients. In
contrast, biologically relevant mutations (STK11, KRAS, PIK3CA and SMO)
not detected in tumor biopsies were found in the ctDNA in 9% (3/32) of
the patients. Interestingly, in one CRC patient a KRAS G13D mutation
still potentially associated with benefit to anti-EGFR therapy was
detected only in the tumor biopsy whereas a KRAS A146T mutation mediating
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy was detected solely in ctDNA. Tumor
biopsies and plasma are currently being tested using ddPCR to validate
the findings. The results of these analyses will be presented at the
meeting.ConclusionAlthough technical challenges remain, ctDNA profiling
appears to be a promising tool for precision oncology by allowing the
identification of genomic alterations associated with drug resistance and
tumor progression.

