Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDA-9/Syntenin (SDCBP) promotes self renewal and malignancy in
cancer stem cells


Cancer metastasis is a complex process that culminates in the majority of
patient deaths. A key component of the cancer paradigm involves cancer
stem cells (CSCs), the primary mediators of cancer progression,
resistance to therapy and recurrence of cancer after remission/latency.
Although the clinical significance of CSCs is well accepted, the key
upstream regulatory mechanisms that define these unique subsets of cancer
cells requires further clarification. Previous studies demonstrate that
MDA-9/Syntenin or syndecan binding protein (SDCBP) levels are elevated in
large spectrum of tumors, including melanoma, breast carcinoma, gastric
carcinoma and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), versus normal cellular
counterparts. We now uncover a unique function of MDA-9 as a facilitator
of cancer stemness and survival.Expression profiles of mda-9, Nanog,
Oct4, Sox2 and c-myc were studied in different clinical samples and cell
lines for correlations. Cells were sorted by FACS into stem and non-stem
populations and the same genes were assayed for correlative expression.
Stemness gene expression array profile analysis was performed on control
and mda-9 silenced CSCs. Genetic (gain-of-function, loss-of-function)
approaches were used to modify mda-9 expression in normal human
astrocytes and prostate cells, non-stem cancer cells (NSCCs) and CSCs
from breast prostate and GBM. Recovery-of-function approaches were also
applied to elucidate the pathways responsible for MDA-9-mediated
regulation of CSCs. The impact of MDA-9 on CSC-mediated tumorigenicity
and progression was evaluated in vivo by intracranial glioma and
subcutaneous xenograft mice models. Apoptosis was assayed by caspase
activation and Annexin V staining.A positive and statistically
significant correlation was observed between mda-9 and stemness
regulating genes (Nanog, Oct4, Sox2 and c-myc), in 50 clinical samples
and 3 cell culture systems, including breast, prostate and GBM. CSCs
expressed elevated levels of mda-9 vs. non-stem cancer cells or normal
stem cells from a total of 11 cell lines including breast, prostate and
GBM and two clinical GBM samples. Over-expression of mda-9 in NSCCs
increased populations of CSCs as well as expression of stemness
regulating genes. Loss of MDA-9 affected 84 genes linked to CSC
regulation. Control intracranial glioma xenograft mouse models had large
tumors with spongioblastic morphology typical of human gliomas, whereas
the loss of mda-9 caused a large decrease in tumor size. Mechanistically,
MDA-9 regulated multiple stemness genes and knockdown of MDA-9 caused a
loss of stemness and tumorigenicity with initiation of apoptosis.Our data
uncover a previously unidentified relationship between MDA-9 and CSCs.
CSCs appear more dependent on MDA-9 expression than normal stem cells.
MDA-9 regulates CSCs on multiple levels of stemness and survival,
reinforcing the relevance of this gene as a potential therapeutic target.

