Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling cancer driver-like events in barrier bypass-clonal
expansion in vitro assays


BACKGROUND Cancer genomes harbor mutational spectra that document
exposures to external factors and endogenous events underlying tumor
development. Information on candidate cancer driver alterations is
accessible from public compendia of somatic mutations, yet much of this
knowledge remains descriptive and of limited mechanistic insight. Simple,
robust and rapid systems are thus needed for well-controlled experimental
investigations of functional impact of carcinogenic exposures on the
genome and on cancer cell growth.METHODS We use barrier bypass-clonal
expansion (BBCE) assays based on primary human and murine cell cultures,
in which mutations are introduced by mutagenic carcinogens and examined
by deep sequencing, after the exposed cells have bypassed a selective
pressure barrier and have clonally immortalized. A customized deep
sequencing data analysis pipeline is used to decipher both the mutational
signatures and the putative functional driver events selected and
enriched for during the clonal outgrowth phase.RESULTS Using the BBCE
assays, we tested the global mutagenic effects of a number of known human
carcinogens. We obtained 25 independently arising clones, altogether
harboring 15,200 acquired mutations, with varying numbers per clone, of
which 7,600 were non-synonymous. These affected 250 genes currently
listed in the COSMIC Cancer Gene Census. Eighty-four genes were
recurrently mutated across the BBCE clone panel, including
well-established oncogenes (HRAS, ABL1, EGFR, MYC, PIK3CG) and tumor
suppressors (APC, ATM, BRCA2, PTCH1, TP53). A number of epigenetic and
chromatin regulators also acquired recurrent mutations, among them ASH1L,
BAZ1A, BAZ1B, EP400, HDAC6, and members of histone lysine demethylase and
methyltransferase families. Collectively, the recurrent alterations
affected pathways regulating DNA damage response, DNA repair, cell cycle,
cell death, transcription and chromatin structure, and developmental
pathways of TGF-beta, Notch, WNT and ERBB signaling. Thus, as in human
cancers, mutations driving critical steps of cellular stress bypass and
clonal immortalization arise and become selected for when these processes
are modeled in vitro.CONCLUSIONS The BBCE assays constitute a unique
resource amenable to follow-up functional studies of particular mutations
in cancer genes. Data will be presented describing systematic genome
editing and pharmacological manipulation of select mutated genes,
followed by assessment of resulting phenotypic and molecular traits. In
summary, our BBCE approach may yield new mechanistic insights into
driver-like events underlying cancer development.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Funding
from International Agency for Research on Cancer; ITMO CANCER-INSERM Plan
Cancer 2015 grant to J.Z.

