Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer immunotherapy: Could TK1 be used as a target for colon
cancer


The aim of this study is to determine whether Thymidine Kinase 1 (TK1)
would be a suitable target for future immunotherapeutic treatment of
colon cancer. The salvage pathway enzyme TK1 has been shown to be
upregulated in cancer patients due to active proliferation of cancer
cells and the resulting high demand for nucleotides. Present in both the
cytosol and the serum of cancer patients, TK1 levels can be used to not
only predict cancer occurrence, but also to predict tumor aggressiveness
and future remission. While serum levels of TK1 have been established,
surface expression of the enzyme have not been fully characterized. In
colon cancer cells, TK1 has been shown to strongly associate with the
plasma membrane. In this project we explored the presence of TK1 on the
surface of colon cancer cells (HT29 and SW620 cell lines) using flow
cytometry, confocal microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, membrane
separation, and cytoplasmic staining. Using fluorescent antibodies
conjugated to FITC, expression levels as high as 19% are observed in
HT29's and 12% in SW620's in comparison to sodium potassium ATPase
surface levels of 11% and 6% respectively. Confocal microscopy images
revealed direct overlap between cells stained with a rhodamine red
membrane dye and with a FITC conjugated anti-TK1 antibody which indicates
a direct relationship between TK1 and the cellular surface of cancer
cells. To further confirm surface expression, TK1 levels were assessed
using gold labeling and scanning electron microscopy. Gold levels
indicate the physical location of the TK1 on the surface of the colon
cancer cells and their relative abundance. TK1 surface levels in colon
cancer cells corresponded with the surface expression levels of sodium
potassium ATPase and share relatively the same abundance. These results
strongly indicate a direct relationship between TK1 and the surface of
colon cancer cells, and suggests TK1 as a potential target for future
immunotherapeutic treatment.

