Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using an integrated gene-based sequence kernel association test
(intSKAT) to identify subtype specific single nucleotide variants in
glioma


One of the challenges for genome-wide association analyses is that the
effect directions and allele frequencies (e.g., rare, common, or
combination of them) of true causal variants are unknown. Built on a
family of powerful approaches, sequence kernel association test (SKAT),
we have devised a gene-based omnibus approach, integrated-SKAT (intSKAT)
to perform association tests using next-generation sequence data. This
includes a suite of 12 methods: Burden test, SKAT, SKAT-O, SKAT-C
(Combined sum test of rare- and common-variant effects), SKAT-A (Adaptive
sum test), SKAT-AR, three methods weighted by functional scores, and
three rare-variant only methods. This expansive set allows the
flexibility to detect the potential combination of different allele
frequencies, effect directions, and/or (lack of) functional predictions.
Minimum FDR was used to adjust for multiple comparison across methods. We
applied intSKAT to investigate sub-type specific susceptibility loci
between low-grade glioma (LGG) and glioblastoma (GBM) as proof of
principle. We downloaded germline exome sequence data (N = 612) from
TCGA, and aligned the sequence reads using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner
(BWA). Insertion/deletion realignment, quality score recalibration, and
variant identification were performed with the Genome Analysis ToolKit
(GATK). We used 80% SNV call rate for quality control. Following
Principal Component Analysis, data for 544 Caucasian subjects were
included in analysis. A total of 224K SNVs in 18,053 genes were studied.
Ten genes were significantly associated with glioma subtypes (minFDR of
10%). Among these genes, a total of 9 significant SNVs with predicted
possible damaging functions were identified in 6 genes, ATP5O, CKAP2L,
SORBS1, STK19, VPS13B, and ZCCHC4. Five of the genes are significantly
differentially expressed between LGG and GBM (all pOne of the challenges
for genome-wide association analyses is that the effect directions and
allele frequencies (e.g., rare, common, or combination of them) of true
causal variants are unknown. Built on a family of powerful approaches,
sequence kernel association test (SKAT), we have devised a gene-based
omnibus approach, integrated-SKAT (intSKAT) to perform association tests
using next-generation sequence data. This includes a suite of 12 methods:
Burden test, SKAT, SKAT-O, SKAT-C (Combined sum test of rare- and
common-variant effects), SKAT-A (Adaptive sum test), SKAT-AR, three
methods weighted by functional scores, and three rare-variant only
methods. This expansive set allows the flexibility to detect the
potential combination of different allele frequencies, effect directions,
and/or (lack of) functional predictions. Minimum FDR was used to adjust
for multiple comparison across methods. We applied intSKAT to investigate
sub-type specific susceptibility loci between low-grade glioma (LGG) and
glioblastoma (GBM) as proof of principle. We downloaded germline exome
sequence data (N = 612) from TCGA, and aligned the sequence reads using
the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA). Insertion/deletion realignment,
quality score recalibration, and variant identification were performed
with the Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK). We used 80% SNV call rate for
quality control. Following Principal Component Analysis, data for 544
Caucasian subjects were included in analysis. A total of 224K SNVs in
18,053 genes were studied. Ten genes were significantly associated with
glioma subtypes (minFDR of 10%). Among these genes, a total of 9
significant SNVs with predicted possible damaging functions were
identified in 6 genes, ATP5O, CKAP2L, SORBS1, STK19, VPS13B, and ZCCHC4.
Five of the genes are significantly differentially expressed between LGG
and GBM (all p<1.0210-3), and consistently supported by both microarray
and RNAseq platforms, with the only exception of ZCCHC4. Three of the
significant genes, which would not have been identified using SNV-level
univariate analyses, are CALML6, FGF22, and GRIN1. Weighted-SKAT was
effective to identify genes with both deleterious and protective
variants. Weighted-Burden test was powerful to detect genes with
deleterious variants with predicted function. These findings demonstrate
the power of our proposed gene-based method.

