Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical pharmacology and repeated dose toxicity of the novel
agonistic TWEAK receptor binding antibody BAY-356


TWEAK receptor (TWEAKR, FN14) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor
receptor superfamiliy and is highly expressed in a variety of human solid
tumor types, and its overexpression is associated with poor prognosis and
metastasis. To explore targeting of TWEAKR for cancer therapy we have
generated the novel, anti-TWEAKR antibody BAY-356. Its potent agonistic
activity leads to TWEAKR hyperactivation and subsequent induction of cell
death in vitro and tumor growth inhibition in vivo.BAY-356 is a fully
human aglycosylated antibody (Kd 10nM) that binds to a novel epitope
within the TWEAKR ectodomain of various species as determined by BiaCore.
In vitro, BAY-356 showed strong agonistic activity on TWEAKR-positive
tumor cells, including activation of NFB- and STAT1 pathways, increase of
TWEAKR protein expression, increased IL-8 secretion, caspase 3/7
activation, and proliferation inhibition in a dose-dependent manner.
BAY-356 inhibited tumor growth in several TWEAKR-positive tumor models
(NCI-H1975, WiDr, ScaBER, and HN10321) with growth inhibition rates of
49-71% when treated with 3-10 mg/kg BAY-356 twice weekly for up to 3
weeks. The activity of BAY-356 was independent of ADCC activation. In a
preventative syngeneic CT26-tumor model in Balb/c mice, BAY-356 induced
complete responses. Anti-tumor activity of BAY-356 was associated with
high tumor levels of TNF alpha protein.To investigate the toxicity of
BAY-356, a repeated dose-toxicity study was performed in Cynomolgus
monkeys. Animals were dosed with 10, 20, and 40 mg/kg by weekly
intravenous injection for 4 weeks. Compound-related clinical findings
consisted of an increase of the serum markers amylase and lipase from 10
mg/kg onwards, urea and creatinine from 20 mg/kg onwards and the
transaminases ALT and GDPH at 40 mg/kg. Histopathological evaluation
revealed focal ductular epithelial hyperplasia with periductular fibrosis
in the exocrine pancreas (at 10 & 20 mg/kg), renal tubular hyperplasia
and degeneration, Bowman capsule hyperplasia, and glomerulosclerosis in
the kidney starting at 10 mg/kg and bile duct hyperplasia in liver at 20
mg/kg and higher. The HNSTD was set as the highest tested dose of 40
mg/kg. Immunohistochemical analysis of TWEAKR expression in these organs
demonstrated a dose dependent induction and increase when compared to
untreated controls which correlated with the histopathological
findings.From these data it can be concluded that hyperactivation of
TWEAKR signaling by BAY-356 leading to strong anti-tumor efficacy in
various mouse models is invariably accompanied by target-mediated
side-effects originating from enhanced TWEAKR induction in in particular
in kidneys, pancreas, and liver of sensitive species such as Cynomolgus
monkeys.

