Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro characterization of PTAU and FU interactions in colon
cancer cells


Background: Fluorouracil (FU) remains a main anticancer therapy for
colorectal cancer (CRC) and other solid tumors. The mechanism of action
of FU is associated with inhibition of thymidylate synthase (TS) and
incorporation of its metabolites into RNA and DNA. High toxicity and
wide-spread chemoresistance, however, have limited the utilization of
FU-based therapies. Five intracellular enzymes, thymidylate synthase
(TS), dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase (MTHFR), thymidine phosphorylase (TP), and uridine
phosphorylase (UP) are key determinants of FU sensitivity or resistance.
Combination therapies aimed at improving the bioavailability of FU and
reducing host toxicity has been evaluated. Recently, our group developed
a new uridine phosphorylase inhibitor, 5-phenylthio-acyclouridine (PTAU)
that has shown promise in reducing host toxicity and increasing FU
efficacy in vivo. The current studies were to characterize interactions
of PTAU and FU in vitro and to assess its effects on key metabolic
enzymes in human colon cancer cells. Hypothesis: We hypothesized that
inhibition of uridine phosphorylase by PTAU would ameliorate the toxic
effects of FU and enhance its efficacy by permitting increased doses of
FU. Methods: Three colon cancer cell lines with differing p53 status,
HCT116-p53wt (wild-type), HCT116-p53null, and HT-29 (p53-mutant); and a
normal colonic epithelial cell line, CRL-1790, were used. Doubling times
were determined, and IC50 values for FU were derived from kill curves
using MTT assay. Cells were treated for 72 hours with IC50 doses of FU,
PTAU (100 M) or uridine (25 M), alone or in combination, or with the
solvent, DMSO. mRNA levels for DPD, TS, TP, and UP were quantitated by
qRT-PCR; for intracellular protein expression, cells were fixed and
stained with monoclonal antibodies and analyzed by flow cytometry.
Results: FU sensitivity correlated with cell doubling times. Basal
expression of FU metabolic enzymes differed between CRC and normal cells.
mRNAs for DPD and UP were higher in normal relative to cancer cells, but
TS mRNA was higher in cancer cells. FU treatment upregulated mRNA
expression of DPD, UP, and TS in cancer cells but not in normal cells.
Only in cancer cells, DPD induction by FU was potentiated by PTAU. In
contrast, treatment with FU decreased protein levels of DPD, TP, and TS
in cancer cells. PTAU induced TS protein expression in cancer cells, an
effect that was reduced by co-treatment with FU. Conclusions: FU induces
mRNA levels of DPD, UP, and TS in cancer cell lines, but protein levels
are reduced; the discrepancy between mRNA and protein levels following FU
treatment underscores the need for evaluation of colon cancer samples to
assess response to FU therapy. This work was supported by a Supplement of
the MSM/TU/UABCCC U54 Partnership grant (3U54-CA118948-09S1) from NIH.

