Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER3 is a functional molecular target in HPV-associated head and
neck cancer


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an
aggressive cancer with a rising incidence of more than 600,000 new cases
each year. Human papillomavirus (HPV)16 plays an etiologic role in a
growing subset of HNSCCs, where viral expression of the E6 and E7
oncoproteins are necessary for tumor growth and maintenance. Although
patients with HPV(+) tumors have a more favorable prognosis compared with
HPV(-) patients, there are currently no HPV-selective therapies. Recent
studies have identified differential receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
profiles in HPV(+) vs. HPV(-) tumors. One such RTK, HER3, is
overexpressed and highly associated with phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
in HPV(+) tumors.Methods: In the current study, HER3 was investigated as
a molecular target in HPV(+) HNSCC cell lines and patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs). HNSCC dependency on HER3 was evaluated with both
anti-HER3 siRNAs and the clinically advanced anti-HER3 monoclonal
antibody, KTN3379. Furthermore, the anti-growth effects of combinatorial
HER3 and PI3K inhibition was examined in HPV(+) HNSCC models.Results:
HER3 was overexpressed and activated in HPV(+) HNSCC models. Further
investigation indicated that HPV(+) HNSCC cells were reliant on HER3 for
cellular proliferation and PI3K pathway signaling, whereas little effect
was observed in HPV(-) cell lines. Intriguingly, HPV oncoproteins
directly regulated HER3, where knockdown of E6 and E7 resulted in loss of
total HER3 protein expression and reduced PI3K pathway signaling (p-AKT,
p-p70S6K, p-rpS6) in HPV(+) cell lines. Conversely, overexpression of E6
and E7 increased total HER3 protein expression (5-7 fold) and PI3K
pathway signaling in HPV(-) cell lines. Since HER3 signals via the PI3K
pathway to mediate cellular proliferation and survival, we sought to
identify if HER3 can mediate response to PI3K pathway inhibitors.
Stimulation of HPV(+) cell lines with neuregulin-1, the cognate ligand of
HER3, resulted in complete resistance to the p110 inhibitor, BYL719, and
prevented BYL719 induced inhibition of AKT. Neuregulin-1 stimulation of
HPV(-) cell lines had no effect on their response to BYL719, and did not
rescue AKT activation. Furthermore, treatment of HPV(+) cell lines with
BYL719 resulted in enhanced HER3 expression and activation (20-50 fold),
indicating that HER3 may mediate resistance to PI3K inhibitors in HPV(+)
cells. Finally, dual targeting of HER3 and PI3K synergistically inhibited
HPV(+) cell line proliferation (by 50-70%) and resulted in sustained
knockdown of PI3K pathway signaling. While HPV(-) cell lines were
responsive to PI3K inhibition, HER3 blockade did not provide additional
benefit. HPV(+) PDX models are currently being evaluated for response to
dual kinase inhibition.Conclusions: These studies identify HER3 as a
potential therapeutic target, and provide a rationale for the clinical
evaluation of combined HER3 and PI3K inhibition in HPV(+) HNSCCs.

