Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid inhibits cancer cell invasion and migration
by modifying focal adhesion complex structure and signaling


The extracellular matrix (ECM) is responsible for the regulation of many
cellular processes, including survival, proliferation, migration and
invasion. Cellular-ECM contact induces a coordinated process recruiting
functional protein complexes, consisting of scaffold, adapter, linking
and docking proteins, to form focal adhesion (FA) structures. Once
formed, FA complexes then recruit signaling proteins to activate
downstream cellular pathways. Aberrations in FA structure and signaling
have shown to contribute to cancer initiation, progression and cellular
motility. Studies investigating the molecular mechanisms accounting for
FA structure and function in cancer cells have demonstrated unique growth
behavior and migratory properties in vitro. While docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA), an omega-3 PUFA, has been shown to inhibit growth of a number of
cancer cell lines, the effects of DHA on FA dynamics and signaling have
not been investigated. In the present study, we show that DHA induced
changes in the morphological growth phenotype in cancer cell lines grown
in Matrigel. DHA treatment also inhibited planar cell movement (cell
migration) and amoeboid motility (invasion) in breast and lung cancer
cell lines. Associated with the observed morphological changes and
inhibited growth, were changes in the expression of a number of proteins
involved in the FA complex. Upon further characterization, cell line
specific changes in protein expression levels and protein localization of
FAK, e-cadherin, paxillin and vinculin were observed with DHA treatment,
which suggests that DHA is modifying FA complex structure. Additionally,
changes in the phosphorylation patterns of major signaling pathways
associated with the FA complex, like EGFR, ERK and c-Myc, were also
observed with DHA treatment. Overall, these results provide new insight
into FA activation and signaling and demonstrate a new mechanism for DHA
treatment in cancer.

