Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological targeting of the TGF-beta-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by anthocyanidins in glioblastoma


Introduction: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary
brain tumor, known for its invasiveness and high resistance to standard
treatments. Therefore, better understanding of the mechanisms that
promote mesenchymal changes in GBM are of great clinical importance.
Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a reversible biological
process in which epithelial cells adopt mesenchymal properties. During
EMT, migration, adhesion and cellular morphology are altered allowing
benign tumor cells to infiltrate surrounding tissues and to metastasize
to distant sites. Several growth factors have been shown to trigger EMT
in tumor development; the Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-b) is the
most prominent inducer of EMT. Epidemiological studies have shown that
diets rich in fruits and vegetables play an important role in preventing
cancer due to their polyphenol content. Among polyphenols, the
anthocyanidins, found in berries, red grapes, and other pigmented foods,
plants and vegetables, have anti-inflammatory, cardioprotective,
anti-angiogenic and anti-carcinogenic properties. Despite the well-known
role of TGB-b in tumor progression, the impact of anthocyanidins on
TGF-b-induced EMT remains misunderstood. Objectives: 1) Characterize the
pharmacological effects of anthocyanidins (cyanidin, delphinidin,
malvidin, pelargonidin and petunidin) on EMT, 2) identify the molecular
targets leading to the inhibition of EMT modulated by anthocyanidins, and
3) characterize their effect on cellular activities involved in this
tumor process. Methodology: The human U-87 glioblastoma (U-87 MG) cells
were treated with anthocyanidins in pre-, co- and post-treatment with
TGF-b. Results: Depending on the treatment, anthocyanidins affect
differently the EMT induction by inhibiting U-87 MG cell migration. This
inhibition resulted in a down-regulation of mesenchymal markers
(fibronectin, snail), phosphorylation of Smad2 proteins and the
mitogen-activated protein kinases (ERK, JNK) in a dose-dependent manner.
Overall, delphinidin was the most potent inhibitor for all treatments.
Conclusion: This study highlights a new antimetastatic action of
anthocyanidins that supports the beneficial health and chemopreventive
effects of dietary-based strategies against cancer.

