Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of the MET transcript is consistently associated with
invasion and tumor budding in colorectal cancer


Background:The c-MET proto-oncogene is frequently overexpressed (50-60%),
amplified (1-3%), and mutated (1-3%) in colorectal cancer (CRC).
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-dependent and independent activation of
c-MET has been associated with increased survival and resistance to
targeted therapies. This study aimed to investigate the role of the
HGF/c-MET axis in regulating migration/invasion in CRC, using
pre-clinical models and clinical samples.Methods:In order to model CRC
tumour cell invasion, we have generated invasive CRC subpopulations using
Boyden Invasion chambers. To model the CRC microenvironment, we have used
a range of co-culture techniques with CRC cells and colon fibroblasts.
Migration/invasion was determined using xCELLigence System (Roche). c-MET
expression in parental and invasive cell lines was measured using Western
blotting and qRT-PCR. c-MET expression in CRC FFPE tissues was measured
using IHC and RNAScope.Results:We identified marked upregulated
expression of c-MET at both the protein and transcript levels in our
invasive CRC cell line models. Importantly, both parental and invasive
subpopulations were found to be inherently dependent on c-MET for
migration, as RNAi against c-MET abrogated migration/invasion in both
parental and invasive models. We also demonstrated that stimulation of
CRC cells with rh-HGF resulted in increased CRC cell migration/invasion.
In addition, co-culture of CRC cells with colonic myofibroblasts,
resulted in marked increases in migratory and invasive capacity, and this
was dependent on HGF/c-MET signaling. Interestingly, stimulation with
myofibroblast conditioned medium or HGF promotes rapid degradation of
c-MET at the protein level, followed by recycling, while MET transcript
remains unaltered, illustrating a dynamic expression of c-MET protein in
response to activation. We further showed that MET is transcriptionally
upregulated in tumour budding foci at the invasive front of a cohort of
stage III CRC tumors. Intriguingly, c-MET protein levels do not correlate
with the transcript, most likely due to a similar protein degradation
process observed in our aforementioned in vitro models.Conclusions:We
show for the first time a key role for transcriptional upregulation of
MET as a molecular driver of tumour invasion, both in vitro and in stage
III CRC tumours.

