Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel microtubule-disrupting indole-based chalcone that induces
caspase-independent cell death in glioblastoma and melanoma cells


Indolyl-pyridinyl-propenones (a subclass of synthetic indole-based
chalcones) have been shown to induce a novel form of cell death termed
methuosis in glioblastoma and other tumor cell lines. This form of cell
death is caspase-independent and involves massive vacuolization of
macropinosome and endosome compartments. In the course of
structure-activity relationship studies identifying a lead compound,
3-(5-methoxy-2-methyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propene-1-one
(abbreviated 5-MOMIPP), we discovered that changing the methoxy
substitution from the 5-position to the 6-position on the indole ring
markedly alters the biological activity of the compound. 6-MOMIPP
exhibits potent anti-proliferative and cytotoxic activity in
glioblastoma, melanoma and other cancer cell lines at a concentration of
100 nM, nearly two orders of magnitude lower than the maximally effective
concentration of 5-MOMIPP. Instead of inducing methuosis, 6-MOMIPP (at >
500 nM) immediately disrupts microtubules, as confirmed by
immunofluorescence microscopy. By 24 h the majority of the cells are
rounded and arrested in mitosis, and by 48 h cell viability is greatly
reduced. The few remaining live cells contain multiple abnormal nuclei.
Extensive cell death occurs before activation of caspases 3, 7 and 9 can
be detected. Scintillation proximity assays show that 6-MOMIPP competes
with 3H-colchicine, but not 3H-vinblastine, for binding to tubulin.
Studies aimed at testing the toxicity of 6-MOMIPP in normal cells are in
progress, but work with a closely related microtubule-active indole-based
chalcone indicates that toxicity is substantially reduced in quiescent
human fibroblasts and rat neuronal progenitor cells. Although drugs
targeted to microtubules (e.g., Vinca alkaloids and taxanes) are widely
used as anti-neoplastic agents, they have shown little efficacy in
treating primary or metastatic brain tumors, partly due to limited
penetrance of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Preliminary pharmacokinetic
studies in mice show that 6-MOMIPP injected IP can readily cross the BBB,
attaining brain concentrations nearly equal to plasma concentrations
within 30 min to 1 h. Therefore, these preliminary findings suggest that
6-MOMIPP merits further preclinical evaluation as a potential therapeutic
agent for primary and metastatic brain tumors. Supported by NIH grant
CA115495 and by the Helen and Harold McMaster Endowment.

