Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ITGA3/ITGB1 signaling by tumor-suppressive microRNA-223
inhibits cancer cell migration and invasion in prostate cancer


BACKGROUNDS:Most patients initially respond to androgen-deprivation
therapy, but eventually acquire resistance and progress to
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Several clinical trials for
CRPC have shown limited benefits, eventually resulting in disease
progression and metastasis. Our recent study of microRNA (miRNA)
expression signature in CRPC revealed that miR-223 expression was
significantly reduced in PCa tissues, suggesting miR-223 functions as a
tumor suppressive miRNA in PCa cells. The aim of this study was to
investigate the functional significance of miR-223 and to identify its
regulated oncogenic genes in PCa.METHODS:Expression levels of miR-223
were evaluated in PCa clinical specimens and PCa cell lines (PC3 and
PC3M) by quantitative real-time PCR methods. Gain-of-function studies
(cell proliferation, migration and invasion assays) were performed using
transfection of mature miR-223 into cancer cells. Genome-wide gene
expression analysis and in silico analysis were applied to investigate
molecular targets regulated by miR-223 in PCa cells. A luciferase
reporter assay was carried out to determine whether 3 UTR of target genes
have actual biding sites for miR-223. To investigate the functional role
of target genes in PCa cells, loss-of-function studies by silencing of
these genes were performed.RESULTS:The expression levels of miR-223 were
significantly reduced in PCa clinical specimens and cell lines compared
to non-cancerous prostate tissues. Restoration of miR-223 significantly
inhibits cancer cell migration and invasion in PCa cells. Integrin
alpha-3 (ITGA3) and integrin beta-1 (ITGB1) were identified as direct
target genes of miR-223 by microarray, in silico studies, and luciferase
reporter assays. ITGA3 and ITGB1 interact with multiple extracellular
matrix proteins and mediate several survival signaling into the cancer
cells. Knockdown of ITGA3 and ITGB1 significantly inhibited cancer cell
migration and invasion in PCa cells by regulating downstream
signaling.CONCLUSIONS:Downregulation of miR-223 was a frequent event of
PCa cells and it functions as a tumor suppressor via targeting ITGA3 and
ITGB1. Overexpression of ITGA3 or ITGB1 might be contributed to PCa
oncogenesis and metastasis. Elucidation of tumor-suppressive miR-223
regulated molecular pathways and targets could provide new information on
potential therapeutic strategies in PCa.

