Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of STAT3 dual-targeting strategies for the treatment
of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer remains a largely incurable disease, with patients
facing the worst 5-year survival rate of any cancer. The challenge is to
identify the molecular effectors that regulate the survival of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells, to devise molecular-targeted
strategies that are effective in the metastatic setting, and overcome the
protective role of the tumor-associated fibrosis and stroma. Strategies
targeting multiple molecular effectors in PDAC are likely going to make a
bigger impact. Thus, we are identifying molecular targets or synthetic
lethal pairs that regulate critical pro-survival or pro-invasive pathways
in PDAC. Constitutively activated Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription 3 (STAT3) protein has been found to be a key regulator of
pancreatic cancer and a target for molecular therapeutic intervention. To
better model the tumor and its microenvironment, we utilized ex vivo
3-Dimensional (3D) cultures of patient-derived pancreatic cancer cells in
the absence and presence of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). We can
quantitate the inhibitory effect on both the tumor and CAFs as they are
labeled with different fluorescent markers. In this co-culture model,
inhibition of tumor growth is maintained following STAT3 inhibition in
the presence of CAFs. We screened several STAT3 small molecule
inhibitors, derived from the SH-4-54 class of STAT3 inhibitors, and found
inhibition of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation in the low M range.
Our inhibitors bind the STAT3 protein potently, as shown by SPR, and
demonstrate no effect in a kinome screen. In vitro studies demonstrated
potent cell killing as well as inhibition of STAT3 activation in the 3D
co-culture model. We have previously reported that Ref-1 (redox factor-1)
regulates STAT3 activity through its redox function and blocking STAT3
through phosphorylation and redox inhibition synergizes for PDAC cell
killing. In our 3D co-culture system, Ref-1 inhibitor, APX3330 decreases
tumor area and intensity in a dose-dependent manner. The addition of
APX3330 to STAT3 pathway inhibition via Ruxolitinib (Rux, Jak 2
inhibitor) or direct STAT3 inhibitor potentiated the killing effect in
the tumor. However, the combination treatment did not appear to sensitize
CAF cells, suggesting that targeting of Ref-1 and the STAT3 pathway is
more specifically targeting tumor cells. Utilizing APX3330, Rux, and our
lead STAT3 inhibitors, we evaluated the effects of Ref-1/STAT3 inhibition
in PDAC low passage patient-derived cell lines. The activity of STAT3 and
specificity of lead compounds was assessed by immunoblotting for levels
of phosphorylated proteins including STAT3 (Y705) and STAT5 (Y694) in 3D
culture. These studies establish the rationale for the development of
STAT3 dual-targeting strategies for the treatment of pancreatic cancer
and suggest that Ref-1 and STAT3 may be a synthetic lethal pair.

