Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GAPVAC-101 phase I trial: First data of an innovative actively
personalized peptide vaccination trial in patients with newly diagnosed
glioblastoma


The Glioma Actively Personalized Vaccine Consortium (GAPVAC; funded by
the European Union Framework 7 Program) aims at treating newly diagnosed
glioblastoma (GB) patients with two distinct actively personalized
vaccines (APVACs).Resected tumor material is analyzed for multiple
biomarkers to characterize the tumor in depth and to enable the design of
APVACs tailored to each individual patient: Tumor-specific mutations, the
HLA peptidome and gene expression profile are assessed by next-generation
sequencing, mass spectrometry and RNA microarray analysis, respectively.
Further, the patient-individual immune status is investigated by
assessment of leukapheresis samples utilizing an in vitro immunogenicity
platform. Data are integrated to define two distinct APVACs for each
patient: APVAC1 is composed of up to ten peptides selected from a
pre-manufactured warehouse. The warehouse contains 59 HLA class I-binding
and three class II-binding tumor-associated peptides frequently
over-presented in GB. APVAC2 is composed of one or two peptides that are
de novo synthesized for a given patient and preferentially represent
mutation-bearing neo-epitopes.After a preparation phase in which the
warehouse was generated and setup of APVAC selection and manufacturing
processes took place, the GAPVAC-101 phase I clinical trial was
initiated. Primary endpoints of the study are assessment of safety,
feasibility of APVAC manufacturing and biological activity.The trial is
conducted at six European centers and recruits HLA-A*02:01 or
A*24:02-positive patients with newly diagnosed GB after gross total
resection. Patients receive APVAC1 and APVAC2 vaccinations plus
immunomodulators (poly-ICLC and GM-CSF) three and six months post study
enrolment, respectively, and concurrent to maintenance temozolomide
(TMZ).As of November 2015, 11 patients have been enrolled, of whom six
already received APVAC vaccines. Composition and manufacturing are
ongoing for four patients. All APVACs were generated in time without
ultimate failures. APVAC1 vaccines differ substantially with 31 out of 59
warehouse peptides have been selected at least once, indicating the need
for personalization due to tumor heterogeneity even for non-mutated
epitopes. In patients tumor samples an average of 40 non-synonymous
mutations (including known driver mutations) were identified. Injection
site reactions were the most frequent toxicities so far. One brain edema
(Grade 3) and one allergic reaction (Grade 4)were observed, both
potentially related to the vaccinations. First data on biological
activity of APVACs and updated clinical data will be presented at the
Annual Meeting.In conclusion, the GAPVAC concept has been successfully
translated into the clinics and so far demonstrated to be safe and
feasible with its level of personalization matching the observed tumor
heterogeneity.

