Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic characterization of premalignant lung squamous cell
carcinoma lesions


Background: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC) arises in the epithelial
layer of the bronchial airways and is often preceded by the development
of premalignant lesions. However, not all premalignant lesions will
progress to lung SqCC and many of these lesions will regress without
therapeutic intervention. Understanding the molecular events that
contribute to progression of premalignant lesions in the airway will
allow us to identify biomarkers for early detection and develop
therapeutic strategies for early intervention.Methods: Bronchial
brushings and biopsies were obtained from high-risk smokers undergoing
lung cancer screening by auto-fluorescence bronchoscopy and CT at the
Roswell Park Cancer Institute. For each subject (n = 30), both
premalignant lesions (PMLs) and the cytologically normal mainstem
bronchus were sampled repeatedly over time (n = 288 samples). DNA and RNA
were isolated from a total of 197 bronchial biopsies of PML (average of 5
per subject) and 91 bronchial brushings. DNA was also isolated from the
blood to serve as a matched normal. Exome capture was performed using the
Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon+UTR 70MB kit and sequenced to a mean
depth of coverage of 75x (n = 85 samples from 22 subjects). RNA libraries
were prepared with Illumina TruSeq (mRNA-Seq: n = 288 samples from 30
subjects and miRNA-Seq: n = 183 samples from 26 subjects).Results: We
identified gene and miRNA expression changes associated with histological
grade as well as progressive/stable disease. The Hippo pathway, Wnt
signaling, p53 signaling, and immune-related pathways are modulated with
histological grade and disease progression. Genes associated with
histological grade in the cytologically normal airway and in the biopsies
were significantly concordantly enriched (FDR3/Mb) were taken from
adjacent sites over two time points in the same individual with a history
of lung squamous cell carcinoma. These lesions had a significantly
overlapping set of mutations (p = 2.2 1017) indicating a common
evolutionary ancestor, and contained mutations in CREBBP and FAT1,
suggesting they are at increased risk for progressing to frank
malignancy.Conclusions: We performed genomic profiling of PMLs in the
airways of high-risk smokers. The gene expression and somatic alterations
that were observed in known cancer genes may be among the earliest events
in cancer development.

