Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming breast cancer chemoresistance and blocking metastasis
by targeting RNA-binding protein HuR


Patients with metastatic breast cancer have a dismal 5-year survival rate
of only 24%. Chemoresistance is another contributor to the high mortality
of advanced breast cancer. The RNA-binding protein, Hu antigen R (HuR),
is overexpressed at all stages of breast cancer development. Cytoplasmic
HuR accumulation correlates with high-grade malignancy, poor distant
disease-free survival and serves as a prognostic factor for poor clinical
outcome in breast cancer. HuR promotes tumorigenesis by promoting mRNA
stability and translation of proteins implicated in proliferation,
survival, angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. HuR also modulates
sensitivity of breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. Taken together, HuR
is an emerging target for breast cancer therapy, especially metastatic
breast cancer. Using shRNA and CRISPR technologies to modulate HuR
expression in breast cancer cells, we found that cells with HuR KD/KO
were less invasive and more sensitive to chemotherapy. In an effort to
discover small molecules that disrupt the HuR-mRNA interaction and block
HuR functions in breast cancer progression, metastasis and
chemoresistance, high throughput screening (HTS) was carried out using
several chemical libraries (23,000 compounds) using fluorescence
polarization (FP) assay and identified several initial hits with
sub-micromolar inhibitory constants (Ki). Those potential disruptors were
then validated by ALPHA assay (Amplified Luminescent Proximity
Homogeneous Assay), confirmed by Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR). In
cell-based assays, top hit KH-3 and its optimized analogs, specifically
shortened HuR target mRNA half-lifes and decreased the level of the
encoded proteins. Moreover, those compounds inhibited invasion and
restored chemosensitivity. qPCR arrays focusing on specific pathways
revealed that HuR inhibitors potently upregulated metastatic suppressors
and downregulated genes frequently overexpressed in lung metastases. In
animal studies, KH-3 not only powerfully exhibited antitumor efficacy in
orthotopic xenografts, but also efficiently blocked experimental
metastasis. In conclusion, we identified potent and specific small
molecule disrupters of HuR-mRNA interaction for potential anti-metastatic
therapy for breast cancer with HuR overexpression.

