Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Twist1 regulates UVB-induced epidermal cell proliferation in
non-melanoma skin cancer


Nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is the most common cancer and consists of
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). SCC
metastases account for up to 20% of all deaths from skin cancer. The
major risk factor for the development of NMSC is solar ultraviolet
radiation (UV). UVA and UVB both function as initiators and promoters in
carcinogenesis and possess immunosuppressive activity. Given the
prevalence of this disease, there remains a pressing need for the
development of novel prevention and treatment strategies for NMSC.In a
recent study (Srivastava et al. 2015. Mol. Carcinog.
doi:10.1002/mc.22335), we evaluated the effect of Twist1, a transcription
factor that is known to play a role in tumor progression, during
epithelial carcinogenesis. Using the two-stage chemical carcinogenesis
model, we identified that BK5.Cre x Twist1flox/flox mice, which have a
keratinocyte-specific Twist1 knockout (Twist1 KO), developed
significantly reduced numbers of papillomas (70% reduction) and SCCs (75%
reduction) as well as delayed tumor latency compared to wild-type (WT)
mice. Twist1 KO mice also exhibited significantly reduced epidermal
proliferation in response to chemical promotion that correlated with
reduced levels of cell cycle regulators and increased levels of p53 and
p21.In further studies, we have begun analyzing the effects of UVB
irradiation in Twist1 KO mice. Specifically, Twist1 KO mice exhibited
heightened sensitivity to UVB-induced apoptosis and decreased epidermal
proliferation as compared to similarly exposed WT mice. In addition, the
accumulation of mast cells in the skin was significantly decreased in
Twist1 KO mice as compared to WT mice. Further preliminary experiments
showed that the protein expression levels of c-Myc, phospho-p65 (S536)
and phospho-p50 (S337) decreased following UVB irradiation whereas levels
of the cell cycle inhibitors p21 and p27 exhibited an increased
expression in Twist1 KO mice as compared to WT mice. Further experiments
have suggested that Twist1 may play a pivotal role in the
proliferation/migration of bulge region keratinocyte stem cells (KSCs)
following exposure to UVB. These and other results from ongoing
experiments will be presented. Collectively, these findings suggest that
Twist1 may have a novel role in UVB-induced epithelial carcinogenesis by
regulating proliferation and migration of keratinocytes and KSCs.
Research supported by CPRIT RP150346, CPRIT RP140108, and NIH T32
ES007247.

