Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utility of p16 immunohistochemistry in evaluating negative
cervical biopsies following high-risk pap test results


The Lower Anogenital Squamous Terminology (LAST) Standardization Project
for HPV-associated Lesions recommends the use of p16 immunohistochemistry
as an adjunct to morphologic assessment of cervical biopsies interpreted
as negative from patients that are at high risk for missed high-grade
disease (defined as a prior cytologic interpretation of HSIL, ASC-H,
ASC-US/HPV-16+, or AGC-NOS) (Darragh et al., 2012). However, few studies
have specifically evaluated the utility of performing p16 on negative
cervical biopsies and endocervical curettage specimens following
high-risk Pap test results.A search of the Stanford Cytopathology
database from 7/1/2002-6/30/2012 for cervical cytology cases with
diagnoses of ASC-H, HSIL, AGC-NOS, and atypical endocervical cells NOS
(AGC-EC) yielded 1517 cases. Of these, 703 cases had histologic
follow-up. Biopsies were excluded if diagnosed as atypical, low grade
squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL), high grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion (HSIL), or insufficient, or if the time to follow
up was greater than 1 year. Immunostain for p16 (CINtec) was performed on
350 cases from 339 patients (age 16-85 yrs, average 42+/-14) and scored
as positive (diffuse strong), negative or equivocal. 6 cases were
excluded due to insufficient tissue and 3 cases with equivocal staining
were excluded from further analysis. For p16(+) and equivocal cases, HPV
in situ hybridization (ISH) (Ventana HPV III Family 16 probe) was
performed and the corresponding H&E section reviewed. Based on the H&E
review, the diagnosis was revised. Follow-up data was also
obtained.12/341 cases (3.5%) were p16(+) corresponding to missed
diagnoses of LSIL (1 cases), HSIL-CIN2 (2 cases), and SIL-indeterminate
grade (6 cases). Two biopsies from one patient at different time points
exhibited p16 staining of bland metaplastic cells undermining
endocervical glands that morphologically did not meet criteria for SIL
and were interpreted as atypical metaplasia. Follow-up biopsies showed
HSIL.p16 immunostain increases the detection rate of SIL by 3.5% in
benign appearing cervical biopsies and endocervical curettages from
patients with a prior high-risk Pap test result. The benefit of p16
immunostain is highest for cases with a prior Pap diagnosis of HSIL.
Cytoplasmic only staining and staining of surface mucosa, endocervical
glands, and tubal metaplasia may lead to over-interpretation of p16 as
positive.Reference:Darragh, T. M. et al. The Lower Anogenital Squamous
Terminology Standardization Project for HPV-Associated Lesions:
background and consensus recommendations from the College of American
Pathologists and the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical
Pathology. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 136, 1266-1297 (2012).

