Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-resolution parallel analysis of genome and transcriptome of
single disseminated prostate cancer cells


Introduction: Manifestation of bone metastases is the most frequent cause
of death among prostate cancer patients. Since the progression from
non-metastatic (M0) to metastatic (M1) is highly unpredictable, molecular
analysis of disseminated cancer cells (DCCs) detected before overt
metastasis may provide an opportunity to dissect the early stages of
systemic cancer and enable detection of critical therapy targets.
However, we previously showed that early stage prostate DCCs acquire a
bone marrow-associated transcriptomic phenotype (Guzvic et al. Cancer
Res. 2014, 15;74(24):7383-94) impeding the definite identification of
DCCs. To address this problem we developed a workflow of combined
single-cell RNA-Seq and single-cell aCGH allowing high-resolution
analysis of genomes and transcriptomes of individual cells. Here, we
present a proof-of-concept study using DCCs isolated from bone marrow of
prostate cancer patients.Materials and methods: We isolated 24
EPCAM-positive DCCs from bone marrow of prostate cancer patients. In
addition, we analyzed two VCaP prostate cancer cells and two peripheral
blood lymphocytes of healthy individuals. All isolated cells were
subjected to combined whole genome and whole transcriptome amplification
using Ampli1TM WGA Kit and a WTA approach (Klein CA et al., Nat
Biotechnol. 2002, 20(4):387-92), respectively. The suitability of WTA and
WGA products for downstream analyses were assessed using PCR-based
QC-assays. Subsequently, WGA products were hybridized on high-resolution
SurePrint aCGH arrays and analyzed with Agilent Genomic Workbench
Software. WTA products were sequenced using Roche 454 GS FLX+ or Illumina
HiSeq 2000 systems. Single-cell RNA-Seq data were evaluated using a
bioinformatic pipeline adjusted to the needs of the single cell WTA
method.Results: We provide two experimental protocols for single-cell
RNA-Seq: (i) allowing detection of low-abundant transcripts and (ii)
enabling comprehensive gene-expression analysis. The protocols were
validated using VCaP cells, in which we could successfully detect low
expression levels of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcripts. The established
analysis allowed also detection of novel fusion transcripts in a M1-stage
prostate cancer patient. Comprehensive gene expression analysis revealed
presence of 4.000 to 13.000 transcripts expressed in bone marrow-derived
cells. The comparison of RNA-Seq and aCGH data allowed to simultaneously
detecting copy number alterations and corresponding changes in gene
expression dosage. Thereby, the combined genome and transcriptome
analysis of single cells enables to uncover the impact of genomic gains
and losses on cellular transcriptomes.Conclusions: Combined genome and
transcriptome analysis of patient-derived single DCCs is feasible and
enables unambiguous identification and genotypic and phenotypic
characterization of DCCs.

