Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Title: IACS-010759 is a novel clinical candidate that targets AML
cells by inducing a metabolic catastrophe through inhibition of oxidative
phosphorylation


Tumor cells depend on both glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) for energy and biomass production leading to robust cell
proliferation. Recent data has demonstrated a dependence of various tumor
types on mitochondrial OXPHOS, which represents an exciting therapeutic
opportunity. Through an extensive medicinal chemistry campaign,
IACS-10759 was identified as a potent, selective inhibitor of complex I
of the electron transport chain, which is orally bioavailable and has
excellent PK and physicochemical properties in preclinical species. Our
group and others have demonstrated that a variety of tumor types
including: AML, plus subsets of lymphoma, breast, melanoma and PDAC are
highly dependent on OXPHOS to meet energy and biomass demands. Treatment
of multiple cell lines and patient derived xenograft (PDX) models in
multiple cancer types with IACS-10759 led to decreased oxygen consumption
rate (OCR). IACS-10759 treatment also led to a robust decrease in cell
viability and often an increase in apoptosis with EC50 values between 1
nM - 50 nM across multiple lines. Through a series of mechanistic studies
we established that IACS-10759 blocks complex I of the electron transport
at the quinone binding site. In an orthotopic xenograft model of primary
AML cells derived from a patient who was refractory to standard of care
and salvage therapies, 42 days of IACS-10759 treatment with 3 and 10
mg/kg orally using a 5 on/2 off schedule extended the median survival by
greater than 2-fold. Efficacy was paralleled by robust modulation of OCR,
aspartate, and p-AMPK levels. Additionally, tumor growth inhibition or
regression was also observed in cell line and PDX xenograft models of
lymphoma, triple negative breast, melanoma and PDAC treated with
IACS-10759, indicating that subsets of several non-AML indications are
also dependent on OXPHOS. Mechanistically, extensive metabolic profiling
and flux analysis revealed that the response to IACS-10759 was associated
with induction of a metabolic imbalance that negatively impacted energy
homeostasis, amino acid biosynthesis, and NTP production due to reduced
conversion of NADH to NAD+ by complex I, decreased ATP production, TCA
cycle flux and nucleotide biosynthesis. As a result of the robust
response in multiple cell lines, primary patient samples, and efficacy in
PDX models, IACS-10759 has been advanced through IND enabling studies.
GLP safety and toxicology have been completed, and we expect to file an
IND at the end of 1Q2016 and initiate a Phase I clinical trial in AML
during the second quarter of 2016.

