Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDCA5 is a novel therapeutic target molecule in oral squamous cell
carcinoma


Molecularly targeted drugs are used in the treatment of a variety of
malignant tumors, but this approach to developing novel therapies for
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has lagged behind the progress seen
for other cancers. We attempted to find appropriate molecular targets for
OSCC, and identified cell division cycle associated 5 (CDCA5) as a
cancer-related gene which was overexpressed in 9 human OSCC cells tested
by microarray analysis. CDCA5 was initially identified as a substrate of
anaphase-promoting complex and as a regulator of sister chromatid
cohesion in HeLa cells. In addition, CDCA5 has been reported to be
overexpressed in the majority of human lung cancers and urothelial
cancers and to play a critical role in carcinogenesis. However, function
of CDCA5 in OSCC remains still unknown. In this study, we investigated
the expression and function of CDCA5 in OSCC. First, we confirmed the
expression level of CDCA5 in 4 human OSCC cell lines and an immortalized
non-neoplastic human keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT, by quantitative
RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting. The expression levels of CDCA5
mRNA and protein were markedly elevated in all human OSCC cell lines
compared to HaCaT cells. Next, we tested the effect of synthetic small
interfering RNAs specific for CDCA5 (siCDCA5) on the growth of human OSCC
cells. The RNA interference effect of siCDCA5 was confirmed by Western
blotting. Transfection of siCDCA5 suppressed the expression of its target
protein in all types of cells. The growth inhibitory effect of siCDCA5 in
OSCC cells was evaluated by WST-8 assay. The Knockdown of CDCA5
significantly inhibited the growth of OSCC cells in vitro. Subsequently,
we assessed the effect of siCDCA5 on the in vivo growth of human OSCC
cells, green fluorescent protein (GFP)-SAS. We administered
siCDCA5/atelocollagen complexes into the subcutaneous spaces around the
xenograft tumors every 3 days. We found that these complexes
significantly reduced the size of subcutaneously xenografted GFP-SAS
tumors, compared to the control group treated with synthetic siRNA
specific for GFP (siGFP)/atelocollagen complexes. Next, we analyzed the
influence of siCDCA5 on the cell cycle of OSCC cells by flow cytometry.
Suppression of CDCA5 resulted in the decrease in percentage of cells in
G0/G1 phase and the increase in G2 phase. This indicated that the
anti-proliferative effect of siCDCA5 was due to G2 arrest. Finally, we
investigated the clinical significance of CDCA5 expression in OSCC. We
examined the expression of CDCA5 in OSCC tissues by immunohistochemistry,
and then found a significant association between CDCA5 expression levels
and overall survival. These results suggest that CDCA5 functions as a
critical gene supporting OSCC progression and that targeting CDCA5 may be
a useful therapeutic strategy for OSCC.

