Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physiological mimicry to characterize the average topology of the
MYC and VEGF promoter G-quadruplexes


DNA G-quadruplexes (G4s) have become increasingly present in modern drug
discovery efforts. The main focus centers on cancer therapeutic
development, as G4s are more concentrated in oncogenic promoters than the
rest of the genome. Two of the most well described G4s to date are within
the MYC and the VEGF promoters; stabilization of either structure fosters
transcriptional silencing. Downregulation of MYC decreases cell
proliferation and alters metabolism; it is promising for a number of
cancers, such lymphomas, leukemia, colorectal cancer and more. VEGF
downregulation would modulate angiogenesis, which is of therapeutic
benefit for almost all solid tumors. The physiological structure of both
of these promoter G4s has been elucidated using plasmid DMS footprinting,
which incorporates DNA supercoiling in addition to stabilizing cations or
molecules. The current study examines a variety of anhydrous or crowding
co-solvents for their ability to recapitulate the physiological structure
in single-stranded ex vivo conditions. The co-solvents tested included
glucose, acetonitrile, polyethylene glycol, dextran sulfate, sucrose,
ficoll, and extracted nucleoplasm, ranging from 0-40%. Significant
changes in structure, including loop directionality and number of
competing isoforms, were examined by electronic circular dichroism.
Electromobility shift assays differentiated inter- and intra-molecular
structures, further distinguishing the distribution of isoforms. DMS
footprinting with select molecular crowding and dehydrating agents was
performed and compared to plasmid footprints, to validate physiological
mimicry ex vivo. Ongoing studies examining the physiological conditions
regulating G4 stability and function include moving from plasmid to in
cell DMS footprinting in order to most completely identify the
physiologic isoform, and to using optimized co-solvents to examine the
effects of small molecules ex vivo and better predict active hits for in
vitro evaluation. Overall the VEGF and MYC promoter G4 structures are
promising therapeutic targets for anti-angiogenic and anti-proliferative
therapy, respectively. This comprehensive understanding of physiological
principles governing the above G4 formation will best inform future drug
discovery efforts for these and other oncogenic promoters.

