Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymerase kappa determines the sensitivity of MTH1 inhibitors to
cisplatin-resistant cell


Resistance is one the main reason for overall decrease in survival of
cancer patient treated with cisplatin in different types of cancer.
Cisplatin kills cancer cells by various mechanisms, but mainly through
formation of inter- and intra stand crosslinks of DNA. Different types of
translesion polymerase including Polymerase kappa (POLK) are involved in
repair of DNA lesions. We observed high expression levels of POLK in
cisplatin resistant bladder and ovarian cancer cells compared to parental
cells. Due to its low proof-reading activity POLK can incorporate
8-oxo-dGTP into DNA. The MTH1 protein (Nudix hydrolase- NUDT1) sanitizes
oxidized dNTP pools to prevent incorporation of damaged bases during DNA
replication. Recently we have generated MTH1 inhibitors that damage the
DNA and induce cancer specific cell death through incorporation of more
oxidized dNTPs. We found cisplatin resistant bladder cancer cells
(NTUB1/P) were more sensitive to MTH1 inhibitors in comparison to
parental NTUB1 cells. As POLK is involved in incorporation of 8-oxo-dGTP
into DNA, we hypothesized that high expression levels of POLK in
cisplatin resistant cells make them more sensitive to MTH1 inhibitors as
more 8-oxo-dGTP would be incorporated into DNA, resulting in more DNA
damage and cell death in comparison to parental cells. Indeed, we
observes higher induction of cleaved-PARP, H2AX, cleaved-Caspase 3 and
more annexin v positive cells in cisplatin resistant NTUB1/P cells in
comparison to parental NTUB1 cells upon treatment with MTH1 inhibitors.
MTH1 inhibitor also significantly delays the NTUB1/P xenograft tumor
growth in comparison to vehicle treatment in immunosuppressive mice.
Knocking down POLK in cisplatin resistant NTUB1/P cells by siRNA resulted
in decreased incorporation of 8-oxo-dGTP and sensitivity to MTH1
inhibitors compared to non target control cells. Overexpression of POLK
in NTUB1 and NTUB1/P cells results in further sensitization to MTH1
inhibitors. In conclusion elevated levels of POLK in cisplatin resistance
cells determines increased sensitivity towards MTH1 inhibitors. Thus MTH1
inhibitors can be a potential promising therapy for the treatment of
cisplatin resistant tumors in patients.

