Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiating esophageal cancer cells from normal cells using
ligand-conjugated microspheres


Cancer of the esophagus has a dismal overall prognosis and low 5 year
survival rate due to its aggressive nature and the fact that it often
presents at a late stage. Biochemical changes present on transforming
tissue provide an opportunity for the early detection of cancer within
the esophagus and thus the promise of a more favorable prognosis and a
higher survival rate. Recently, there has been an increasing effort to
detect cancer of the esophagus by introducing, during an endoscopic
procedure, soluble molecules (ligands) cognate to moieties preferentially
expressed on transforming tissue. The success of this approach depends on
the selective binding of the ligand to transforming tissue relative to
normal tissue. For soluble ligands, the factors that dictate the
selective binding depend on a very small number of factors. In contrast,
if the ligands are conjugated to particles, there are a large number of
controllable factors that can be manipulated to engineer the detection
scheme and thus optimize selective recognition of transforming tissue.In
this study, we utilized an in vitro system to investigate the feasibility
of the ligand-conjugated particle approach. First, we explored the
surface chemistry of an esophageal adenocarcinoma cell line, OE19,
relative to a normal esophageal cell line, HEEpiC, using flow cytometric
analysis. Among other differences, we found that the OE19 cell line
expresses relatively high levels of the tetrasaccharides sialyl Lewis A
(sLea) and sialyl Lewis X (sLex). sLea and sLex are known cognate
molecules for the selectin family of adhesion molecules, in particular
E-selectin. Thus, we conjugated an E-selectin construct to 10 m diameter
microspheres. The E-selectin construct consisted of the extracellular
domain of E-selectin fused to the Fc domain of IgG. Flow cytometric
analysis revealed that the E-selectin construct was conjugated to the
microspheres and that the E-selectin portion of the molecule was
available for binding. To roughly simulate the introduction of the
conjugated microspheres during an endoscopic procedure, a parallel plate
flow chamber was used. A planar substrate of either OE19 or HEEpiC cells
was placed in the flow chamber and a suspension of E-selectin or IgG
(negative control) microspheres were perfused through the flow chamber.
We observed that the E-selectin microspheres exhibited significantly
greater adhesion to the OE19 cells relative to the HEEpiC cells. In
contrast, IgG microspheres exhibited negligible adhesion to the OE19 and
HEEpiC cells. Combined, this study provides proof of concept for an assay
approach that could be engineered to detect transforming tissue present
within the esophagus.

