Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic urothelial cancer 10 years after transplanting a filial
kidney: genomically investigating the perpetrator


BACKGROUNDPolyomavirus (BKV) infection has been associated with
development of urothelial carcinoma (UC). We report on a patient with
conventional UC of the bladder (Ta, G3) 8 years after receiving a kidney
graft from a 4 year old male donor. After a recurrence (T1, G3) 9 years
after transplantation (NTx), he was diagnosed with a SV-40 positive
metastatic micropapillary and muscle-invasive UC 10 years after NTx with
involvement of the graft kidney pelvis (pT3), the bladder (pT3) and a
pelvic lymphnode metastasis. The aim of this study was to investigate the
genealogy and clonal relationship between these cancer
locations.METHODSCancer cell nuclei derived from formalin fixed tumor
specimens were processed and sorted based on DNA content with a BD Influx
FACS. DNA from sorted aneuploid populations was analyzed by whole genome
high resolution CGH microarrays (aCGH). In addition, short tandem repeat
(STR) analyses were done with the PowerPlex ESI Kit commercial testing
kit. Each run was performed on an Applied Biosystems Genetic Analyzer
3500 and analyzed with the GeneMapper ID-X Software. Integration of
PV-genom was investigated by RT-PCR. The IonTorrent platform by LifeTech
(PGM, IonAmpliseq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2) was used for
next-generation-sequencing (NGS).RESULTSArray CGH clarified that the
primary two non-muscle invasive bladder tumors differed completely from
each other and from the subsequent cancer tissues. The tumor
manifestations 10 years after NTx shared the same genomic profile, except
for a private amplification at 6p12.3 and a private deletion at Xp22.33 -
Xp22.11, both in the bladder tumor. STR identified all three tumors
diagnosed 10 years after NTx to originate from the allograft donor. NGS
identified two shared mutations of unknown relevance (KDR / InDel
chr4:55962545; Akt1 / c.138C>A) in the 10 year after NTx UC sites. No
known somatic mutation was found. RT-PCR identified the PV to be
integrated in the human cancer genome. Further studies are currently
ongoing to define the exact integration sites of BKV and the potentially
influenced human genes.CONCLUSIONSThis case is an impressive example of
a, donor-derived, metastatic micropapillary UC developed under
immuno-suppression and subsequent BKV-reactivation in a presumably
healthy transplanted kidney of a four years old donor.

