Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 11 is pro-proliferative and promigratory integrin and its
expression is upregulated by the MYC oncogenic factor in colorectal cancer


BackgroundColorectal cancer (CRC) is a multi-step process that involves
successive mutation, epigenetic alteration and gene dysregulation.
Integrins are a family of heterodimeric glycoproteins involved in
bidirectional cell signaling and participate in the regulation of cell
shape, adhesion, migration, survival and proliferation. The integrin 1
subunit is known to be involved in RAS/ERK proliferative pathway
activation and plays an important role in mammary carcinoma cell
proliferation and migration. In the small intestine, 1 is present in the
crypt proliferative compartment and absent in the villus. In mouse
models, the 11 integrin, together with the Kras oncogenic factor,
potentiates tumor growth. Very little is known about 11 function in
CRC.Aims: As we have recently shown that 1 is present in 65% of CRC
(Boudjadi et al, 2013), that its expression is controlled by the MYC
oncogenic factor and that the expressions of 1 and MYC correlate in 72.3%
of colon adenocarcinomas (Boudjadi et al, Oncogene 2015) we postulated
that integrin 11 has a pro-tumoral contribution to CRC related to 1
function.METHODS: 11 function was studied in HT29, T84 and SW480 CRC cell
lines using shRNA silencing targeting 1 (sh1) compared to an shRNA
control (shCtrl). Cell proliferation was assessed by cell count and BrdU
incorporation. Migration was tested by the scratch test assay. For the
anoikis test, cells were kept in suspension without serum for 24 hours on
poly-2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (polyHEMA)-coated dishes and were then
lysed and subjected to caspase3 activity measurement and cleaved PARP
expression. To test tumorigenic capacity, sh1 and shCtrl HT29 cells were
injected into the dorsal subcutaneous tissue of female CD1 nu/nu mice.
The tumor volume was assessed by external measurement. After resection, 1
knockdown was confirmed at the mRNA and protein levels.RESULTS: In HT29,
T84 and SW480 cells, 1 mRNA silencing resulted in reduced cell growth and
proliferation compared to the control. Caspase3 activity measurement and
cleaved PARP expression in HT29 and T84 cells showed that resistance to
anoikis was altered in sh1 cells compared to shCtrl. Wound healing was
delayed in sh1 HT29 and T84 cells compared to shCtrl. Moreover, tumor
development in xenografts was reduced in HT29 sh1 cells.
Histopathological analysis showed extensive necrosis areas and low
mitotic index in sh1 tumors compared to the shCtrl tumors.CONCLUSION: Our
results show that 11 is involved in tumor cell proliferation, survival
and migration. This finding suggests that 11 is involved in colorectal
cancer progression. (Supported by the CIHR)

