Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of receptors tyrosine kinase in the modulation of
store-operated calcium entry


A multitude of studies show that alterations in Ca2+ signalling initiate
or support the development of hallmarks of cancer. In particular, the
role of store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) in tumorigenesis and tumour
progression has been subject to intense investigation. SOCE is the main
mechanism by which external Ca2+ enters into the cell. It is initiated by
depletion of ER Ca2+ stores and mediated by several proteins such as
STIM1, an ER transmembrane protein sensing Ca2+ within the ER and ORAI1,
a plasma membrane Ca2+ channel. We recently showed that SOC inhibition
interfered with EGFR-dependent signalling in non-small cell lung
carcinoma cells.In this study, we observed that STIM1 depletion reduced
neuregulin-dependent proliferation of breast cancer cells. Since
neuregulin binds to ErbB3 and/or ErbB4 and therefore activates ErbB2,
this result prompted us to investigate whether ErbB proteins might
modulate SOCE. We observed that lapatinib, a dual inhibitor of EGFR and
ErbB2, dramatically inhibited SOCE. As expected, lapatinib also inhibited
phosphorylation of EGFR, ErbB2 and downstream pathways of both receptors.
Specific inhibition of EGFR by erlotinib or gefitinib had no effect on
SOCE. In contrast, specific inhibition of ErbB2 by CP724714 mimicked the
effects of lapatinib. We also investigated the role of downstream
pathways of ErbB2 in the modulation of SOCE. Inhibition of the MAPK and
the JAK-STAT pathways does not modify the amplitude of SOCE.
Contrariwise, LY294002 and MK2206, two inhibitors of the PI3K pathway,
dramatically reduced SOCE. Interestingly, in silico analysis showed that
STIM1 might be phosphorylated by Akt.All these results suggest that SOCE
is important in the proper function of ErbB2-dependent signalling. This
raises the possibility to target molecular mediators of SOCE in order to
interfere with the proliferation of cancer cells.

