Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BKM120 promotes apoptosis and suppresses tumor growth in
medulloblastoma by targeting the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway


Background: Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor
in children with poor survival outcome. New treatment strategies are
needed for control of MB. The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
(PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) intracellular signaling
pathway plays a key role in cellular metabolism, proliferation, survival
and angiogenesis. This pathway is often constitutively activated in human
tumor cells, providing unique opportunities for anticancer therapeutic
intervention. BKM120 (Buparlisib) is an oral pan-class I PI3K inhibitor
that targets all 4 isoforms of class I PI3K. BKM120 is currently being
clinically evaluated for the treatment of different adult cancers
including breast cancer, glioblastoma, prostate cancer, advanced
non-small cell lung cancer, and colorectal cancer. In this study, we
screened our MB established and patient primary cell lines by genomic
profiling analysis, and validated the targeted therapy both in vitro and
in vivo in xenograft mouse model.Methods: RNA expression profiling
analysis was performed with Affymetrix GeneChip U133 Plus 2.0 genome wide
expression cDNA microarray. Analysis was done using R/Bioconductor
packages and Partek Genomics Suite. Eleven MB cell lines were treated
with increasing concentrations (0-4 M) of BKM120 for 48 hours.
CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay was used to determine cell
viability. IC50 values were calculated with a four-parameter
variable-slope dose response curve using GraphPad Prism v.5 software.
IncuCyte ZOOM Live-Cell Imaging system was used for kinetic monitoring of
cytotoxicity of BKM120 and apoptosis in MB cells. Western blot analysis
was used to measure phospho-Akt, phospho-mTOR, and cleaved caspase 3
protein levels. ATP level per cell was measured using CyQuant fluorescent
DNA assay combined with CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay.
Xenograft study was performed with DAOY cells implanted in the flank of
nude mice and treated with vehicle, BKM120 at 30 mg/kg and 60 mg/kg via
oral gavage daily.Results: BKM120 exhibited cytotoxicity in MB cells in a
dose-dependent manner by inhibiting activation of downstream signaling
molecules Akt and mTOR, and activating apoptotic pathways and inducing
cell death in the eleven cell lines tested. IC50s of BKM120 in the MB
cell lines ranged from 0.456 to 2.9 M determined by cell viability assay.
Furthermore, BKM120 decreased cellular glycolytic metabolic activity in
MB cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. In MB xenograft mouse study,
BKM120 significantly suppressed tumor growth and prolonged mouse survival
at 30 mg/kg and 60 mg/kg.Conclusion: This study indicates that BKM120
promotes apoptosis and suppresses medulloblastoma tumor growth both in
vitro and in vivo. Additional investigation of BKM120for the treatment of
pediatric medulloblastoma is warranted.

