Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of tumor-associated macrophage utilizing
virus-guided fluorescent imaging of pancreatic cancer cells in the
peritoneal cavity


Objectives:Postoperative recurrence occurs in approximately 80% of
pancreatic cancer, and the peritoneum is the second most frequent
metastatic site next to the liver. Recent evidence suggests that cancer
microenvironment plays key roles in metastasis. To investigate mechanism
of intraperitoneal metastasis in pancreatic cancer, we tried to detect
cancer cell in the peritoneal wash from pancreatic cancer patients and
analyze intraperitoneal cancer microenvironment. A genetically engineered
adenovirus, TelomeScan, which replicates and expresses GFP only in
telomerase-active cancer cells, was employed to detect cancer cells, and
it enabled us to distinguish cancer cell from co-existence cells in the
abdominal cavity. We explored the role of tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs) by using this virus-guided fluorescent imaging
system.Methods:Peritoneal wash was obtained from 20 pancreatic cancer
patients during operation. The cells in the wash were infected with
TelomeScan for 24 hours. Samples from cases with TelomeScan-expressing
GFP-positive cells were further subjected to immunofluorescence assay for
analysis of microenvironment. The antibodies against CD45, CD14, and
CD204 were used in immunostaining as markers of leukocytes, monocytes and
TAMs, respectively. To investigate the effect of TAMs on pancreatic
cancer, Panc1 and BxPC-3 cell lines were co-cultured with PMA (phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate)-treated monocytes and analyzed their
changes.Results:The three out of 20 cases were positive in cytology, and
GFP positive cells were detected after TelomeScan infection in those
cases. In the wash, pancreatic cancer cells existed together with many
leukocytes including macrophages. Further analysis demonstrated that
those macrophages were TAMs. After Panc1 or BxPC-3 cells were co-cultured
with TAMs, E-cadherin was decreased in Panc1, -SMA and Vimentin was
increased in BxPC-3. These results suggested that Epithelial to
Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) was induced in pancreatic cancer cells by
TAMs.Conclusion:Pancreatic cancer cells and TAMs were detected in the
peritoneal wash using TelomeScan and immunostaining. The results
suggested that EMT induced by TAMs may promote intraperitoneal metastasis
of pancreatic cancer.

