Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual PI3K/mTOR inhibition as a treatment strategy for PIK3CA and
APC mutant colorectal cancers


BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is understood as a diverse group of
cancers calling for the personalization of therapeutics to individual
subtypes of CRC. Mutations in PIK3CA, which result in a constitutively
active phosphoinositide-3-kinase protein (PI3K), are present in 20-30% of
CRCs. Aberrations in the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene are found
in 86% of PIK3CA mutant CRCs. The potential for treatment of tumors with
this specific profile is of great interest. METHODS: Mice expressing a
constitutively active PI3K and loss of APC were generated and spheroid
cultures were derived from the resulting cancers. PIK3CA and APC mutant
spheroids were treated with GDC0941 (GDC), a pan PI3K inhibitor,
NVP-BYL719 (BYL), a PI3K alpha isomer specific inhibitor, or NVP-BEZ235
(BEZ), a dual mTOR/PI3K inhibitor. Proliferation was measured by changes
in spheroid diameter over time. BEZ treatment of mice with PIK3CA and APC
mutant CRCs was performed over 14 days. Tumor response was measured with
serial murine colonoscopy and dual hybrid 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging.
RESULTS: Persistent PIK3CA and APC mutant CRC spheroid growth was
observed with BYL and GDC treatment, while BEZ treatment resulted in a
significant reduction in spheroid size. Immunoblotting determined that
this correlated with significant suppression of phosphorylated AKT, RPS6
and 4EBP1 in BEZ-treated spheroids and incomplete PI3K pathway inhibition
following BYL and GDC treatment. BEZ treatment was then investigated in
mice with PIK3CA and APC mutant CRCs. BEZ elicited a dramatic treatment
response in these cancers on endoscopy, with a 53% decrease in median
lumen occlusion compared to a 60% increase in controls over the 14 day
treatment period. PET/CT imaging results confirmed these findings
demonstrating a decrease in tumor size and avidity post BEZ treatment.
BEZ resulted in inhibition of the PI3K pathway in these tumors.
Reactivation of PI3K signaling was observed within 24 hours of the
withdrawal of BEZ. BEZ was well-tolerated in these mice and associated
with a decrease in the endoscopic anemia score. CONCLUSIONS: PIK3CA and
APC mutant CRCs are a potentially targetable subtype of cancer. These
cancers are resistant to proximal inhibition of the PI3K pathway, but are
responsive to dual PI3K/mTOR inhibition. These results warrant further
investigation in clinical studies.

