Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cells overexpressing EMT-inducing transcription
factors mediate metastasis of neighboring tumor cells via secretion of
molecules that upregulate Hedgehog signaling


Breast cancers are known to be heterogeneous, and thus it is important to
understand how different tumor subpopulations influence each other to
mediate metastasis. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to
facilitate metastasis in breast cancer, via enabling tumor cells to be
more motile and invasive (amongst other properties), yet only a small
population of cells within a tumor is thought to undergo EMT at any one
time. Transcription factors (TFs) such as Twist1, Snail1, and Six1 induce
EMT, and are all known to increase metastasis of numerous tumor types,
but are not thought to be expressed uniformly throughout tumors. While
the cell-autonomous function of these EMT regulators has been extensively
studied, how cells expressing these TFs influence neighboring tumor cells
remains unknown. We have found that co-culture of HMLER-WT and
HMLER-Snail1/Twist1 cells leads to a significant increase in migration of
HMLER-WT cells. Importantly, transfer of conditioned media (CM) from
HMLER-Twist1 or HMLER-Snail1 cells to HMLER-WT cells leads to increased
migration and invasion, and Six1 is required downstream of Twist1 and
Snail1 to mediate these non-cell autonomous phenotypes. Similarly, CM
from metastatic MCF7-Six1 cells, when placed on MCF7-control (Ctrl)
cells, leads to an EMT in the control cells, as observed by
downregulation of cytokeratin 18 and membranous E-cadherin and
upregulation of fibronectin. Importantly, while MCF7-Ctrl cells are
non-metastatic when injected orthotopically into mice, co-injection of
metastatic MCF7-Six1 and MCF7-Ctrl cells into nude mice results in
increased metastasis of the control cells. These data demonstrate that in
a heterogenous tumor where a population of cells express EMT-inducing
TFs, these cells can influence their neighbors to also undergo EMT, thus
promoting their metastasis. More interestingly, we have found that the
non-cell autonomous effects of EMT-inducing TFs Snail1 and Six1 are
mediated by Hedgehog signaling, and that the secreted factors that lead
to activation of this pathway can be different in different contexts, but
all impinge on Gli activation as a critical means by which neighboring
cells develop metastatic characteristics. Therefore, our data suggest
that treatment of heterogenous tumors with downstream, rather than
upstream, inhibitors of the Hedgehog signaling pathway will be more
efficacious in treating metastatic progression in breast cancer, as the
pathway can be activated by means not dependent on the ligands SHH, IHH,
or DHH, nor on the canonical receptors.

