Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Costimulation of T cells by CD81 enhances CAR transduction of
naive T cells


T cells genetically modified to express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs)
mediate the eradication of antigen expressing tumor cells. The process of
ex vivo T cell transduction to express CARs influences the phenotype,
function and ultimate fate of the final CAR+ T cell product infused into
patients. Pre-clinical data supports that naive-derived effector T cells
have superior anti-tumor effect and enhanced persistence upon adoptive
transfer as compared to memory-derived effector T cells. CD81 is a member
of the tetraspanin family that functions as a T cell costimulator with
activity independent of and additive to CD28. The addition of CD81 to CD3
and CD28 costimulation specifically induces increased activation of naive
T cells. Retroviral genetic engineering methods require cells to be
activated and in cell cycle to permit optimal gene integration. Here we
demonstrate that introducing CD81 costimulation to the process of CAR
transduction results in enhanced activation of naive T cells and
resultant improved CAR transduction of the naive T cell subset.Human
naive T cells were isolated from healthy donors using magnetic bead
negative selection. The purity of isolation was confirmed using flow
cytometry showing CD62L+, 45RO- surface expression of the selected T
cells. Naive T cells were differentially activated using CD3 antibody
alone or in combination with CD28 or dual CD28 and CD81 costimulation.
Using CD69 as a measure of activation, we demonstrate that stimulation
with anti-CD3 alone or CD3 and CD28 antibodies does not activate isolated
naive T cells. The addition of a CD81 antibody induces activation of both
CD4+ and CD8+ naive T cells at 24 and 48 hours. We then transduced these
activated naive T cells with a retrovirus encoding1928z, a CD19 specific
second generation CAR. We used flow cytometry to confirm CAR transduction
and compared the transduction efficiencies of the differentially
costimulated groups.We demonstrate that adding CD81 costimulation to CD3
and CD28 T cell activation permits retroviral-mediated CAR transduction
of naive T cells. In contrast, stimulating CD3 alone or CD3 and CD28 does
not induce activation, nor CAR transduction of isolated naive T cells.
Transduction efficiency correlated with the degree of activation
pre-transduction. Although the starting population was comprised of
purified naive T cells, the activation and retroviral transduction
process induced a change in surface markers. Surface expression of CD45RO
increased and CD62L decreased, generating a final population of both
naive T cells and naive-derived memory and effector T cells. This
confirms that phenotyping T cells using surface markers following
transduction is not reflective of the original T cell parent
population.We conclude that inclusion of CD81 co-stimulation into the
process of CAR transduction improves transduction of naive T cells
resulting in a final CAR+ T cell pool enriched for more potent naive
derived CAR+ T cells.

