Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro effects of PI3K/mTOR inhibition in canine hemangiosarcoma


While extremely rare in humans, hemangiosarcoma (HSA) accounts for nearly
2% of canine neoplasia, and is characterized by both aggressive local
growth/invasion and a high rate of metastasis. Both canine and human HSA
exhibit sustained aberrant PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway signaling. The purpose
of this study was to examine the in vitro effects of a novel dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, VDC-597, in canine HSA cells. Three canine HSA cell
lines (DEN-HSA, CIN-HSA, and SB-HSA) were employed in multiple in vitro
assays. Western analysis evaluated activation (phosphorylation) of key
downstream pro-survival proteins in the PI3K/mTOR pathway. Changes in
tumor cell growth/apoptosis were assessed using both bioreductive assays
(Alamar Blue) and in vitro live-cell imaging (IncuCyte), in the presence
and absence of doxorubicin, a standard-of-care cytotoxic drug for canine
and human sarcomas, as well as in the presence and absence of U-0126, an
inhibitor of the MEK pathway. Migration was assessed using both Boyden
chamber and scratch assays, via live-cell imaging (IncuCyte). Matrigel
invasion was assessed using traditional Boyden chambers. Finally, ELISA
was utilized to quantify relative expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). VDC-597 suppressed activation of both Akt and 4eBP1
in canine HSA cells in a dose- and time-dependent fashion, with an IC50
of approximately 0.3 uM, a concentration predicted to be clinically
achievable based on preliminary early-phase canine and human studies.
VDC-597 dose-dependently reduced proliferation, migration, invasion, and
VEGF expression in HSA cells, while promoting tumor cell apoptosis.
VDC-597 demonstrated additive antiproliferative effects when combined
with doxorubicin and U-0126. Together, these results suggest that
inhibitors of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway may act against multiple
components of the neoplastic process, including proliferation/apoptosis,
chemosensitivity, invasion/migration and angiogenesis, and justify the
evaluation of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in canine, and eventually human, HSA.
Experiments to examine the effect of VDC-597 in reducing tumor burden and
metastasis in a rodent model are ongoing.

