Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel NAMPT inhibition resistance mechanism
utilizing the de novo NAD+ biosynthesis pathway


Targeting NAD(H) metabolism is being interrogated as a novel anti-cancer
strategy. Nicotinamide phoshophoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) was found to
be overexpressed in tumor cells, and plays a key role in the
replenishment of the NAD(H) pool in cells. In this study we have used a
commercially available NAMPT inhibitor, GMX1778, which exerts a cytotoxic
effect by decreasing the cellular level of NAD(H). Through serial
selection with increasing sub-lethal concentrations of GMX1778, we
derived a GMX1778-resistant HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cell line
(HT1080-GMX). The IC50 value for GMX1778-induced cell killing of the
resistant cell line was 100-fold greater than that determined for the
parental cell line. No significant change in the level of expression of
NAMPT was observed in HT1080 vs. HT1080-GMX cells. However, a key enzyme
in the de novo NAD(H) synthesis pathway known as quinolinate
phosphoribosyl transferase (QPRT) was significantly upregulated as
validated by Western blot and bDNA analysis. Knockdown of QPRT partially
restored the sensitivity to GMX1778 exposure in HT1080-GMX cells, but did
not affect the parental cells. The cytotoxicity of GMX1778 can be
partially rescued with exogenous quinolinic acid, which permits NAD(H)
repletion via QPRT in the de novo pathway, in HT1080-GMX cells but not
HT1080 parental cells. Overexpression of QPRT in HT1080 cells did not
fully rescue GMX-induced cytotoxicity and strongly suggests that there
are additional mechanisms of resistance in the HT1080-GMX cell line
beyond QPRT overexpression. Exome sequencing of the NAMPT gene in the
HT1080-GMX resistant lines identified a single mutation of amino acid
residue 18 from tyrosine to cysteine [NAMPT(Y18C)] located in the first
exon of one allele. Tyrosine 18 is located near the active site of NAMPT
and associates with NAMPT small molecule inhibitors through a pi stacking
interaction, as determined by studies of the enzyme's crystal structure.
Overexpression of the NAMPT mutant Y18C in HT1080 cells significantly
reduced the sensitivity to GMX1778 exposure, but overexpression of a
NAMPT Y18F mutant had no effects compared to the parental line. Based on
our results, activation of an alternate NAD(H) biosynthesis pathway via
QPRT or the Y18C mutation within the NAMPT coding sequence can both be
contributors to resistance in this line. The characterization of
resistance inducing up-regulation of other sources of NAD(H) such as de
novo synthesis or mutations in NAMPT may be useful in developing
next-generation NAMPT inhibitors that are less affected by known
resistance mechanisms.Disclosures:All authors are employees of AbbVie.
The design, study conduct, and financial support for this research was
provided by AbbVie. AbbVie participated in the interpretation of data,
review, and approval of the publication.

