Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oncogenic role of PRL-3 in multiple myeloma through regulation
of Src kinase family members


Introduction: Phosphatase of regenerating liver 3 (PRL-3) is a dual
specificity phosphatase and its up-regulation in cancer cells is related
to poor prognosis. We have previously described PRL-3 as a downstream
target of IL-6 in multiple myeloma (MM) by demonstrating that it was
upregulated in response to this cytokine. The Src kinase family (SFK) is
composed of 8 members and regulates proto-oncogenic cellular pathways. As
it has been reported that the SFK members Lyn, Fyn and Hck are important
in signal transduction of IL-6 signals in MM cells and that Src is
reported to be the major kinase regulated by PRL-3 in colon cancer, we
evaluated effects of PRL-3 on activation of Fyn, Lyn, Hck and Src in
MM.Methods: By retroviral transduction in the IL-6-dependent MM cell line
INA-6,we generated functional PRL-3(INA-PRL-3) overexpressing cells, and
control cells expressing catalytically inactive mutant PRL-3 (C104S) or
empty vector (Mock). We measured global tyrosine (Y) phosphorylation (P)
by immunoblotting using (P-Y1000) antibody. We measured the expression of
4 SFK members by qRT PCR and immunoblotting. Activity of SFK members was
evaluated using MILLIPLEX MAP8-plex Human SFK kit. We confirmed MILLIPLEX
result for Src by immunoblotting with antibody against P-Y416 Src
(activating phosphorylation site). We also measured Src activity after
inhibiting PRL-3 by PRL-3 inhibitor I or shRNA. Finally, we showed the
influence of PRL-3 on cell growth and cell sensitivity to two Src
inhibitors (PP2 and Su6656) by using CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell
Viability Assay.Results: INA-PRL-3 had more global P-Y than C104S and
Mock cells in the absence of IL-6 and showed a pattern of P-Y more
similar to that of the parental INA-6 cells grown in the presence of
IL-6. C104S and INA-PRL-3 cells showed lowest and highest activity,
respectively, of Lyn and Src. Stimulation of cells with IL-6 increased
active Lyn and Src but still C104S had lowest activity. We did not
observe significant difference in activity of Fyn and Hck. Measuring
total amount of 4 SFK members showed up-regulation of total Hck and Fyn
in C104S cells in mRNA and protein level. This indicated that inactive
PRL-3 in C104S cells leads to less SFK activity compared to both
INA-PRL-3 and Mock cells. Increased total amount of Hck and Fyn in C104S
could be the result of diminished negative feedback regulation of
expression of SFK members by their active forms. INA-PRL-3 showed more
P-Y416 Src also by immunoblotting and its inhibition by PRL-3 inhibitor
or shRNA decreased Src activity. INA-PRL-3 had higher growth rate than
both C104S and Mock cells. This difference was more prominent in the
absence of IL-6 and high SFK activity in INA-PRL-3 could be one of the
possible reasons for this. INA-PRL-3 also showed high sensitivity to both
PP2 and Su6656.Conclusion: Inhibition of PRL-3 and SFK members could be
considered as a possible treatment for MM.

