Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput validation of antibodies for cancer research


Antibodies are critical reagents both to study and treat a wide range of
cancers. In addition to the relevance of antibodies in immunotherapy,
their use in understanding cancer pathophysiology is one of the fastest
growing applications. Such applications create a constant demand for high
quality antibodies that can recognize a wide range of expression of a
specific target that is involved in cancer and metastasis. Even though
there are thousands of antibodies available, including those from
commercial sources, only a small percentage is well characterized and
demonstrated to be of dependable quality.Establishing the ground rules
for rigorous validation of antibodies used for immunodetection of cancer
targets is critical for obtaining high quality data. In fact, a number of
high profile preclinical study failures have been attributed to the use
of inadequately characterized antibodies exhibiting non-specific binding
or high background. While researchers typically rely on publications in
peer-reviewed journals as absolute indicators of antibody quality, this
approach has not proven to be very reliable.In this poster we describe a
robust and high throughput process for validating antibodies for use in
western blot applications for cancer research. Some key cancer-related
target proteins are detected by antibodies and the validation process is
illustrated using these western blot data. In a nutshell, each antibody
is screened against an entire panel of lysates from different cells
expressing endogenous levels of the target protein. A rapid membrane
transfer system coupled with a novel stain-free gel imaging technology is
used to ensure a high efficiency of transfer and assess protein quality.
Antibody sensitivity and binding specificity is determined based on
quantitative data generated using an image analysis software. This
software allows us to calculate the ratio of specific to non-specific
binding accounting for background within the same lane from the western
blot image. We have developed analytical parameters that, when applied to
these data, allow us to identify high performing antibodies. The basic
principles of this validation method are widely applicable for different
types of antibodies and sample types. Overall, this approach ensures the
selection of high-performing antibody reagents, thus enabling scientists
to get dependable data for academic or preclinical research which, in
turn, could significantly advance our understanding of cancer and help
develop novel immunotherapies for cancer treatment.

