Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The landscape of tumor mutation load across the entire spectrum of
human cancer derived from 60,000 patients


INTRODUCTIONTumor mutation load is a biomarker of emerging significance
in cancer immunotherapy. Both mutation load and neoantigen load, as
measured by whole exome sequencing, have been shown, in several tumor
types, to correlate with patient response to both CTLA4 and PD1
inhibition. Consequently, understanding the factors associated with
increased tumor mutational burden is critically important to cancer
patient treatment decisions. We sought to better understand the landscape
of tumor mutation load and potential response to immunotherapy based on
data from comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) of 60,000 tumors from
patients across 400 cancer types.METHODSCGP profiling by hybridization
capture of exonic regions from 236 or 315 cancer-related genes and select
introns from 19 genes commonly rearranged in cancer was applied to 50ng
of DNA extracted from >60,000 clinical FFPE cancer specimens. These
libraries were sequenced to high, uniform median coverage (>500x) and
assessed for base substitutions, short insertions and deletions, copy
number alterations and gene fusions/rearrangements. Mutation load was
accessed as the number of somatic, coding, base substitution and indel
mutations, per megabase of genome examined.RESULTSWe first validate that
mutation load calculated based on CGP of the entire coding region of 315
genes (1.3 MB) provides a representative measurement of genome-wide
mutational load. We quantify and provide detailed data describing
mutation load across common tumor types and identify recurrent somatic
mutations that are associated with significant increase in tumor mutation
load. Our analysis expands significantly upon existing data that
quantifies mutation load in hundreds of additional cancer types. Lower
grade and pediatric malignancies were observed to have the lowest somatic
mutation load, while diseases with significant known mutatgenic exposure
such as lung and skin cancers were most highly mutated. Finally, the
genomic alterations most associated with increased mutation load were
loss of function mutations in mismatch-repair genes (MSH2, MSH6, MLH1 and
PMS2), DNA replication genes (POLD1, POLE) and in TP53.CONCLUSIONThese
data demonstrate that tumor mutational load can be accurately quantified
using targeted CGP with a CLIA-certified assay that is already integrated
into routine patient care. As the role of mutation burden as a biomarker
for patient response to immune therapy becomes established, this approach
can be used to identify both targeted and immune therapeutic options that
are either approved or in clinical trial. Additionally, by characterizing
the landscape of mutation load across the full spectrum of human cancer,
we provide new data for the rational expansion of the patient population
that can potentially benefit from immunotherapy.

