Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dextran-Catechin conjugate: An anticancer nano-modified natural
compound targeting copper metabolism in neuroblastoma


Background: Neuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood cancer that is
poorly responsive to therapy. Moreover, survivors experience long term
side effects from their treatment highlighting the need for effective and
less toxic therapies. Catechin is a natural polyphenol with anti-cancer
properties and limited side effects. Low serum stability of Catechin
limits its clinical use that we overcame by chemical functionalization
with Dextran. However its mechanism of action is unknown. Here, we
investigated the mechanism of action of Dextran-Catechin, and its
efficacy against neuroblastoma in vitro and in vivo.Methods: Anticancer
activity was tested in 4 independent neuroblastoma cell lines using the
cell viability assay Alamar Blue and apoptosis was assessed using PARP
cleavage. Gene expression was determined using qRT-PCR and protein
expression of CTR1 by western blotting. Intracellular copper was measured
by spectrophotometric analysis. Fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy
was used to study NADH/NAD+ ratio to determine the induction of oxidative
stress. Cellular levels of the antioxidant GSH was examined using a
colorimetric assay. PET imaging studies with Cu64 were performed in a
xenograft neuroblastoma model to monitor copper uptake in tumors. In vivo
anticancer activity of Dextran-Catechin was assessed in human xenograft
and syngeneic models of neuroblastoma.Results: The neuroblastoma cell
lines SH-SY5Y, IMR-32, BE(2)C and doxorubicin-resistant BE(2)C-ADR were
sensitive to Dextran-Catechin (IC50 9.7 g/ml, 17.83 g/ml, 16 g/ml and
18.2 g/ml, respectively) at concentrations that were not toxic to
non-malignant MRC-5 cells. However, Cisplatin-resistant neuroblastoma
cells, IMR-32-CisRes, were 2.5-fold resistant against Dextran-Catechin
compared to the parental cells. Copper transporter 1 (CTR1) mediates
cisplatin uptake and IMR-32-CisRes exhibited 50% lower expression of CTR1
and lower intracellular copper compared to the IMR-32 cells. In contrast,
Dextran-Catechin sensitive neuroblastoma cells had elevated intracellular
copper implicating copper in the activity of this conjugate. We
demonstrated that Dextran-Catechin reacts with copper generating reactive
oxygen species and inducing cancer cell death. Dextran-Catechin treatment
caused a decrease of NADH/NAD+ ratio and GSH levels, confirming oxidative
stress. PET imaging analysis of the IMR-32-neuroblastoma xenograft model
revealed high accumulation of copper in the tumor mass. The high levels
of copper were maintained in the tumor mass for up to 48h, while Cu64 was
cleared by the other organs. Importantly, we showed that Dextran-Catechin
significantly reduced tumor growth in human xenograft and syngeneic
models of neuroblastoma with no evidence of side effects.Conclusion:
Dextran-Catechin targets copper, inhibits tumour growth, and has
therapeutic potential for cancers dependent on copper for their growth.

