Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the mechanism of AR-v7 nuclear translocation in
prostate cancer


Continuous androgen receptor (AR) signaling is the key driver of
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), despite prior androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT). Potent, next-generation AR signaling
inhibitors, such as abiraterone and enzalutamide have been recently added
to the standard of care in the treatment of prostate cancer. However,
resistance to these drugs inevitably emerges and is mediated by adaptive
mechanisms that restore AR function, in the form of constitutively
active, ligand-independent AR-variant (AR-V) overexpression. The
microtubule-targeting drugs Docetaxel (DTX) and Cabazitaxel (CTX) are the
only chemotherapy that significantly improves survival of CRPC patients.
We have shown that full-length AR (AR-fl) binds microtubules (MTs) via
its hinge domain, and utilizes them as tracks to facilitate its nuclear
translocation. Taxanes keep AR-fl inactive in the cytoplasm as a result
of MT stabilization. Of the two most prevalent AR-Vs, ARv567 contains the
hinge region and is sensitive to taxane treatment while AR-v7, expressed
in 60% of CRPC patients, lacks the hinge region and does not depend on
MTs for its nuclear translocation. Therefore, ARv7 nuclear translocation
is MT-independent and neither taxane treatment nor the disruption of
dynein motor complex inhibited its nuclear localization. Thus, AR-v7
expression confers taxane resistance in vivo, in addition to
next-generation AR inhibitors. Hence, inhibition of AR-v7 nuclear
translocation and activity is critical to overcome drug resistance to
current therapeutic modalities. However, the mechanism of ARv7 nuclear
translocation is not clearly understood. Previously, we showed that ARv7
exhibited faster kinetics of nuclear translocation compared to AR-fl.
Additionally, AR-v7 nuclear import is independent of the importin-/
pathway, which is utilized by the MT-dependent, AR-fl and ARv567. Upon
disruption of the Ran-GTPase nuclear import pathway, by overexpression of
the catalytic mutant Q69L form of Ran, we observed that the nuclear
import of both AR-fl and AR-V567 was significantly impaired, while ARv7
nuclear import was only partially affected. In this study, we
hypothesized that molecular dynamics of AR nuclear import and export
determines overall spatiotemporal localization of AR and its activity. To
test this hypothesis, we generated photo-convertible AR-fl and AR-Vs
(AR-v567 and AR-v7) fused to mEos4b construct, which enables us to track
protein mobilization in the region of interest after photo-conversion in
live cells. We are currently studying the nuclear import and export
kinetics of both AR-fl and AR variants (AR-v567 and AR-v7) alone and in
combination using the photo-conversion methodology. Elucidation of the
distinct pathway(s) that mediate ARv7 nuclear import and/or export will
allow the rationale design of effective ARv7 inhibitors or the
development of co-targeting strategies in combination with taxanes and AR
signaling inhibitors.

