Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation sequencing of a panel of genes contributing to
breast cancer risk


BRCA mutations account for a minority of hereditary breast cancer risk
families. Many other genes have been identified, with rare but highly
penetrant mutations, or more frequent mutations giving modest breast
cancer risk. Next generation sequencing has made it possible to explore a
wide sample of genes for their contribution to breast cancer risk. We
have sequenced gene panels in two populations of non-BRCA breast cancer
families.First, 47 French families were selected for triple-negative
breast cancer in the index case and >1 first degree relative with breast
cancer. A panel of 33 genes involved in cancer risk, DNA repair, and/or
partners of BRCA1 or BRCA2 was sequenced using DNA capture and GS-Flex
sequencing. Second, a Lebanese cohort of 25 non-BRCA cases with
Manchester scores >18 was sequenced on a MiSeq after capture of a similar
panel of 37 genes. BRCA1 and BRCA2 were included in both panels to
confirm previously obtained results. Large rearrangements were detected
using MLPA.Sequence alignment and variant identification was performed
using a combination of commercial software and an in-house GATK-based
pipeline. Variants were described as neutral or likely neutral if the MAF
in online databases exceeded 1%, if in silico analyses suggested
neutrality, and if splicing prediction algorithms agreed on the absence
of any significant effect.NGS analysis confirmed the absence of BRCA
mutations. Deleterious mutations were observed in three Lebanese cases:
two with a deletion in PALB2 and one stop mutation in ATM. Nine
additional Lebanese cases and four from the French TNBC group were found
to carry variants of unknown significance (VUS) in one or more genes.
Most cases were found to have one VUS; two TNBC cases had more than one
VUS and one Lebanese case had a VUS and a PALB2 mutation.The cases with
deleterious mutations had Manchester scores of 56, 22 and 19. Scores for
cases with VUSs ranged from 18 to 45 (average 23), and those with only
neutral or likely neutral variants ranged from 18 to 27 (average 21.8).
These differences are not significant, but additional cases are under
study and will be presented. No difference was observed between French
TNBC families with or without VUSs.DNA capture of gene panels is a quick
and efficient way of analyzing multiple genes involved in hereditary
cancer risk. Our panels focused on a limited number of genes involved in
DNA repair and/or direct interactions with the BRCA genes: the small
number of genes allowed us to analyze a maximum number of patients per
experiment on two relatively low-throughput machines. Although the two
cohorts are small, they show that the number of variants requiring
follow-up in non-BRCA genes is low. The absence of deleterious mutations
in genes involved in homologous recombination repair in the TNBC cohort
showed that although genes of this pathway are candidates for tumor
sensitivity to PARP inhibitors, the candidates we tested may not be
frequently constitutionally mutated.

