Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Successfully targeting triple negative breast cancer using
combination therapy of Didox and Doxorubicin with reduced cardiotoxicity


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive histological
subtype that has limited treatment options with chemotherapy being the
only systemic therapy for these patients. The most common chemotherapy
regimen used includes the anthracycline Doxorubicin (DOXO). Although DOXO
is a highly effective agent, its efficacy is limited due to acquired drug
resistance and cardiotoxicity. We have previously identified that
ribonucleotide reductase M2 (RRM2) is upregulated in TNBC cells and is a
key contributor to acquired drug resistance. The ribonucleotide reductase
inhibitor Didox has been shown to be a powerful free radical scavenger
and iron chelator that provides the capabilities to alleviate the
cytotoxic profile of DOXO especially the cardiotoxicity as well as
enhance the DOXO efficacy. In this current study, MDA-MB-468 and
MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells were treated with DOXO alone or DOXO plus Didox.
Synergy assays were performed and IC50 values were determined. Here we
report that Didox worked synergistically with DOXO and reduced the DOXO
IC50 values by more than one-half in each cell line. In order to
determine the in vivo benefit of adding Didox to DOXO therapy, ncr-nude
mice implanted with MDA-MB-468 xenografts were treated with (1) vehicle,
(2) daily Didox alone (425 mg/kg), (3) DOXO alone (10 mg/kg/week for 2
doses and 2 mg/kg/week for 3 additional doses), or (4) the combination of
DOXO and Didox. Tumor volumes over time were determined for each of the
treatment groups. At endpoint, we performed necropsy, collected serum,
and dried and weighed the hearts. Treatment with DOXO alone prevented
tumor growth and provided about a 70% lower tumor volume as compared to
vehicle treatment. Treatment with Didox alone yielded about 50% lower
tumor volume as compared to vehicle treatment. However, adding Didox in
combination with DOXO significantly inhibited the tumor size and resulted
in a 90% lower final tumor volume as compared to vehicle treatment. One
indicator of DOXO cardiotoxicity is increased heart weight. We found that
the heart weight of DOXO alone treated animals was significantly
increased and the inclusion of Didox in the treatment prevented this
increase. Collectively, these results identify that adding the
ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor Didox in combination with DOXO may be
used to treat TNBC by enhancing the efficacy on tumor inhibition and by
alleviating the cardiotoxic effects of DOXO.

