Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GULP1 is a potential tumor suppressor that modulates
chemo-resistance through regulation of Nrf2-Keap1 signaling axis in
urothelial carcinoma


By an integrated genomic approach, we recently identified engulfment
adaptor PTB-domain-containing 1 (GULP1) as a potential tumor suppressor
gene (TSG), selectively silenced in different types of solid tumors by
promoter methylation (PM). Here, we aimed to test GULP1 PM in urothelial
carcinoma (UC) and to functionally characterize GULP1 during UC
initiation, progression and acquisition of chemo-resistance.Initially,
using a panel of cell lines, we observed that silencing of GULP1
expression is mediated by PM in UC cell lines. Furthermore, to test if
this phenomenon is clinically relevant, we first employed quantitative
methylation specific PCR on 20 primary tumors and matched normal samples.
We observed higher frequency of GULP1 PM in tumors (35.0%) than in
matched normal tissues (10.0%). Secondly, additional 76 tumors of
different stages and grades of UC were tested and the methylation
frequency were similar in UCs (27.1%) and significantly higher than in
normal urothelial tissues (9.5%). Interestingly, UC cases with GULP1 PM
had a tendency of lymphatic/venous invasion (P = 0.066) when compared
with cases without GULP1 PM. Moreover, to explore the correlation of
GULP1 expression with different clinicopathological parameters, we
performed immunohistochemical analyses on 2 different UC
Tissue-Micro-Arrays. Overall GULP1 silencing was observed in 85% of UC
cases and silencing is significantly more in muscle invasive UC (MIUCs)
than in non-muscle invasive UC (NMIUCs) (PBy an integrated genomic
approach, we recently identified engulfment adaptor PTB-domain-containing
1 (GULP1) as a potential tumor suppressor gene (TSG), selectively
silenced in different types of solid tumors by promoter methylation (PM).
Here, we aimed to test GULP1 PM in urothelial carcinoma (UC) and to
functionally characterize GULP1 during UC initiation, progression and
acquisition of chemo-resistance.Initially, using a panel of cell lines,
we observed that silencing of GULP1 expression is mediated by PM in UC
cell lines. Furthermore, to test if this phenomenon is clinically
relevant, we first employed quantitative methylation specific PCR on 20
primary tumors and matched normal samples. We observed higher frequency
of GULP1 PM in tumors (35.0%) than in matched normal tissues (10.0%).
Secondly, additional 76 tumors of different stages and grades of UC were
tested and the methylation frequency were similar in UCs (27.1%) and
significantly higher than in normal urothelial tissues (9.5%).
Interestingly, UC cases with GULP1 PM had a tendency of lymphatic/venous
invasion (P = 0.066) when compared with cases without GULP1 PM. Moreover,
to explore the correlation of GULP1 expression with different
clinicopathological parameters, we performed immunohistochemical analyses
on 2 different UC Tissue-Micro-Arrays. Overall GULP1 silencing was
observed in 85% of UC cases and silencing is significantly more in muscle
invasive UC (MIUCs) than in non-muscle invasive UC (NMIUCs) (P<0.001,
Fisher's exact test).Numerous cell based assays revealed that GULP1
silencing confers growth advantage to tumor cells. Further mechanistic
analysis revealed that GULP1 has a crucial role in the regulation of
Nrf2-KEAP1 axis, maintaining actin cytoskeleton architecture and
assisting KEAP1 to prevent Nrf2 nuclear translocation. By using RT2
pathway expression array analysis of ShGULP1 T24 cells and T24 cells, we
discovered that GULP1 silencing induces activation of Nrf2 targets, such
as heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1). We further confirmed the inverse correlation
between GULP1 and HMOX1 expression in numerous UC cell lines by
forcefully modulating GULP1 expression. Since constitutive activation of
Nrf2 signature has been defined as responsible for chemoresistance, we
analyzed GULP1 PM and expression in cisplatin based therapy responsive
and resistant primary UC samples; and in isogenic cisplatin sensitive and
resistant T24 cell lines. Interestingly, GULP1 expression is lower both
in resistant primary UC samples and in resistant T24 cell
line.Altogether, our findings determined that GULP1 is an epigenetically
silenced potential TSG in UC and its inactivation lead to malignant
progression by constitutive activation of NRF2 pathway in UC
carcinogenesis. Furthermore, GULP1 expression and/or PM may guide in
selecting candidate patients for cisplatin based neo-adjuvant therapy.

