Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating payload delivery to the CNS from surface-modified
nanoparticles


The blood-brain barrier (BBB) remains a major obstacle to treatment of
intracranial tumors. Most drugs are poorly bioavailable in the brain, and
peripheral toxicity can severely limit administerable dose. Drug loaded
nanoparticles are capable of accumulating preferentially in the core of
angiogenic tumors by a mechanisms known as the enhanced permeation and
retention (EPR) effect, which can improve therapeutic efficacy of
encapsulated molecules compared to free form. However, to achieve
complete tumor kill, chemotherapy must target both the leaky tumor core
and cells that reside behind an intact blood-brain barrier.The goal of
this work was to evaluate payload delivery to the CNS from nanoparticles
modified with one of four targeting ligands: TAT, antennapedia (AP),
angiopep2 (Ang2) or Tet-1. Poly(lactic acid)-co- poly(ethylene glycol)
nanoparticles (NPs) encapsulating Nile Red, a small fluorescent dye, were
produced by solvent-evaporation technique. Peptides were covalently
attached to the nanoparticle surface by a maliemide-thiol reaction. The
effect of targeting ligands on NP payload delivery to healthy brain and
spinal cord compared to unmodified NPs was evaluated in mice at 2 and 6
hours post injection. Mice were perfused with saline, and the brains and
spinal cord were removed, homogenized and payload delivery quantified by
fluorescence.All targeting ligands evaluated significantly increased
payload delivery to the brain at both 2 and 6 hours, with the
cell-penetrating peptides, TAT and AP, producing the greatest effect of a
4-fold increase over control. Additionally, the cell-penetrating peptides
significantly increased payload delivery to the spinal cord at 2 hours
but had no significant effect on delivery at 6 hours. Interestingly, the
receptor-mediated peptides, Ang2 and Tet-1, did not significantly change
spinal cord delivery at 2 hours but significantly increased payload
concentration at 6 hours. These data suggest both receptor and
nonspecific targeting ligands affect payload delivery and kinetics in a
regionally specific manner. Future work is focused on evaluating
additional ligands to better understand how the type of cell-nanoparticle
interactions affects payload distribution.

