Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Control of lung cancer with aspirin-triggered stimulation of
resolution


Objective: To establish aspirin-triggered resolvins as a novel treatment
to enhance current cancer therapies through the resolution of
inflammation and clearance of cancer therapy-induced tumor cell debris.
Background: Inflammation in the tumor microenvironment is now recognized
as a strong promoter of tumor growth. Substantial epidemiological
evidence suggests that aspirin, which suppresses inflammation, also
reduces the risk of cancer. However, the mechanism by which aspirin
reduces cancer risk and improves survival remains unclear, and toxicity
has limited its clinical use. Low-dose aspirin stimulates the endogenous
production of aspirin-triggered (AT) resolvins, novel omega-3 fatty
acid-derived pro-resolving lipid autacoid mediators. We recently
discovered that resolvins have potent anti-tumor activity, making
resolvins potential candidates to mediate the anti-cancer activity of
aspirin. Thus, we hypothesize that aspirin's anti-cancer activity is
mediated in part by AT-resolvins via novel anti-inflammatory and
pro-resolution mechanisms. Methods: Flow cytometry confirmed apoptotic
and necrotic lung tumor cell debris following chemotherapy (etoposide) or
targeted therapy (erlotinib) treatment in vitro. Macrophage phagocytosis
was quantified via Relative Fluorescent Units (RFU). Cytokine levels were
quantified via ELISA. Results: AT-resolvins counter therapy-induced
debris-stimulated tumor growth and spontaneous lung metastases via
enhancing endogenous clearance of tumor debris via macrophages and
counter-regulating macrophage cytokine production. Pharmacological and
genetic antagonism of the AT-resolvin D1 receptor (ALX/FPR2) neutralized
aspirin's anti-cancer activity. Conclusions: AT-resolvins may provide a
novel pathway and molecular mechanism to explain how aspirin reduces
cancer risk so broadly. These anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving lipid
autacoid mediators may complement current therapies for lung cancer with
minimal toxicity.

