Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel and comprehensive screening of genes resistant to an
anticancer drug and radiation in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Esophageal cancer has a poor prognosis due to early
metastasis and direct invasion. Multimodal therapies including surgery,
chemotherapy, and radiotherapy are necessary for advanced esophageal
cancer. Although chemo or radiosensitivity is closely related to
prognosis, it is currently impossible to predict the therapeutic effect
of therapies. Patients with resistance to chemo or radiotherapy cannot
derive benefit from the therapy but suffer side effects. Therefore,
detecting resistant genes and mechanisms is essential for tailoring
treatment to improve the prognosis.Drug and radiation resistance may be
mediated by genetic changes in the tumor; therefore, the identification
of gene mutations may lead to better therapeutic outcomes. We used a
novel method involving transposons to screen and identify drug-resistant
genes and radio-resistant genes.Methods: A modified piggyBac transposon
was designed as an insertion mutagen, and a cytomegalovirus (CMV)
promoter sequence was added to induce strong transcription. After
establishing a transposon-tagged cell library, we treated cell lines
derived from esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCC) [Tohoku Esophagus
(TE)] with cisplatin (CDDP) or radiation. We performed splinkerette PCR
and TOPO cloning on the resistant colonies. Bacterial colonies were
sequenced, and Next-Generation sequencing was used to identify the
over-expressed/down-regulated sequences as candidate genes for CDDP
resistance or radiation resistance,Results: We established 4 cell lines
of transposon-tagged cells, TE 4, 5, 9, and 15. We treated the 2
relatively viable cell lines, TE4 and TE15, with CDDP or irradiation. We
identified 37 candidate genes from 8 resistant colonies for CDDP. Eight
genes were over-expressed whilst 29 were down-regulated. Eleven genes
were detected as candidate radioresistant genes.Conclusions: The new gene
screening technique was useful for detecting candidate of drug-resistant
genes and radio-resistant genes in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. We
identified 37 candidate genes responsible for CDDP resistance in the two
cell lines derived from ESCC cells. Eleven genes were detected as
candidate radioresistant genes in the two cell lines derived from ESCC
cells.The method is inexpensive, relatively simple, and capable of
introducing activating and de-activating mutations in the genome,
allowing for drug-resistant genes and radio-resistant genes to be
identified.

