Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct immune cell contact to basal-like triple negative breast
cancer cells evokes downregulation of EGFR and PD-L1


BACKGROUND:We previously reported that direct co-culture of triple
negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 and immune cells results in
reduction of EGFR expression on cell surface of MDA-MB-231 (AACR 2015
#2349). However, a role of reduction of EGFR on MDA-MB-231 via co-culture
with immune cells still remains unclear. Therefore, we evaluated a role
of reduction of EGFR on MDA-MB-231 at the immunological point of view by
testing expression of immune related genes including PD-L1.METHODS:In
order to verify the importance of direct immune cell contact to breast
cancer cell, MDA-MB-231 cells were co-cultured directly or indirectly
with THP-1 cells (human monocytic cell line) at 1:50 cellular ratios. In
order to study indirect co-culture assay, we used cell culture insert to
avoid direct cancer cell-immune cell contact. We analyzed gene expression
by quantitative real time PCR and membrane protein expression by flow
cytometry of EGFR, also other HER family on MDA-MB-231 which is directly
or indirectly co-cultured with THP-1. We also evaluated the expression of
immune related genes including PD-L1.RESULTS:Both mRNA and protein level
of EGFR on MDA-MB-231 cells directly co-cultured with THP-1 were
significantly decreased as compared to those with indirectly co-cultured
MDA-MB-231 cells. There are no significant differences in EGFR expression
between indirectly co-cultured MDA-MB-231 cells and control MDA-MB-231
cells. Importantly, PD-L1 expression on MDA-MB-231 cells directly
co-cultured with THP-1 was significantly decreased as compared to that
with indirectly co-cultured MDA-MB-231 cells.CONCLUSION:It has been
reported that PD-L1 expression in cancers is regulated by
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt signaling. Thus, our
findings may give a novel insight on regulation of PD-L1 expression on
cancer cells in tumor microenvironment that tumor infiltrated immune cell
directly contact with cancer cells and EGFR down-regulation leads to
reduction of PD-L1 expression on cancer cells.Further investigation is
needed to elucidate the mechanism of reduction of EGFR by direct immune
cell contact to cancer cells and its interaction with modulation of PD-L1
expression. This will provide novel aspects for immune therapy of breast
cancer patients.

