Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXD3 is a novel repressor of the expression of short isoform of
DCLK1 (DCLK1-S) from IntronV()-promoter of hDCLK1-gene, and is
epigenetically silenced in hCRCs: prognostic/diagnostic implications of
FOXD3/DCLK1-S expression in hCRCs


DCLK1 is a specific marker of colon and pancreatic cancers in mice, and
is elevated in human colon adenocarcinomas (hCRCs). Downregulation of
DCLK1, results in loss of cancer stem-cell-markers and
tumorogenic-potential of human colon cancer cells (hCCCs). We recently
reported a novel finding that hCRCs express short-transcripts of DCLK1
(DCLK1-S) from an alternate promoter located within IntronV of
DCLK1-gene, while normal human colons express the canonical long
transcript (DCLK1-L) from 5()-promoter. We and others have demonstrated
that 5()-promoter is hypermethylated in hCRCs, resulting in epigenetic
silencing and loss of expression of DCLK1-L in hCRCs. Although
5()-promoter is differentially methylated in normal human colons vs
hCRCs, methylation status of IntronV()-promoter does not change. We
therefore hypothesized that differential expression of DCLK1-S in normal
colons vs hCRCs is perhaps due to differences in transcriptional activity
of the promoter in normal vs cancer cells. To test our hypothesis, we
used several in silico and molecular biology approaches, and report for
the first time that FOXD3 is a potent transcriptional inhibitor of the
IntronV()-promoter, resulting in the absence of DCLK1-S expression in
normal human colons. Our results suggest that FOXD3 gene becomes
methylated during colon carcinogenesis, causing loss of FOXD3 expression,
and results in the expression of DCLK1-S in hCRCs. In order to examine
pathophysiological relevance of the loss of FOXD3 and gain of DCLK1-S
expression in hCRCs, we measured relative levels of FOXD3/DCLK1-S by
qRT-PCR in a cohort of 92 CRC patients, in relation to overall survival
and clinicopathological parameters. Patients expressing
high-DCLK1-S/low-FOXD3 had significantly worse overall-survival compared
to patients expressing low-DCLK1-S/high-FOXD3. High expression of
DCLK1-S, in conjunction with low expression of FOXD3, was a stronger
independent prognostic factor than expression of high levels of DCLK1-S
alone. Conclusions. Based on our studies, we report for the first time
that FOXD3 is a potent repressor of IntronV()-promoter of hDCLK1-gene in
normal cells, and that loss of FOXD3 expression due to hypermethylation
and silencing of FOXD3 gene during colon carcinogenesis, results in the
expression of DCLK1-S in hCRCs, representing an important biomarker of
hCRCs. Our findings also suggest a prognostic/diagnostic value of
measuring relative expression levels of DCLK1-S/FOXD3 in tumors of CRC
patients. It is speculated that loss of DCLK1-L and FOXD3 expression,
associated with increased expression of DCLK1-S can be used as an early
diagnostic marker of epigenetic changes, associated with colon
carcinogenesis in humans.

