Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The miR-17-92 microRNA cluster plays a crucial role in
osteosarcoma progression


Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone malignancy that affects
adolescents. Around 30% of patients with localized osteosarcoma and 70%
of patients with metastasis will experience treatment failure within 5
years of diagnosis. The complex biology of osteosarcoma and astounding
genetic heterogeneity has made it challenging to identify effective new
gene targets and therapeutic agents. Our studies found an overall
overexpression of a microRNA cluster, miR-17-92 microRNAs in human
primary osteosarcoma compared to normal bone. We learned that
upregulation of this miR-17-92 cluster simultaneously silences a suite of
key tumor suppressors. Using data from a novel spontaneous osteosarcoma
mouse model and genetic screen, we discovered miR-17-92 targets, such as
PTEN, PTRPD and SRGAP2, which are potential tumor suppressor genes.
Specifically blocking miR-17-92 function in osteosarcoma cells reduced
their migration and ability to grow larger tumors in immunodeficient mice
compared to the controls. Also, knockdown of miR-17-92 cluster microRNAs
led to increase in the levels of PTPRD and SRGAP2 in cells as well as
tumors; further suggesting that miR-17-92 is targeting these genes. We
also performed gain-of-function of miR-17-92 studies in a poorly
aggressive osteosarcoma cell line and found that overexpression of
miR-17-92 leads to ability to grow in an anchorage independent manner and
form tumors in immunodeficient mice, both features that are lacking in
the parental line. Ongoing RNA sequencing studies on miR-17-92 target
transcripts in osteosarcoma cells, and functional analyses of miR-17-92
deletion mutants, will be presented. In an attempt to target miR-17-92
miRNA expression, we have tested small molecules. Our data suggests that
triptolide, a diterpenoid epoxide, inhibits MYC expression and
downregulates miR-17-92 miRNAs resulting in upregulation of several tumor
suppressor driver proteins including PTEN, PTPRD, and SRGAP2. Together,
our data suggests that upregulation of miR-17-92 miRNAs contributes to
osteosarcoma progression and triptolide inhibits miR-17-92 expression.
These data have implications for how sarcomas develop in general and
suggest a new way to treat cancer by targeting microRNAs using small
molecules.

