Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copy number estimation of cancer samples with genome, exome and
targeted panel next generation sequencing


Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is mainly used to obtain sequence
variants (SNVs). However, obtaining copy number results from NGS has
gained momentum in both research and clinical applications. While
microarray has traditionally been the gold standard for copy number
analysis, NGS is rapidly gaining momentum as the first line analysis for
tumor samples. The genomic content captured may vary from batch to batch,
where targeted regions may include the full genome, all exonic regions or
may be limited to exonic regions in specific genes that have a clear
diagnosis, are actionable with prescription drugs or compounds in
clinical trials, or have known impacts on prognosis or outcome. Thus,
obtaining copy number information from a range of NGS methods is needed.
As a result, we have developed a method called BAM (pooled reference)
which only requires the loading of BAM files and the NGS design file to
generate copy number results. BAM (pooled reference) can derive copy
number results from Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS), Whole Exome Sequencing
(WES), and targeted panel NGS data. This method builds a reference file
out of a pool of BAM files that are either from normal controls or from
unrelated experimental samples, then generates copy number calls for each
experimental sample. In combination with the VCF files that contain the
sequence mutations, an integrated analysis of both events can be easily
carried out. To test this algorithm, five colon adenocarcinoma whole
exome sequencing samples were processed through the BAM (pooled
reference) algorithm in Nexus Copy Number 8.0. GC correction schemes
based on a range of window size and presence or absence of GC probe
content were applied to the data and assessed for overall quality.
Differences in overall read-depth resulted in variable sample quality
across the cohorts, however most sample quality was adequate for copy
number estimation and a quality threshold was assessed. Among the samples
tested, the best quality after GC correction comes from the 50kb region
size with or without the probes. Next, the copy number profiles of the
TCGA COAD samples from WES and microarray were compared for accuracy.
Using microarray results as a reference for assessing calls greater than
5 MB, no false positive and one false negative call were observed; the
single false negative call was attributable to low-level mosaicism in the
tumor sample. Results indicate that relative copy number can be estimated
and is comparable to the results achieved with microarray for the same
targeted regions. This analysis series was then repeated using a
secondary cohort of unrelated samples subjected to microarray and
targeted panel NGS to validate results. The BAM (pooled reference) method
has been tested in a variety of cancer samples. This is an ideal tool for
copy number estimation with NGS results in cancer samples because it
provides a way for non-pair matched analysis with genome, exome and
targeted NGS.

