Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cloud-enabled open source data management platform supporting a
federated research and development organization


Biopharmaceutical R&D organizations characterize drug candidate target
effects and modes of action and create molecular models of target
diseases. These data-intensive activities are informed by vast data
resources including publicly available data, internally generated data
and partnered private data collections. However, rapid evolution in
computing, data management tools, analytical and visualization methods,
the complexity of data types and the data volumes that must be
accommodated present significant technical and logistic hurdles to
overcome. It is particularly difficult for a geographically dispersed R&D
organization to make data resources easily available to scientists for
search, visualization and exploration. Nevertheless, this is required for
R&D scientists to gain insight into disease and drug mechanisms and to
capture the knowledge needed to sustain the scientific
enterprise.Standardized commercial solutions to R&D data challenges are
unattractive since they require significant resource investment in
platform configuration, user-training and system maintenance. This
strategy necessarily creates delay in adopting newly emerging
technologies and provides incentive not to adopt alternatives due to
investment in existing systems. In contrast, our solution to R&D data
demands was to build a cloud-deployed data platform using state of the
art tools developed and maintained by the open source software community
at the Apache Software Foundation. Partnering with academic data
scientists, we selected the best available tools to fit our specific
needs. We integrated them into a platform accessible to our federated R&D
scientific community while allowing the system to be freely modified and
updated on demand to meet evolving user requirements.Priorities for our
data platform are to ingest, secure and index R&D source data of all
types, make these indexed data assets available to computational
scientists for analysis and provide faceted search capability based on a
comprehensive metadata model. Three products: LabKey server, Apache OODT
and ISATools have all been combined into a scientific data management
system to provide a unified data resource enhanced by a search platform
powered by Apache Solr. The platform supports both internally generated
data and data imported from public, contracted or partnered sources. All
data are available for interactive exploration by our R&D community,
accessed via integrated search, analysis and visualization
tools.Deployment of this system to our R&D organization has been met with
enthusiastic adoption. Feedback for improvement or requests for system
enhancements and additional capabilities are rapidly addressed in this
open source environment, leading to further adoption among the R&D
scientists and providing the basis for accessible, stable institutional
knowledge collections.

