Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mediator kinase module as a transducer of oncogenic
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling


Dysregulation of Wnt/-catenin signaling promotes colorectal cancer (CRC)
and other types of malignancies through unprogrammed changes in gene
transcription that drive tumorigenesis. CDK8 is a CRC oncoprotein whose
amplification-dependent overexpression identifies a significant subset of
CRC patients with poor prognosis. CDK8 kinase activity, along with Cyclin
C (CycC), drives tumorigenesis by stimulating -catenin transcriptional
activity. Thus, inhibition of CDK8 kinase function offers a promising
therapeutic approach for CDK8-overexpressing CRCs. CycC-CDK8, along with
MED12 and MED13, compose a four-subunit kinase module within Mediator, a
conserved multiprotein interface between gene-specific transcription
factors and RNA Polymerase II. We have previously identified a network of
physical and functional interactions within the Mediator kinase module
critical for oncogenic Wnt/-catenin signaling. Mechanistically, -catenin
binds directly to MED12 in Mediator, thus activating CycC-dependent CDK8
kinase activity and -catenin transcriptional activity. More specifically,
MED12-dependent CDK8 activation occurs through a direct interaction
involving the MED12 N-terminus and a phylogenetically conserved surface
groove on CycC. Here, we demonstrate that mutagenic disruption of the
MED12/CycC interface in CRC cell lines leads to uncoupling of CycC-CDK8
to MED12 and core Mediator, and concomitant loss of Mediator-associated
CDK8 activity. Transcriptome analysis of cells lacking CDK8 kinase
function revealed downregulation of Wnt/-catenin signaling and other
oncogenic pathways, consequently impairing CRC cell proliferation and
clonogenicity. Our studies therefore identify the MED12/CycC interface as
a critical transducer of oncogenic Wnt/-catenin signaling. By validating
MED12/CycC as a potential therapeutic target, our findings have
significant implications in current methods of treating CRC as they pave
a way for development of novel, targeted inhibitors of Wnt/-catenin
signaling to treat colorectal and other CDK8-driven driven
malignancies.Supported by MH085320-05 (TGB), RP140435 (TGB) and
T32DE14318 (ADC).

