Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPARC expression stimulates paracrine inhibitory response from
bone marrow stroma during dormancy of prostate cancer in the bone


Recurrent disease is the most daunting aspect of cancer treatment;
however, how tumor cells become dormant and later recur even years after
successful treatment is poorly understood. However, studies to decipher
mechanisms responsible for dormancy have been hampered due to lack of
appropriate model. In this study, we isolated two syngeneic cell lines
(Indolent and Aggressive), which recapitulates dormancy and recurrence of
prostate cancer in the bone microenvironment. We found that Indolent
cells retained dormant phenotype whereas Aggressive cells grew rapidly in
the tibial bone in vivo whereas the in vitro cell proliferation,
invasion, migration and self-renewal properties of both cells in culture
were not altered, suggesting the role of microenvironment in regulation
of dormancy and recurrence. The expression profile by our microarray
analysis revealed that SPARC and Noggin (a known inhibitor of BMP7) were
significantly upregulated in Indolent and Aggressive cells, respectively.
SPARC secreted by Indolent cells was found to stimulate BMP7 expression
in bone stromal cells that in turn inhibited cancer cells by activating
the dormancy-associated p38 MAPK pathway and its downstream cell cycle
inhibitors, p21 and p18. In addition, BMP7 increased senescence and
diminished stem-cell phenotype of cancer cells, which was rescued by
addition of recombinant Noggin. We also found that BMPR2 plays a crucial
role in SPARC-induced paracrine inhibition of tumor cells residing in the
bone. Accordingly, BMPR2 knockdown rescued the BMP7-mediated decrease in
stemness. Importantly, the BMPR2 correlative signature was enriched in
patients who did not experience recurrence for a long period of time,
which further verified the role of BMPR2 downstream signaling in
dormancy. When primary tumor samples were examined by
immunohistochemistry, both SPARC and BMPR2 were found to be significantly
downregulated in patients with bone metastasis. Moreover, patients who
did not experience bone metastasis were found to express high level of
both SPARC and BMPR2. Importantly, we also observed elevated expression
of DNA methylase genes, DNMT1 and -3B in Aggressive cells. Treatment of
Aggressive cells with NS398, a COX-2 inhibitor downregulated DNMTs and
concomitantly augmented SPARC expression in vitro. Therefore, recurrence
of cancer cells in the bone microenvironment involves epigenetic
regulation of SPARC and disruption of inhibitory crosstalk of cancer
cells with the stroma. These findings suggest that SPARC plays a critical
role in maintaining dormancy of prostate cancer cells in bone
microenvironment.

