Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass spectrometry imaging determines biomarkers of early adaptive
precision drug resistance in lung cancer


Drug resistance emergence is a common problem that limits long term
outcome benefits in the era of precision cancer therapy. Recently, we
identified an early precision drug escape mechanism with adaptive tumor
cellular reprogramming emerging within days after drug initiation. Here
we present a mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) approach to interrogate the
biomolecular changes occurring within residual tumor cells under
precision treatment with an ALK-specific kinase inhibitor TAE684 in
EML4-ALK fusion (ALK+) lung adenocarcinoma xenograft.ALK+ H3122 lung
adenocarcinoma murine xenograft model was established for in vivo
treatment with TAE684, at a daily dose of 25mg/kg by orogastric gavage (n
= 6). Diluent control was included as comparison (n = 6). Tumor
measurement revealed expected remarkable tumor response with TAE684.
Control tumors and drug-treated residual tumor tissues were harvested for
MSI studies, at day 7 and day 14 during tumor response. MSI was carried
out on formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissues to compare peptide
profiles between control tumors and 7- and 14-day ALK-TKI treated tumors
using a histology guided mass spectrometry approach. Briefly, two
sections were collected from each sample, one for mass spectrometry and
one for histology. Mass spectrometry sections were deparaffinized,
antigen retrieved, and subjected to on-tissue tryptic digestion. Tumoral
areas of interest (100 m diameter, 20 per sample) were annotated on
digital microscopy images of the stained sections. The annotated images
were merged with digital images of the unstained sections using Photoshop
and this combined image was used to guide data acquisition from the areas
of interest. Additionally, frozen control and day 14 TAE684 treated
tumors were subjected to full section MSI to determine the ALK inhibitor
drug distribution as well as the changing landscape of lipids and
metabolites.Statistical analysis of the peptide data resulted in
determination of 580 significant peaks using Wilcoxon rank sum test with
a Bonferroni correction. A genetic algorithm classification model
consisting of 24 peptide peaks was generated using a leave-20%-out cross
validation over 10 iterations that resulted in an overall classification
accuracy across the 3 groups of over 98%.Direct MS/MS fragmentation
revealed that TAE684 was detected within the frozen dosed tumors, but was
absent from the control tumors. Several lipids (notably, m/z 732.78,
744.67, and 770.72 increased, m/z 769.65 and 820.71 decreased) were found
to undergo alterations in expression as a result of TAE684 treatment.MSI
allowed for the direct in situ determination of biomolecules that are
changing in expression landscape in ALK+ lung cancer as a result of
TAE684 treatment. These results provide a rationale to advance our MSI
studies to deepen our insights in mechanisms of adaptive precision drug
resistance to improve treatment outcomes.

