Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron chelation inhibits mTORC1 signaling in tumor cells


Iron chelators are commonly used for treatment of iron overload diseases.
Recent studies have shown that iron chelators possess potent anticancer
activities. Iron chelators (ciclopirox and 3-AP) are in clinical trials
for cancer treatment. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the
anticancer effect of iron chelation is not well understood.
Mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a master kinase,
regulating cell growth/proliferation and survival through sensing
environmental cues. mTOR functions as at least two complexes (mTORC1/2).
Here we show that two iron chelators, ciclopirox olamine (CPX) and
Dp44mT, inhibit tumor cell proliferation by suppressing mTORC1 signaling
in human rhabdomyosarcoma (Rh30) and lung cancer (A549 and A427) cells.
This is evidenced by the findings that treatment with CPX or Dp44mT
inhibited the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and S6K1, two best known effector
molecules of mTORC1, which could be blocked by addition of ferrous
sulfate. Addition of ferrous sulfate prevented the growth inhibitory
effect of CPX. Ectopic expression of constitutively active mTOR also
conferred resistance to CPX-induced growth inhibition. Mechanistically,
iron chelation inhibition of mTORC1 was partially linked to the
activation of AMPK, a negative regulator of mTORC1. Overexpression of a
dominant-negative AMPK (DN-AMPK) in Rh30 cells attenuated the inhibitory
effect of CPX or Dp44mT on the phosphorylation of S6K1 and 4E-BP1. In
addition, iron chelation also transiently stabilized HIF-1 and further
upregulated the expression of its downstream effector Bnip3, another
negative regulator of mTORC1. Knockdown of Bnip3 partially attenuated the
inhibitory effect of iron chelation on mTORC1. Furthermore, we found that
iron chelation increased the translocation of mTOR from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus. The co-localization of mTOR with the third negative
regulator of mTOR, PML (promyelocytic leukemia), increased in the nucleus
upon iron chelation. Moreover, iron chelation did not obviously alter the
phosphorylation of IGF-1 receptor, PI3K or PTEN. The effect of iron
chelation on mTORC2-mediated phosphorylation of Akt was cell line
dependent. Taken together, the results suggest that the anticancer effect
of iron chelation is in part related to inhibition of mTORC1 signaling,
and iron chelation inhibits mTORC1 signaling via multiple mechanisms.
(Supported by the FWCC, LSU Health Sciences Center)

