Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cell enrichment and dielectric manipulation for
ultra-pure cell recovery in advanced bladder cancer


Background: Advanced transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the bladder is
a lethal malignancy with few available biomarkers to guide therapy.
Recent evidence suggests that circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are
detectable in TCC and may have a prognostic role; however, most studies
to date have focused on CTC enumeration. We leveraged novel enrichment
and capture technologies to isolate and recover ultra-pure CTC (upCTC)
that can be used for single cell molecular analysis.Methods: Patients
with metastatic bladder cancer were enrolled under an institutional
review board approved pilot study. Blood samples (7.5 ml each) were drawn
into EDTA or Cell-Free DNA blood collection tubes (Streck), and
preliminary CTC enrichment was performed using one of 3 microfluidic
platforms: i) EpCAM-based LiquidBiopsy system (Cynvenio); ii)
size/deformability-based ClearCell FX system (Clearbridge); or iii)
size/deformability-based Parsortix system (Angle). Enriched CTCs were
labeled with Cytokeratin (CK), EpCAM, and CD45 immunofluorescent
antibodies and Hoechst nuclear stain. Identification and recovery of
upCTCs was performed on a DEPArray v2 system (Silicon BioSystems).
Additional experiments using cell lines were performed to gauge the
recovery of mRNA from rare cancer cells collected in EDTA vs.
preservative tubes.Results: To date, samples were collected from 8
patients of whom 5 (63%) had detectable CTCs. All 3 enrichment platforms
successfully yielded CTC fractions from which Hoechst+/CK+/CD45- upCTCs
were subsequently identified and recovered on the DEPArray v2 system.
Additional cells that were Hoechst+/CK-/CD45- were identified and
collected, and cells also were gated by integral Hoechst intensity and
collected for correlation to aneuploidy. Comparison of mRNA recovery from
10 cancer cells collected into EDTA vs. fixative tubes (CellSave,
Cynvenio, Streck Cell-free RNA) demonstrated that gene expression
readings by qPCR from rare fixed cells was feasible but associated with
variable results, likely due to variable proteinase K reversal of
mRNA-protein cross-linkages.Conclusion: We leveraged new techniques to
develop and optimize a workflow for identification and collection of
upCTCs from bladder TCC patients, and we established that gene expression
profiling is also feasible, albeit currently is still best achieved using
EDTA collection and not any of the available preservative tubes. Single
upCTC molecular profiles (DNA alterations, gene expression) from patient
samples generated using these protocols may help to elucidate mechanisms
of disease progression and ultimately may advance the management of
advanced bladder cancer.

