Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High rates of informed consent for biospecimen sharing among
hispanic women in a safety-net clinic


Introduction: Biospecimen sharing among low-income and undeserved
individuals has been reported to low. Few data exist on participation in
biospecimen sharing for research purposes and reasons for declining
participation by individuals from underserved populations. To address
this gap, we conducted a randomized study to compare the rate of informed
consent for biospecimen collection and data sharing for research when
participants were consented by their physician versus a research
assistant.Methods: Eligible participants included Hispanic English or
Spanish-speaking patients 18 years of age or older who underwent breast
biopsy at the Breast Center in Maricopa Integrated Health Services
(MIHS), a safety-net facility in Phoenix, Arizona. Consecutive patients
receiving care at the center were asked to participate in the study and
individually randomized to be consented by their physician or a research
assistant not working in the Breast Center. Informed consent was
delivered vi an electronic tablet. Biospecimen sharing for research
included a saliva sample for DNA extraction and formalin fixed paraffin
embedded tissue. Data collection included sociodemographic variables,
health literacy using Newest Vital Sign (NVS) instrument, and a trust
questionnaire based on the Biobanking Attitudes and Knowledge Survey
(BANKS-SP-Trust). Rate of participation was compared between the two
randomization arms and reasons for participation were assessed.Results:
The study enrolled 140 women (70 to each randomization arm). Study
participants had a mean + sd age of 46.7 +11.6 years and most (95%) were
of Mexican descent and Spanish-speakers (85%). Mean (sd) education level
was low (8.7 + 4.1) years. Eighty-five percent of the participants were
found to have limited health literacy. Using a 1 to 10 Likert scale, the
mean + sd range of responses to the BANKS-SP-Trust in relation to 10
different attributes was from 7.7 + 2.5 for health insurance companies to
9.2 + 1.5 for doctors who do research. Results showed very high rates of
consent with no significant difference between the two randomization
arms: 97.1% for the physician and 92.9% for the research assistant.
Participants who were current smokers were 60% less likely to consent (p
= 0.045) and those who were unmarried were 90% less likely to consents (p
= 0.043). All women who refused consent had limited health literacy
whereas 86% of those who consented had this limitation but this was not
statistically significant (p = 0.346). No association between consent and
trust was observed.Conclusions: Consent for biospecimen and data sharing
among low-income Hispanic women is very high, with only current smokers
and unmarried females being significantly less likely to provide consent.
More efforts should be made to reach out to patients in safety-net
facilities for biospecimen sharing to overcome the scarcity of
representation of underserved individuals in biospecimen repositories.

