Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the role of PAK7 variants in melanoma


Melanoma mortality is directly linked to its profoundly metastatic nature
and inherent resistance to conventional chemotherapy. For this reason,
increased understanding of the molecular mechanisms driving melanoma
progression is of utmost importance. The p21-activated serine/threonine
kinases (PAKs) are frequently mutated or overexpressed in cancer and have
recently been implicated in tumor metastasis, proliferation, and
apoptotic resistance. This observation has inspired drug discovery
efforts to limit PAK activity; yet, mechanistic understanding of how PAKs
(especially Type II PAKs) contribute to tumor initiation and progression
is still evolving. PAK7, a type II PAK, is mutated in 16-18% of all
melanomas. Melanoma-associated PAK7 mutations occur throughout the gene
and have unknown biochemical and physiological consequences. The
objective of this study was to determine how tumor-associated PAK7
variants mechanistically contribute to melanoma initiation and
progression. First, we characterized PAK7 protein expression in a panel
of 39 melanoma cell lines and primary melanocyte cultures. PAK7 levels
were similar in both tumorigenic and non-tumorigenic cells and failed to
correlate with the status of common melanoma driver mutations (e.g.
NRASQ61, BRAFV600). In an array of 101 human tumor biopsies, PAK7
expression did not significantly change with advancing melanoma stage;
however, PAK7 levels were higher in regional lymph node biopsies when
compared to primary skin lesions. Since mutation is the predominant
mechanism affecting PAK7 in melanoma, we investigated the biochemical and
physiological consequences of common PAK7 variants. 11 distinct PAK7
mutations were stably expressed at low levels in VMM39 (melanoma) and
NCI-H441 (lung) cells. Using these clones, changes in the phosphorylation
of downstream PAK7 targets associated with cellular migration (p120),
proliferation (CRAF), and apoptotic resistance (BAD, MDM2) were examined.
In addition, we defined phenotypic alterations in cellular morphology,
proliferation, migration, and apoptotic resistance associated with the
expression of each mutant. These data allowed us to classify PAK7
variants of unknown significance into groups associated with specific
cellular outcomes. To our knowledge, this is the first study to
functionally characterize a wide variety of melanoma-associated PAK7
mutations and represents a critical first step in understanding how this
kinase contributes to tumor initiation and progression.

