Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signatures in circulating tumor cells are
prognostic for metastatic lesions in breast cancer patients and correlate
with response to therapy


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTC) are discussed to be an ideal
surrogate marker to monitor disease progression in metastatic breast
cancer (MBC). Besides CTC characterization for targeted therapies, it
would also be desirable to know where these cells derive from or to which
organ site they are going to. Here we investigated whether it is possible
to predict the origin of metastatic lesion based on the expression of 46
genes in CTC of MBC patients (pts).Materials and Methods: 25 ml blood of
45 MBC pts and 20 healthy controls was collected at the time of disease
progression (T0) and at two consecutive clinical staging (T1 and T2) for
the detection of CTC applying immunomagnetic enrichment using the
AdnaTest EMT-2/Stem Cell Select (QIAGEN Hannover GmbH, Germany). Pts were
grouped a) into overall responders (OR) and overall non-responders (ONR),
thus responding or not responding at T1 and T2 and b) according to sites
of metastasis. PCR assays, targeting 46 transcripts and reference markers
were used for a workflow based on pre-amplification and high throughput
profiling (each samples in duplicates) with the full set of markers
including also ValidPrime to correct for genomic background and
InterPlate Calibrator to even out variations between runs. Data were
analyzed using GenEx (MultiD, Sweden) and SAS. qPCR as well as technical
reads were normalized using several normalization strategies.Results: The
multidrug resistant protein gene MRP1 was significantly differently
expressed if OR and ONR groups were compared. In the following order of
significance, VEGFR1, Keratin (KRT) 19, EGFR, MET1, ALDH, progesterone
receptor (PR), UPA, Cathepsin D, KIT1 and Ki67 were differentially
expressed in CTC of pts who had already developed liver metastasis as
compared to pts without liver metastasis. Interestingly, a small group of
pts, developing liver metastases in the course of disease, showed the
estrogen receptor (ER), PR, HER2, mammaglobin, KRT19 on a significantly
lower level as compared to the other pts. Similarly, once CTC were ER and
PR positive, the probability of bone metastasis development
decreased.Conclusion: Our preliminary results indicate that the
development of metastatic lesions is associated with site-specific CTC.
Thus, besides using CTC as a monitoring tool to guide therapy, they might
also indicate the site of metastasis which will allow a more precise
decision concerning treatment strategy.

