Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of late stage tumors powering precision medicine
in Japan


Much evidence has shown that genomic profiling of tumors provides
patients with treatment options specific to their tumor's biology in the
US. Within the Kyoto University Hospital Cancer Center, we offer patients
access to these tests through the OncoPrimeTM for those patients of
cancer with unknown primary (CUP), rare tumor types or for which standard
treatment options have failed. Our institution sees over 6,000 cancer
patients each year with over 1,500 receiving chemotherapy and a
progressive climate makes this kind of testing favorable. We aim to
demonstrate the efficacy of genomic profiling along with successful
execution of international specimen logistics as FFPE samples are shipped
to EA Genomics and clinical report is provided within 3 weeks.We
officially launched the product publicly in March 2015 and the majority
of patients have paid for testing out of pocket in lieu of insurance
coverage. During this first year, we saw 30% of patients with CUPs, and
16% of both pancreas and biliary tract with the rest being other rare
cancers. Patients going through the testing were generally successful
(93.5%) with the specimen failures likely indicative with FFPE artifacts
or severe tumor heterogeneity. Actionabilty for our population (84.8%) is
consistent with previously published numbers for information provided in
the clinical report.Additional information was collected after the
clinical reports to determine early indicators of follow up and see that
the accepted term actionability holds different meaning during the
practice of patient care. While we had 17% of patients receive the
suggested indication we have yet seen positive response from patients who
have returned for follow-up. Selected tissues were tested by alternative
profiling vendors, and in one case alternate action with Erlotinib was
recommended by one vendor; this action has shown promising response. This
suggests that heterogeneous interpretation is still a largely unsolved
issue with genomic profiling. This may suggested that interpretation is
still a largely unsolved issue with genomic profiling. While almost all
other patients tested qualified for clinical trials (84.8%) we noted 3
main barriers to entry: geography, cost of intervention and deterioration
of patient condition.We show our results in line with previous studies
but strive to increase adoption of results and are compiling information
of pan cancer biomarker statuses and treatment success/failures to
improve interpretation prior to wider adoption of this kind of testing.

