Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia induced resistance to chemotherapy is regulated by the
endothelin receptor axis


IntroductionTumor cells growing in the brain are resistant to
chemotherapy. We have recently demonstrated that the activation of the
endothelin receptors A and B axis is involved in the induction of
resistance to chemotherapy by primary brain tumor cells and by brain
metastases. Treatment with a dual endothelin receptor antagonist in
combination with chemotherapy produced significant therapy of
orthotopically growing glioblastoma cells as well as breast cancer and
lung cancer brain metastases. Since the milieu of tumors in the brain is
hypoxic (0.5% - 1% O2), we investigated whether the chemo-resistance of
the tumor cells is linked to hypoxia mediated activation of the
endothelin receptor axis.Materials and Methods Human glioma (LN229),
breast cancer (MDA231), and lung adenocarcinoma (PC14) cell lines were
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 5% FBS. The endothelin receptor A
(ETAR) and/or B (ETBR) of cancer cells were knocked down by shRNA. ETAR
and ETBR were activated by incubating the tumor cells with exogenous
endothelin-1 for 15 minutes or blocked by treating the parental or
engineered cells with ETAR-specific antagonist, BQ123 (100nM), and/or
ETBR-specific antagonist, BQ788 (100nM), for 2 hours prior to the
addition of paclitaxel (5ng/ml), temozolomide (100g/ml) or cisplatinum
(5g/ml). The cultures were placed into incubators with an atmosphere of
20%, 6% or 1% oxygen for 48 hours(MDA231 cells) or 72 hours (LN229 and
PC14 cells). Tumor cells were then plated into 96-well plates to
determine chemosensitivity by the MTT assay or into 6-well plates for
western blots, or into chamber slides for immunohistochemical analyses.
Expression of survival-related proteins such as pETAR, pETBR, pAkt,
pMAPK, pNFB, GSTA5, TWIST1 or Bcl2L1, were then determined.Results
Stimulation of parental MDA-231, PC-14, or LN229 cells with exogenous
ET-1 induced significant resistance against all tested chemotherapeutic
agents. The resistance was abolished only when both the ETAR and ETBR
were antagonized by a combination of BQ123 and BQ788. Parental cells
cultured under hypoxia were also significantly resistant to chemotherapy
and treatment of these cells with BQ123 and BQ788 reversed this
resistance. The effects of exogenous ET-1 on the induction of
chemo-resistance or BQ123 and BQ788 on restoration of chemo-sensitivity
were not found in any cancer cells devoid of ETAR and ETBR. In all cases,
the chemo-resistance of tumor cells was associated with increased level
of expression of proteins related to cell survival.Conclusion These data
suggest that the endothelin receptor axis plays a role in hypoxia induced
resistance of cancer cells to chemotherapy. Additional studies are
warranted to determine the functional changes of the endothelin receptor
axis in hypoxia.

