Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of hypoxia on tyrosine kinase activation in cancer cells


Purpose: Metastasis is the major cause of therapeutic failure and high
mortality in cancer patients. Growing evidence has demonstrated that
dysregulated intracellular tyrosine kinase (TK) activity can play an
important role in promoting disease onset and progression, while low
oxygen tensions (hypoxia) are a typical external driving force that
facilitates tumor cell dissemination. However, whether hypoxia-induced
metastasis is mediated by TK-signaling is largely unknown. In this study,
we have identified potential TK(s) that can mediate hypoxia-induced cell
functions associated with metastasis, and further determine the
therapeutic potential of small molecule TK inhibitors in intervening
these functional behaviors.Methods: Cancer cells were exposed to low
oxygen tensions (1% O2) for varied durations (0, 2, 6, 24 h), with or
without treatment of desired molecular agents. To test cellular
phenotypes, cells were seeded into appropriate culture vehicles and cell
migration and invasion will be examined by scratch and transwell-based
assays. At the molecular level, pan-TKs phosphorylation in malignant
versus normal cells, as well as in cancer cells with or without hypoxic
exposure were detected by Western blotting. To further investigate the
association of p-Src and HIF-1 in patient tissues, tissue microarray
(TMA) with prostate cancer patients was conducted by immunohistochemical
staining followed by independent quantification on the H-score of the two
proteins.Results: TK phosphorylation in cancer cells is generally
stronger than in normal cells. Similar observation is found in patient
tumor tissues versus adjacent normal counterparts. When exposing cells to
hypoxia, short term hypoxic exposure (2-6 h) generally induces greater
cell migration and invasion than prolonged hypoxic exposure (24 h). Such
functional behaviors tend to be associated with elevated tyrosine kinome
activation, although the exact TKs in different cell lines may vary.
Subsequent kinome screening reveals that the well-known oncoprotein c-Src
is activated under particularly acute hypoxia. Further, small molecule
inhibitors targeting these TKs have shown stronger inhibition on cell
migration and invasion under hypoxia than normoxia. Finally, TMA analysis
suggests that p-Src expression is significantly associated with HIF-1
particularly in prostate cancer patients with advanced
disease.Conclusion: The data reveal that short term hypoxia is able to
enhance metastasis-associated phenotypes by activating a group of TKs
such as p-Src. In addition, Src inhibitors are showing higher potential
in impeding hypoxia-induced functional behaviors. These findings suggest
that at least in some cancers over-activated TKs can be used as indirect
markers for hypoxia and more importantly, molecular agents targeting
hypoxia-activated TKs may hold therapeutic potential to prevent
metastatic spread of cancer cells that have experienced particularly
short-term oxygen depletion.

