Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Topoisomerase II mediated DNA damage generates unique classes of
genome rearrangements


Topoisomerase 2 (Top2) is the target of active anti-cancer agents such as
etoposide and doxorubicin. These drugs interfere with the Top2 catalytic
cycle and lead to trapping of the enzyme as a covalent protein: DNA
complex. This trapped covalent complex is a unique DNA lesion that
includes DNA strand breaks and covalent protein adducts at the site of
the breaks. While Top2 mediated DNA damage is the major mechanism for
tumor cell killing, it is also responsible for drug-induced
translocations that can lead to secondary malignancies. We have developed
several novel systems for assessing Top2-mediated genome instability
using yeast as a model system. We developed repair proficient yeast
strains that accumulate high levels of etoposide and other Top2 targeting
drugs. We selected for loss-of-function mutations in the yeast CAN1 gene
that arise following etoposide treatment, and examined the induced
mutations by DNA sequencing. We identified a unique spectrum of mutations
generated by etoposide in yeast. One novel class of mutational events
induced by etoposide is relatively large deletions (>300 bp) and tandem
duplications. Most of these etoposide-induced events are flanked by 4-8
nucleotide direct repeats. To further characterize the mechanism of Top2
induced genome instability, we took advantage of a novel Top2 allele
isolated in our laboratory. This Top2 allele, termed top2AR, exhibits
elevated levels of drug independent DNA cleavage in vitro, and
inviability when combined with yeast mutants defective in DNA double
strand break repair. We found a similar spectrum of large deletions and
tandem duplications flanked by 4-8 nucleotide direct repeats.
Interestingly, we also found that the recovery of large deletions and
insertions was enhanced in yeast cells lacking Tdp1, a gene that
participates in the repair of protein:DNA covalent complexes. Our results
illustrate a novel type of genome rearrangement that is mediated by
covalent Top2 DNA damage. It is noteworthy that the deletions and
insertions flanked by short direct repeats have not been previously
observed with other classes of DNA damaging agents. We suggest that the
unique properties of these lesions may also contribute to oncogenic
translocations induced by etoposide and other Top2 targeting drugs. We
are currently using next-generation sequencing of etoposide treated yeast
cells and cells carrying the top2AR allele to obtain a more complete
picture of the types of alterations induced by Top2 mediated DNA damage.

