Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sigma-2 receptor/progesterone receptor membrane component 1 is a
potential therapeutic target that modulates expression of HER2 in gastric
cancer cell lines


Background: Gastric cancer (GC) is the third leading cause of death from
cancer globally. Sigma-2 Receptor/Progesterone Receptor Membrane
Component 1 (S2R/Pgrmc1) is a cytochrome-related protein and it is
upregulated in multiple types of cancer. S2R/Pgrmc1 binds to several
proteins including epidermal growth factor receptor 1 (EGFR) and
regulates the EGFR signaling in lung and breast cancer cells, as we
previously showed. Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2), a
member of EGFRs family, has been evaluated as a potential therapeutic
target for GC due to an identified link between expression of HER2 and
severity of GC. Several HER2 inhibitors are currently under investigation
in Phase I and II clinical trials. Most of them inhibit ligand binding or
kinase activity of HER2. Here, we suggest that HER2 is a novel molecular
target of S2R/Pgrmc1, thus, inhibiting S2R/Pgrmc1 can be a potential
therapeutic strategy for GC.Results: We found that the protein expression
of S2R/Pgrmc1 is elevated in human gastric cancer tissue array and in
multiple gastric cancer cell lines such as AGS, NCI-N87, and Hs 746T.
Approximately 60% of GC cells have moderate to strong staining of
S2R/Pgrmc1 as compared to weak staining noted in normal gastric cells,
suggesting an association of S2R/Pgrmc1 with pathogenesis of GC. We also
found that S2R/Pgrmc1 was inhibited by AG205, an inhibitor of PGRMC1, in
concentration-dependent manner in NCI-N87 GC cell line. Consistently,
AG205 inhibited proliferation of NCI-N87 cells in concentration- and
time-dependent manner (p-value = 0.025). HER2 is a prognostic marker in
GC and overexpression of protein level of HER2 is associated with tumor
growth. We found that HER2 expression was decreased in AG205 treated
NCI-N87 in concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, we showed that
AG205 enhanced the sensitivity of Herceptin, an anti-HER2 antibody that
inhibits tumor growth. Akt, a downstream target of HER2, is overexpressed
in GC, and regulates tumorigenic properties of cancer cells including
tumor growth and survival. Here, we demonstrated that concomitant
treatment of the GC cells with Herceptin and AG205 significantly
decreased Akt protein level as compared to control cells or cell treated
with Herceptin alone. Consistently, the viability of the cells was
significantly lower in combination treatment group (p-value = 0.009), as
compared to groups treated with Herceptin or AG205 alone.Conclusion: We
have demonstrated that S2R/Pgrmc1 promotes proliferation of GC cell line
and regulates the expression of HER2. Our results suggest that targeting
S2RPgrmc1 could be a potential therapeutic target for gastric cancer.

