Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted proteomic analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma and its
histologic mimickers


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of primary liver
cancer. Well differentiated HCC can sometimes be extremely difficult to
be distinguished from other hepatocellular mass lesions such as
hepatocellular adenoma and dysplastic liver nodule due to considerable
morphologic overlaps. Immunohistochemical markers may have a limited
utility, especially on core biopsy.Choice of treatment depends on the
extent and location of the cancer, and the overall health of the patient.
For patients who are healthy enough to undergo surgery and who have
early-stage cancer confined to the liver, treatment may involve hepatic
resection; however many patients develop a cancer recurrence, which is
the main cause of death in long-term evaluations. Recurrence rates after
treatment with resection are high, highlighting the importance of finding
effective adjuvant treatments and markers that aid in determining
differences between hepatocellular lesions.To explore differences between
hepatocellular lesions that could be indicators of tumor behavior, we
used targeted proteomic analysis to assess different protein biomarkers
in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) HCC tumor tissueTwenty-two
FFPE HCC tissue blocks were obtained and a pathologist marked a minimum
8mm2 of tumor area. Following laser microdissection, proteins were
extracted using the Liquid-Tissue process and subjected to selected
reaction monitoring mass spectrometry to quantify the amounts of 30
different targeted proteins.As anticipated, well differentiated HCC,
hepatocellular adenoma and dysplastic nodule expressed high rates of
P-glycoprotein and the majority expressed multi-drug resistance gene
protein (MDR1). Such markers may account in part for the chemotherapy
refractory nature of HCC. All 22 patients expressed high levels of hENT1
and lacked expression of RRM1, indicating that gemcitabine-based therapy
would be an appropriate choice. All 22 patients lacked expression of
marker of sensitivity to anthracycline (TOPO2A) and the majority of
patients did not express a marker of resistance to platinum therapy
(ERCC1).Of the 22 patients whose tumors expressed EGFR, 5 had expression
above the 75%ile and would thus be eligible for EGFR small molecule
inhibitor therapy. Dysplastic liver nodule patients did not expressed
significant level of EGFR. Further, multiplex-targeted proteomics
discovered patients expressing cMET and IDO1, which indicate eligibility
for clinical trials of targeted therapies or immunotherapies. 60% of
dysplastic liver nodule patients did not expressed cMET at any levelThis
study retrospectively evaluates HCC patients in an attempt to identify
predictors of tumor behavior. Proteomic and genomic screening should be
performed to identify differences between various hepatocellular lesions.
Prospective evaluation of molecular and genetic profile is warranted in
HCC patients to be distinguished from other hepatocellular mass lesions.

