Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of differentially expressed exosomal genes from ibrutinib
resistant diffuse large B cell lymphoma


Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and approximately 30% of the patients develop
relapsed/refractory disease that becomes a major cause of mortality and
morbidity. Selective pressure provided by chemotherapy causes aberrant
gene expression and selection of pre-existing population of
chemo-resistant cells. These chemo-resistant cells can also transmit
chemo-resistance to chemo-sensitive cells through exosomal transfer of
molecules (miRNA, mRNA and proteins). In this study, we have analysed
differentially expressed mRNA and miRNA from syngeneic ibrutinib (an
irreversible BTK inhibitor, FDA approved) resistant DLBCL cells and from
their isolated exosomes. Five DLBCL-GCB and five ABC subtype were
analysed for their sensitivity with ibrutinib. We found three ABC subtype
and one GCB subtype (OCL-LY1) were sensitive to ibrutinib. We have
generated syngeneic ibrutinib drug resistant model from sensitive cells
(at least 10 fold increase in IC50 value) by continuous culturing them in
the presence of ibrutinib with gradual increase in drug concentration in
each passage. Ibrutinib sensitive DLBCL cells when cultured with the
syngeneic resistant cells in transwell apparatus, acquired resistance to
ibrutinib. We also analysed the sensitivity of ibrutinib resistant cells
with other conventional drugs for non-Hodgkin lymphomas. We further
tested the expression of drug resistant genes in syngeneic resistant
cells by real time PCR analysis. Later, we isolated the total RNA and
miRNA species from DLBCL ibrutinib sensitive, their syngeneic resistant
cells and from respective exosomes and analysed for differential
expression by micro array analyses. Thus in conclusion, our study
demonstrates that chemo-resistance can be transferred from resistant
cells to sensitive cells via exosomal horizontal transmission of miRNA
and mRNA in diffuse large B cell lymphoma cells. Moreover, our study
identified potential targets that can be used to overcome
chemo-resistance in diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

