Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Context dependent regulatory patterns of the androgen receptor
(AR) and androgen receptor target genes


Background: Expression of the androgen receptor (AR) is associated with
androgen-dependent proliferation arrest and terminal differentiation of
normal prostate epithelial cells. Additionally, activation of the AR is
required for survival of benign luminal epithelial cells and primary
cancer cells. Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) leads to apoptosis in
both benign and cancerous tissue. Cancer cell escape from ADT is known as
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In the course of CRPC
development the AR typically switches from being a cell-intrinsic
inhibitor of normal prostate epithelial cell proliferation to becoming an
oncogene that is critical for prostate cancer cell proliferation.Methods:
Immortalized human prostate basal epithelial EP156T cells and progeny
cells that underwent epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), primary
prostate epithelial cells (PrECs) and prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP,
VCaP and 22Rv1 were used to examine context dependent restriction and
activation of the AR and classical target genes, such as KLK3.
Genome-wide gene expression analyses and single cell protein analyses
were applied to study the effect of different contexts.Results: A variety
of growth conditions were tested and found unable to activate AR
expression and transcription of classical androgen-dependent AR target
genes, such as KLK3, in prostate epithelial cells with basal cell
features or in mesenchymal type prostate cells. The restriction of
androgen and AR dependent transcription of classical target genes in
prostate basal epithelial cells was at the level of AR expression.
Exogenous AR expression was sufficient for androgen-dependent
transcription of AR target genes in prostate basal epithelial EP156T-AR
cells, but did not exert a positive feedback on endogenous AR expression.
Mesenchymal type prostate EPT3-AR cells with exogenous AR expression, in
contrast to epithelial type EP156T-AR cells, were androgen non-responsive
and were unable to produce detectable PSA in the culture supernatants
even with higher levels of exogenous AR protein than in EP156T-AR and
LNCaP cells for up to 2 weeks in androgen containing growth medium. The
restricted PSA expression in the mesenchymal context suggests that if ADT
increases the pool of mesenchymal type prostate cancer cells, then this
might go undetected during PSA monitoring of disease progression.

