Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of 14-3-3 gamma stabilizes polyploidization in NSCLC
cells


In normal lung tissue the expression levels of 14-3-3 gamma are very low
and tightly regulated, however, in cancer it is evident that 14-3-3
gamma's expression patterns become deregulated and significantly
elevated. In patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
increased expression of this isoform is associated with poorer survival
and significantly correlates with lymph node and distant metastasis.
These data prompted us to analyze TCGA's NSCLC gene expression dataset,
and it is clear that 14-3-3 gamma's expression continues to increase in
the progression from early to late stage cancers. Taken together, these
data suggest that overexpression of 14-3-3 gamma is correlated with a
more aggressive tumor phenotype, an observation also seen with breast and
hepatocellular carcinoma. The focus of this study is to elucidate the
mechanism(s) causing these more aggressive cancer phenotypes. We have
previously shown that overexpressing 14-3-3 gamma in human lung cancer
cells harboring very low levels of endogenous 14-3-3 gamma and no
wildtype p53 results in a stable subpopulation of cells with polyploid
DNA content. Interestingly, approximately 40% of lung adenocarcinomas
present with hyper-triploid karyotypes, and even a higher percentage,
40-60%, have inactivation of p53. It is well established that polyploid
tumors have the capacity to increase tumorigenicity by allowing
resistance to conventional therapies and also permitting elevated
tolerance to chromosomal instability (CIN). This leads us to hypothesize
that in the absence of p53, NSCLC tumors overexpressing 14-3-3 gamma
result in a polyploid population of cells that may be influencing the
aggressiveness of the tumor. Further in vitro analysis of these 14-3-3
gamma induced tetraploid cells show that they have a prolonged mitosis
with significantly more lagging chromosomes in anaphase than their
diploid counterparts, indicating an increase in chromosomal instability
(CIN). After isolating isogenic tetraploid clones with or without 14-3-3
gamma expression, the stability of the tetraploid cell state was
assessed. Clones not expressing 14-3-3 gamma quickly reverted back to a
pseudo-diploid state, whereas overexpression of 14-3-3 gamma
significantly prolonged the tolerance of tetraploidy and eventually
resulted in an aneuploid cell state. Our data suggests that
overexpression of 14-3-3 gamma increases tumorigenicity through the
stabilization of a polyploid cell state.

