Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA processing signatures of normal versus malignant progenitor
cell aging predict leukemia stem cell sensitivity to RNA splicing
modulation


Introduction: Human bone marrow aging is typified by decreased
cellularity, stem cell exhaustion and myeloid lineage bias that may set
the stage for development of myeloid malignancies. Secondary AML (sAML)
is a malignancy that has been associated with alterations in RNA
processing genes and currently has few effective treatment options
available. A central goal of future therapeutic strategies is to prevent
disease relapse and therapeutic resistance by selectively targeting
unique gene products that are essential to LSC but not normal HSC
function. Therefore, we established whole gene, long non-coding RNA
(lncRNA), splice isoform, and RNA editing signatures of benign versus
malignant bone marrow progenitor cell aging, and evaluated the
therapeutic efficacy of splicing-targeted agents in pre-clinical
humanized in vitro and in vivo model systems.Methods: Whole transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-Seq) was performed on FACS-purified hematopoietic stem
(CD34+CD38-Lin-) and progenitor cells (CD34+CD38+Lin-) from aged (average
age = 65.9 6.8 years old) versus young (average age = 25.8 3.0 years old)
adult healthy bone marrow samples, and in leukemia stem cells (LSC) from
patients with sAML (average age = 71.4 7.9 years old). Comparative gene
set enrichment analyses (GSEA), splice isoform, lncRNA, and RNA editing
profiles were identified for normal and malignant progenitor cell aging.
Then, we evaluated the spliceosome modulatory agent 17S-FD-895 in
splicing reporter activity, PCR, and functional in vitro hematopoietic
progenitor and in vivo LSC primagraft assays.Results: Disruption of
pre-mRNA splicing activity has recently been implicated as a therapeutic
vulnerability in some types of cancer. Comparative whole transcriptome
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses revealed pre-mRNA splicing factor gene
expression was significantly disrupted in human AML LSC compared with
age-matched normal progenitors. Comparative splice isoform RNA-seq and
qRT-PCR validation revealed recurrent intron retention and exon skipping
in expressed transcripts, such as PTK2B and several protein phosphatase
gene products. Notably, transcription factor profiling of AML LSC
demonstrated downregulation of key tumor suppressor genes, such as IRF8
and TP53. We then investigated the LSC inhibitory efficacy of a stable
and potent splicing modulatory agent, 17S-FD-895, in humanized stromal
co-culture and AML LSC primagraft assays. Pharmacological spliceosome
modulation disrupted AML LSC maintenance in vivo by altering splicing of
stem cell survival and AML-associated transcripts at doses that spared
normal hematopoietic progenitors.Conclusions: Detection and targeted
modulation of aberrant RNA processing provides an innovative strategy for
AML LSC eradication with implications for treatment of a variety of human
malignancies and other age-related disorders.

