Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pannexin 1 regulates rhabdomyosarcoma tumor growth: a potential
novel therapeutic target


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a skeletal muscle-derived soft tissue sarcoma
for which a novel therapeutic strategy is greatly needed. RMS cells have
lost the ability to terminally differentiate thus proliferating
indefinitely. Promoting their redifferentiation to skeletal muscle tissue
is thus a promising therapeutic approach. We have recently shown that
levels of Pannexin 1 (Panx1) are below detectable limits in
undifferentiated myoblasts, but become highly upregulated during their
differentiation and indeed promote this process. We thus hypothesize that
the levels of Panx1 are deregulated in RMS and that restoration of Panx1
levels may induce differentiation of RMS cells thereby alleviating their
malignant properties. Briefly, our results demonstrate that both Panx1
transcript and protein are at very low levels in, both embryonal and
alveolar RMS tumor specimens and patient-derived cell lines similar to
that seen in fetal skeletal muscle tissue and undifferentiated myoblasts,
respectively. In vitro functional analyses have revealed that while
re-introduction of Panx1 in RMS cell lines led to their partial
differentiation, it significantly inhibited their rate of proliferation
and migration. Moreover, re-expression of Panx1 in RMS cell lines
prevented both spheroid formation and growth, and induced RMS cell
apoptosis. Based on this in vitro data, pre-clinical orthotopic xenograft
studies are currently underway to assess the ability of Panx1 to inhibit
tumor onset and growth, and induce tumor regression in vivo. Our
preliminary results thus far have shown that Panx1 over-expression
significantly suppresses RMS xenograft tumor growth. Taken together,
these results indicate that restoration of Panx1 levels in RMS reduces
its malignant properties. This, together with further investigation into
the tumor-suppressive mechanism by which Panx1 mediates its effects, will
establish Panx1 as a novel therapeutic target for RMS.

