Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time, quantitative cellular analysis of migration and invasion


Chemotactic-driven cell migration is an important biological process
impacting many areas of life science research including immunology,
cancer and developmental biology. The dominant high-throughput solution
for measuring cellular chemotaxis in vitro is the Boyden-chamber.
However, traditional Boyden chamber products have inherent liabilities
including: a) the inability to directly visualize the cell migration
process, b) a requirement of tens of thousands of cells per well, c) the
need to label cells for quantitation, d) a relative insensitivity to
surface integrin signaling, and e) high random migration artifacts.
Microfluidic solutions have sought to eliminate some of these
deficiencies, specifically by providing the ability to visualize the cell
migration process, but at the expense of relatively low throughput and
cumbersome quantitation methods. Using a live-cell imaging approach and
real-time image analysis quantitation, we have developed a new technology
which eliminates most of the deficiencies of existing Boyden chambers and
most importantly, provides direct visualization of both migration and
invasion as it occurs. Integrated metrics precisely quantify the
chemotactic response using significantly fewer cells (500-5000 cells per
well) in a 96-well format. We exemplify this novel image based technique
by studying the migration and invasion of both non-tumor and
tumor-derived cell lines. Using Fetal bovine serum (FBS) as a
chemoattractant, HT-1080 and NIH-3T3 cells were evaluated for their
ability to directionally migrate across a coated surface or invade
through a basement membrane extract by embedding the cells in an
extracellular matrix prior to seeding. Qualitatively, we observed
significant morphological differences between migrating and invading
cells, the latter adopting a mesenchymal morphology reminiscent of cells
that have undergone epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
exhibiting thinner, spindle-like morphology as they invade through the
matrix. Using both cell count and cell area metrics, we observed a
significant difference between migration and invasion kinetics of the
relatively non-invasive cell line, NIH-3T3, and the highly invasive human
fibrosarcoma derived cell line, HT-1080. Moreover, we observed
significant and selective inhibition of HT-1080 cell invasion in the
presence of GM6001, a broad inhibitor of Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs)
with an IC50 of 25.7 nM. This new, real-time, quantitative cellular
analysis technique illustrates a novel method to simultaneously study
migration and invasion of tumor cells.

