Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LADR: A novel linker activated drug release technology for drug
delivery


Drug delivery systems in oncology for treating cancer are based on
different drug release mechanisms at the tumor site including primarily
hydrolytic, reductive, enzymatic and/or acid-sensitive cleavage. Drug
carrier conjugates that incorporate an acid-sensitive breaking-point
exploit the extra- and intracellular acidic environment of the tumor.
Important requirements for acid-sensitive bonds are high stability of the
carrier-bound drug in the blood circulation and an effective or sustained
release of the active drug in the acidic tumor interstitium and acidic
endosomes/lysosomes of tumor cells. In addition, sufficient stability of
the acid-sensitive bond is a prerequisite for galenic formulation and
reconstitution. As a continuation of our development of aldoxorubicin, an
acid-sensitive albumin-binding drug of doxorubicin, which is being
clinically assessed in advanced clinical trials (www.cytrx.com), we have
set out to design a novel acid-sensitive drug release platform that is
applicable to carriers such as serum proteins and antibodies.The key
components of this specific drug delivery system are linkers containing a
thiol-binding maleimide group and a substituted aromatic hydrazine to
form an acid-cleavable hydrazone bond with suitable carbonyl-containing
drugs. For establishing and fine-tuning the pH-dependent release
profiles, the aromatic moiety of the linker was substituted with a
spectrum of electron-withdrawing groups, and reacted with the
anthracyclines doxorubicin and nemorubicin. The resulting hydrazone
derivatives were conjugated to the cysteine-34 position of albumin as a
model protein. Subsequently, the drug release was determined at
physiological and acidic conditions as well as in human plasma. It was
discovered that by variation of the electron-withdrawing groups, the pH
dependent release of the drug could be substantially varied between 1-50
h in the pH range of 4-5. The technology using these linkers was coined
LADR (Linker Activated Drug Release) and has the additional advantage
that the galenic formulation and reconstitution of LADR-based drugs is
facilitated. We have applied the LADR technology to several anticancer
drugs such as vinblastine and gemcitabine. In summary, LADR is an
innovative and versatile linker technology creating a platform for
developing acid-sensitive drug carrier conjugates that allow the
carrier-bound drug to be released in a controlled manner resulting in
sustained exposure to cancer cells.

