Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal hematopoiesis identified by matched-normal blood sequencing
of solid tumor patients without hematologic malignancy is common and is
associated with decreased overall survival


Background: Recent genomic studies have identified somatic mutations in
leukemia genes in asymptomatic individuals without hematologic
malignancy. A subset of patients (pts) with clonal hematopoiesis (CH)
subsequently develops hematologic malignancies. However, the incidence of
CH in pts with solid tumors has not been extensively studied. We sought
to assess for CH and its associated clinical impact in pts with solid
tumors who were profiled using paired tumor/blood sequencing.Methods:
This study included pts who were consented on protocol NCT01775072. All
had tumor and blood genomic profiling using the MSK-IMPACT hybridization
capture-based next-generation sequencing assay, encompassing all
protein-coding exons of 410 cancer-associated genes. In matched blood, we
investigated for hotspot mutations from COSMIC database (v71) and
non-hotspot mutations in leukemia-associated genes and genes reported in
prior CH studies. Mutations were scored as present if variant allele
frequency (VAF) in blood was greater than 2% and at least twice the VAF
seen in tumor. For cases where at least one mutation exceeded these
thresholds, we reduced the VAF threshold in blood to 1% to detect
subsequent events. Mutations with VAF >35% in both blood and tumor were
excluded as likely germline events.Results: We analyzed 2,146 pts,
including 239 pts (11%) with CH. Most commonly identified mutations were
in DNMT3A, TET2, and TP53, seen in 167, 52, and 18 pts, respectively. The
mean age at time of testing was 62.6 years in pts with CH and 55.4 years
in pts without CH (p1 mutation (n = 55; 1-yr OS: 0.59). The univariate
hazard ratios were 1.16 (p = 0.269) and 1.63 (p = 0.015) for 1 mutation
and >1 mutation, respectively, when compared to pts without CH. After
adjusting for age and sex, a marginal OS association persisted for >1
mutation compared to no CH (HR: 1.46, p = 0.060)Conclusions: CH is common
among solid tumor pts without known hematologic malignancy, occurring in
11% of pts, and appears to be associated with decreased OS. Analyses will
be replicated in a larger cohort with longer follow up to determine the
clinical impact of these mutations in cancer pts.

