Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OncoMD: A powerful genomics data analysis and interpretation
platform for cancer discovery research


Cancer cells gain fitness advantage over normal cells by accumulating
mutations over time. Next Generation DNA sequencing technologies have
made the detection of genetic alterations in tumor genomes affordable.
Powerful data analysis and interpretation tools enable extraction of
disease-relevant information from diverse genomics data to guide
diagnosis and treatment decisions. We have built a robust cancer
analytics platform OncoMD that combines tumor mutation profiles,
expression signatures, copy number variations, epigenetic alterations and
drug sensitivity to create a holistic view of human cancer enabling
discovery of new targets for therapy and prognosis. We have analyzed the
rich mutational data captured in OncoMD to identify potential T-cell
neo-epitopes in different cancers and examined their prevalence in the
context of the tumor microenvironment. The presence of T-cell
neo-epitopes alone is not sufficient to sensitize tumors to immunotherapy
drugs and requires cooperation from the tumor microenvironment. Although
mutational burden was a strong predictor of T-cell neo-epitopes in our
analysis, other genetic alterations such as overexpression, splicing,
gene-fusions and insertions/deletions can produce altered peptides
exhibiting high affinity binding to HLA class I and II molecules in
cancers with low burden of missense mutations. We determined the number
of potential T-cell neo-epitopes after classifying tumors based on their
epithelial, stromal and immune cell content using gene expression
signatures. We observed that the normalized T-cell neo-epitope burden was
strongly anti-correlated with the T-cell content of the tumors, compared
to their epithelial or stromal content. Together, our findings suggest
that tumors enriched in T-cells may be subjected to immunoediting
processes and carry relatively fewer T-cell neo-epitopes to avoid
elimination. These tumors are likely to respond to immunotherapy
treatments.

