Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of circulating tumor cells in high-risk primary uveal
melanoma by the photoacoustic method


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been shown to be a prognostic marker
in breast cancer1. We hypothesize that circulating melanoma cell (CMC)
detection could be utilized in the management of uveal melanoma,
including early intervention. Prior methodologies for circulating uveal
melanoma cell (CUMC) detection have been fraught with poor sensitivity,
limiting their clinical utility2. Development of an improved method is
necessary to establish the clinical utility of CUMC monitoring.
Photoacoustics, also referred to as laser-induced ultrasound, is a novel
platform for the detection and capture of CMCs. Photoacoustics uses short
duration pulsed light to create ultrasonic acoustic waves in an optically
absorbing medium, in this case melanin within melanoma3. As light is
absorbed by irradiated chromophores, the optical energy gets converted
into kinetic thermal energy trapped within the chromophore and subsequent
thermal expansion ensues. Transient thermoelastic expansion of the
absorbent cell results in the propagation of ultrasonic acoustic waves
which can be detected and analyzed using a piezoelectric response
mechanism. In addition, detected CMCs can be isolated by a two-phase flow
cell separation technique4. Due to the low cost and melanoma specific
capabilities of photoacoustics, we evaluated this technology for the
purpose of CUMC detection. Methods: Cells from uveal melanoma cell line
UM002B, established at Thomas Jefferson, were titrated to various cell
concentrations and analyzed in a neutral density solution utilizing the
photoacoustic method. Uveal melanoma cells of differing concentrations
were spiked into isolated healthy donor peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) and healthy whole blood samples. PBMC isolates were
analyzed for CUMCs. Results: CUMCs were successfully quantified by the
photoacoustic method including single cell detection. Recovery rates of
cultured cells in a neutral density solution approached 25%. Recovery
rates for CUMCs in whole blood averaged 10% of expected cell yield
(56/540 cells detected) with a higher detection rate at lower cell
concentrations. Photoacoustics offers a viable method for the detection
of CUMCs with an accuracy that meets or exceeds previously reported CUMC
yields. Studies analyzing CUMCs from patients with metastatic disease are
ongoing.1. Cristofanilli, M, et al., Circulating tumor cells, disease
progression, and survival in metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med,
2004. 351(8): 781-91.2. Bidard FC, et al., Detection rate and prognostic
value of circulating tumor cells and circulating tumor DNA in metastatic
uveal melanoma. Int J Cancer. 2014 Mar 1;134(5):1207-13.3. Weight RM, et
al. Photoacoustic detection of metastatic melanoma cells in the human
circulatory system. Opt Lett. 2006 Oct 15;31(20):2998-3000.4. OBrien CM,
et al. Capture of circulating tumor cells using photoacoustic flowmetry
and two phase flow. J Biomed Opt. 2012 Jun;17(6):061221.

