Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neural crest-like gene FOXD1 plays a role in melanoma cell
migration and invasion


Melanoma is a highly aggressive skin cancer arising from transformed
melanocytes. Despite tremendous efforts and considerable progress in
clinical treatment, melanoma remains a deadly disease characterized by
abundant treatment resistance due to high phenotype plasticity of
melanoma cells. In order to evade therapy, melanoma cells can undergo
phenotype switching from a differentiated state towards a
dedifferentiated and more stem cell-like state. Recently, some melanoma
cells with neural crest-like characteristics were shown to be able to
sustain tumor growth and to give rise to distant metastases.Here, we use
the technique of directed differentiation of human induced pluripotent
stem cells (hiPSCs) to characterize the human neural crest cell
population in vitro and to identify potential genes that are reactivated
during melanoma progression. We differentiated hiPSCs towards melanocytes
via the neural crest stage. Expression analyses revealed an
overexpression of the Forkhead Box D1 (FOXD1) transcription factor in
neural crest cells and importantly, increased FOXD1 expression was also
found in melanoma cells compared to normal human melanocytes.
Interestingly, in invasive and less proliferative melanoma cells, FOXD1
expression was elevated compared to highly proliferative and less motile
cells, indicating a potential role of this factor in motility
acquisition. To gain deeper insight into the expression pattern of FOXD1
in clinical samples, a protein expression analysis using tissue
microarrays was performed determining FOXD1 expression in melanocytic
nevi, primary and metastatic melanoma samples. Surprisingly, in benign
melanocytic nevi, FOXD1 was dominantly localized in the nucleus whereas a
shift towards a cytoplasmic localization was observed in both, primary
and metastatic melanomas. Loss of FOXD1 gene in melanoma cells also
revealed the importance of this gene in melanoma cell migration and
invasion. Further characterization of FOXD1 and its role in melanoma
progression may help to understand the phenotypic plasticity of melanoma
cells, which is required for overcoming resistance in anti-melanoma
therapy.In conclusion, FOXD1 is overexpressed and aberrantly localized in
malignant melanoma cells compared to melanocytes. Our data indicate its
function in melanoma migration and invasion. FOXD1 might be an
interesting target in melanoma therapy.

