Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ethnic disparity in pediatric leukemia relapse


Background: Leukemia is the most prevalent pediatric malignancy,
representing 25% of all cancer diagnoses among children. Despite recent
substantial improvements in therapy that have dramatically increased
survival, 10-20% of cases develop relapse and become refractory to
treatment. Although racial/ethnic disparity in survival is well
documented, limited knowledge currently exists on the disparity in
relapse. The objective of this study was to compare the risk of pediatric
leukemia relapse between Hispanic Whites and non-Hispanic Whites.Methods:
The study included children (Background: Leukemia is the most prevalent
pediatric malignancy, representing 25% of all cancer diagnoses among
children. Despite recent substantial improvements in therapy that have
dramatically increased survival, 10-20% of cases develop relapse and
become refractory to treatment. Although racial/ethnic disparity in
survival is well documented, limited knowledge currently exists on the
disparity in relapse. The objective of this study was to compare the risk
of pediatric leukemia relapse between Hispanic Whites and non-Hispanic
Whites.Methods: The study included children (<21 years) diagnosed with
leukemia between January 2006 and December 2014 at the All Children's
Hospital Johns Hopkins Medicine, St. Petersburg, FL. Patients demographic
and clinical information were obtained from an electronic health
record-derived data warehouse. Ethnicity was self-reported. Leukemia
diagnosis and relapse were identified using appropriate ICD-9 codes.
Relapse-free survival was defined as the time from diagnosis to the first
documentation of relapse. Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals
(95% CI) for relapse-free survival were calculated using Cox proportional
hazard models adjusting for age at diagnosis, gender and type of
insurance (commercial vs government).Results: The study included 66
Hispanic Whites and 202 non-Hispanic Whites. The median age for both
groups was 7 years. However compared to non-Hispanic Whites, Hispanic
Whites were more likely to be males (59% vs 53%), to have government
insurance (71% vs 35%) and had a shorter median follow up time (52 vs 66
months). Approximately 15% of Hispanic Whites developed relapse compared
to only 5% non-Hispanic Whites. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed a
difference in relapse between the two groups (log-rank p = 0.006). After
adjusting for age at diagnosis, gender and type of insurance, Hispanic
Whites were three times more likely to develop relapse compared to
non-Hispanic Whites (HR = 3.1, 95%CI = 1.2-8.0, p = 0.02).Conclusion:
Although the findings of this study suggest that ethnic disparity in
pediatric leukemia may exist, our findings are limited by the inability
to control for potential confounders such as medication adherence, timing
of diagnosis, white blood cells at diagnosis and minimal residual
disease. Future studies should further investigate this racial/ethnic
disparity.

