Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docetaxel-platinum-fluorouracil (TPF) induction chemotherapy
increases PD-L1 positivity and CD8+ / FOXP3+ immune infiltrates in
advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)


Introduction: Checkpoint inhibitors targeting programmed cell
death-1/-ligand1 (PD-1/-L1) have demonstrated promising clinical activity
in locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (LA-HNSCC),
with overall response rates (ORR) of 20% in unselected patients (pts).
Moreover, significant improvements have been observed when selecting pts
on PD-L1 positivity, with ORR reaching 50-78%. It is therefore crucial to
optimize therapeutic sequence between induction chemotherapy (Docetaxel,
Platinum, Fluorouracile,TPF) and anti-PD-1/-L1 in order to maximize the
number of pts that benefit from these drugs. Methods: All patients with
LA-HNSCC treated at Gustave Roussy between 2006 and 2013 by induction TPF
followed by surgery were considered. Only patients for who paired samples
(pre and post-TPF) were available were kept for further analysis. PD-L1
expression was quantified by immunochemistry (IHC) (clone E1L3N, Cell
Signaling) on a Ventana Discovery Ultra autostainer by a senior
pathologist according to a validated protocol. PD-L1 IHC staining on
tumor cells (TC) and tumor-infiltrating immune cells (IC) was quantified
with a positivity threshold of 5%. The density of CD8+ and FOXP3+
lymphocytes was also assessed. Results: Out of 313 pts receiving
induction TPF, 86 underwent surgery; paired samples were available for
21. Baseline PD-L1 expression was positive in only 2 and 5 samples for TC
and IC respectively. An increased PD-L1 expression was observed post-TPF
in 3 (14%) and 15 (71%; p = 0.0003, T-test) samples for TC and IC
respectively. Tumor-infiltrating CD8+ and FOXP3+ populations also
significantly increased post-TPF. Conclusion: TPF induction in LA-HNSCC
increases PD-L1 positivity on tumor-infiltrating immune cells as well as
CD8+ and FOXP3+ populations. This suggests that anti-PD-1/-L1 therapy
might be more effective as a second-line than first-line strategy, but
warrants clinical evaluation.
IHC staining results

