Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuroblastoma: Telomere elongation is responsible for aggressive
behavior


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a highly malignant pediatric tumor of the
sympathetic nervous system that commonly displays low overall mutation
frequency. We searched for new structural rearrangements in a series of
275 NBs of all stages using high density SNP microarrays. Exome
sequencing was also performed on 15 tumor/constitutional DNA pairs and 25
additional tumors, mainly high-risk NBs, using paired-end sequencing on
Illumina instrument. Normalized coverage data were used to generate array
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)-like profiles. Structural
rearrangements leading to gain of TERT gene were observed in 15 of 275
neuroblastomas as judged by SNP microarray. 12 out of these 15 tumors
with TERT rearrangement belong to 11q-deleted subgroup of NB patients
that marks tumors with a poor prognosis. These rearrangements occurred
only in high-risk NBs in an almost mutually exclusive fashion with MYCN
amplifications, which is a known genetic event in this tumor type.
Furthermore, in the small series of NBs analyzed by exome sequencing, we
detect extensive structural rearrangements of chromosome 2, 5 and 7
leading to amplification of MYCN, TERT and CDK6 respectively in one
tumor. The exome sequencing approach detected at average 14 (range 2-77)
somatic protein-changing alterations per tumor. Combining structural and
mutational data from the exome sequencing show recurrent alterations in
ATRX gene. In our NB cohort we see alterations of ATRX in four non
MYCN-amplified tumors: two focal deletions, one nonsense mutation and one
deleterious missense mutation. ATRX inactivation results in alternative
lengthening of telomeres (ALT). This means that high-risk neuroblastomas
cancer cells can preserve their telomeres by ALT or by activation of
telomerase reverse transcriptase (encoded by TERT). Alterations in TERT
and ATRX were mutually exclusive, which is in agreement with the
independent activation by these genes of telomere lengthening. Moreover,
three cases with chromothripsis of chromosome 5 with rearrangements
affecting the TERT were identified through SNP microarrays. These results
identify TERT as at least one of the target genes activated by
chromothripsis of chromosome 5. This remodeling of the genomic context
likely abrogates transcriptional silencing of TERT in high-risk
neuroblastoma and places telomerase activation in the centre of
transformation in a large fraction of these tumors. This study identifies
recurrent TERT and ATRX rearrangements and telomere lengthening as an
important mechanism characterizing high-risk tumors and it supports the
pharmacological inhibition of these targets to improve the outcome for
this patient group.

