Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bacteriophage associated silicon particles (BASP) for targeting
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors


The purpose of this project is to design and develop a multifunctional
nanosystem for the diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors (PNETs). PNETs also known as Islet Cell Tumors are rare and
slow-growing highly vascularized malignancies with an incidence rate of a
thousand new cases per year. Their occurrence has increased five-fold
within the past few decades and with surgery being the primary treatment
modality, there is an immediate need to devise efficient diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures.For this purpose, the synergistic tissue targeting
capabilities of phage, optical and physical properties of gold
nanoparticles (AuNP)/phage scaffold and the drug carrying potential of
the hydrodynamically engineered silicon-based multistage nanovectors were
employed to create the Bacteriophage Associated Silicon Particles (BASP).
The BASP were characterized in vitro, optimized for in vivo imaging and
are currently being investigated for therapeutic efficiency in vivo when
loaded with Abraxane. CRKL is evaluated as a potential target expressed
in the PNET microenvironment. CRKL targeting phage is incorporated into
the BASP and the targeting capability is explored.Our data show that
bacteriophage, displaying CRKL-recognizing peptide sequences, enhanced
cellular association of BASP in human pancreatic cancer and murine
microvascular endothelial cell lines. There is a significant increase in
association of CRKL targeted BASP with endothelial cells as opposed to
non-targeted assemblies mainly under the flow conditions with shear
stresses similar these in the tumor vessels. Further, intravital
microscopy studies in highly vascularized tumors demonstrated
preferential accumulation of BASP in the tumor vasculature, based on
their hydrodynamic characteristics and biological targeting.
Overexpression of CRKL was confirmed in histological samples from PNET
patients and mice with homozygous deletion of the Men1 gene in the
pancreas (PNET model). MRI and CT imaging using CRKL targeted BASP loaded
with SPION demonstrated that the systems can aid in detecting very small
tumors using various imaging modalities. 3D CT images showed increasing
density in the pancreatic tumor region in the mice for CRKL targeted BASP
loaded with SPION treatment. Furthermore, the mice were imaged and
validated the biodistribution and concentration of nanoparticles using a
9.4T MRI scanner. MRI images reveal nanoparticles accumulation in the
region of tumor growth in the pancreas of mice at post-injection with
CRKL targeted BASP loaded with SPION. This innovative multifunctional
nanosystem has the potential to deliver a novel platform for both imaging
and therapy for patients with PNETs as well as other cancers.

