Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Droplet digital PCR in validating copy number variations in
hereditary prostate cancer families from Louisiana


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of death in American
men, and approximately 27,540 men will die from the disease in the US
this year. Louisiana has one of the highest rates of PCa in the country,
with approximately 4,000 new cases each year. Family history is one of
the most prominent predictors of PCa risk, and approximately 10% of PCa
cases are attributable to inheritable genetic factors. However,
identifying PCa genetic susceptibility has been extremely difficult due
to genetic heterogeneity. Genomic copy number variations (CNVs) have been
detected in prostate tumors and several other cancers, but changes in
copy number have not been studied extensively in germ-line DNAs from
hereditary PCa (HPC) cases. The goal of the present study is to validate
the presence of CNVs using a cutting edge technology Droplet Digital
Polymerase Chain Reaction (ddPCR). ddPCR provides absolute quantification
of target DNA copies and can measure small fold differences in target DNA
copy numbers. We hypothesize that ddPCR will precisely validate the CNVs
identified using array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH)
technology.In our preliminary study, we have identified CNVs in germline
DNAs from 7 HPC cases from 7 Louisiana HPC families of European ancestry
by using aCGH technology. The regions identified were 2q22, 11q22, and
16q23, and these regions were found to be duplicated in all HPC cases
analyzed. In addition, a 68 kb duplication was observed at 2q14 in all 7
HPC cases of European ancestry, and this region was further identified by
using linkage analysis in 4 of the 7 HPC families (heterogeneity
LOD-score = 1.94). In order to validate the duplication observed at 2q14
(BIN1), we performed ddPCR. Each ddPCR reaction uses duplex TaqMan assay
reagents for the target region and the reference gene. Analysis of ddPCR
data is conducted using QuantaSoft Analysis software. From this study we
found that several of our HPC cases had germline copy number values of
2.2 or higher in the BIN1 region, suggesting that these samples may have
partial gene amplification at the 2q14 region rather than duplication of
the entire gene. These findings suggest that ddPCR is capable of
providing absolute quantification of copy number differences. Using the
recently launched custom design ddPCR Copy Number assays for our specific
regions of interest, we will perform analysis on additional CNV regions
in affected as well as in other unaffected family members from these HPC
families. The absolute quantification of copy number differences using
ddPCR will contribute to the impending need of cancer biomarker
identification in the era of precision medicine, and will allow us to
facilitate prostate cancer screening in HPC families.

