Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The analysis of TRPV6 expression in lymphoid tumours


Introduction:TRPV6 is a calcium channel that is found overexpressed in
various malignancies and is correlated with the prognosis of patients
with prostate cancer. TRPV6 targeted anticancer therapies are in
development. We are interested in the potential of TRPV6 as a potential
biomarker and therapeutic target in lymphoma. This retrospective study
examines the expression levels of TRPV6 in various lymphoid tumour types,
and correlates expression levels with grade, prognostic scores, and
survival rates.Methods:A clinical-pathological database was constructed
using the health records and lymphoid tumor samples of patients diagnosed
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), Follicular lymphoma (FL),
small lymphocytic lymphoma/chronic lymphocytic leukemia (SLL/CLL), and
Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL). Immunohistochemical studies were performed on
lymphoid tumor samples to analyze the level of TRPV6 expression. Tumor
samples were graded on a 3-point scale. A score of +3 indicated dense
staining with high expression levels, and a score of +1 indicated minimal
staining with low expression levels. TRPV6 expression levels were
correlated with prognostic scores (IPI, FLIPI) and survival rates using
Chi-squared, Mantel-Cox, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves. Descriptive
statistics were used to describe patient demographics.Results:We found
high TRPV6 expression levels in DLBCL and HL tumor samples with > 40% of
samples scoring +3. We found low TRPV6 expression levels in FL and
SLL/CLL with > 40% of samples scoring +1. We found no significant
correlation between the level of TRPV6 expression and prognostic scores
or survival rates in any of the lymphoma subtypes studied. In follicular
lymphoma tumor samples, it was noted on observation that the large tumor
cells generally stained +3 while the small tumor cells generally stained
+1.Conclusion:This retrospective study showed DLBCL and HL tumors have
high levels of TRPV6 expression. It also showed that TRPV6 is found
highly expressed in the large transformed cells (centroblasts) in
follicular lymphoma. These results demonstrate a need to further assess
the role of TRPV6 in the aggressiveness of follicular lymphoma, as well
as the prognosis and survival in DLBCL and HL with a larger sample size.
Further studies of the potential of TRPV6 as a therapeutic target in
lymphoma will focus on DLBCL, high grade/transformed FL, and HL.

