Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free imaging identification of WBCs based on the features of
quantitative phase microscope images for negative selection of CTCs


Background: Recent technological advances have enabled the reliable
detection and characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the
blood of cancer patients. To quantify the amount of CTCs, various assays
have been developed to facilitate the detection of epithelial cells in
the blood by using cellular surface markers such as EpCAM and
cytokeratins. However, recent studies have revealed the importance of
CTCs undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which are
difficult to detect by the conventional surface marker-based methods
because those CTCs express low expression of epithelial markers. We
previously reported a novel method for the identification of CTCs by
removing WBCs from mononuclear cells in the blood, based on the features
of Quantitative Phase Microscope Images (QPIs) of the cells obtained from
machine-learning (AACR Annual Meeting 2015). Here, we report some
progress of our study.Methods: We analyzed WBCs and cancer cell lines
using Quantitative Phase Microscope (QPM) that can image optical
path-length of living cells with a high resolution of 1nm without
staining in non-cytotoxic way. At this time, QPIs were reconstructed from
line scanned images of the cells flowing in a chamber. Obtained QPIs were
analyzed by a computer vision application which automatically identifies
an object in digital images based on the features extracted from the
dataset we had developed by machine learning.Results: We imaged 325 WBCs
obtained from healthy donors and 325 cell-line cells (from 5 cancer cell
lines) with QPM. Then, we extracted certain features from the QPIs and
used them as training images for machine learning. We employed 5-fold
cross validation to create an algorithm to detect WBCs circulating in the
blood. The algorithm successfully recognized WBCs among QPIs mixed in
with WBCs and cancer cell lines. The ROC AUC value was 0.98, indicating
that the algorithm was not a random selection. Furthermore, we
successfully captured QPIs of the flowing cells, which makes it possible
to sort living cells based on the algorithm we developed.Conclusions: We
successfully differentiated WBCs from cancer cell lines based on the
features of QPIs. The object recognition method applying to QPIs of the
cell is expected as a useful, non-cytotoxic, marker-free isolation of
CTCs.

