Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy against anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) is limited by target antigen density and CAR
surface expression


ALK is overexpressed on the surface of neuroblastoma (NB) and is
associated with high risk disease. We developed a second generation CAR
based on a monoclonal antibody against ALK. ALK CAR T-cells significantly
delay the growth of human NB cell lines in murine xenograft models, but
animals eventually succumb to tumors.In order to understand how target
antigen density limits the effectiveness of this CAR, we created a
library of NALM-6 B-cell leukemias with variable amounts of ALK expressed
on the surface of each clone. In vitro, ALK CAR T-cells lyse high ALK
expressing leukemias but have reduced activity against leukemias with low
expression of ALK. In co-culture assays, we found that there is a minimum
target antigen density required for CAR T-cells to produce appreciable
amounts of Th1 cytokines. This threshold of ALK expression is above the
expression on human NB lines. There is also a threshold target antigen
density at which maximum cytokine production occurs. Above this density,
no additional cytokines are produced. In xenograft models, ALK CAR
T-Cells are significantly more effective against high ALK expressing
leukemia than against low ALK expressing leukemia. To our knowledge, this
is the first report of greater in vivo efficacy of CAR T-cells against
tumors with higher antigen expression.The level of surface expression of
the CAR on T-cells also alters the function of CAR T-cells. We have
identified a phenomenon in which both ALK and CD19 CAR T-cells lose
surface expression of CAR over time in culture. Additionally, both the
ALK CAR and the CD19 CAR downregulate quickly after T-cells are exposed
to antigen. Using a fluorescently tagged CD19 CAR, we demonstrate that
CARs are rapidly internalized upon antigen encounter.We created an assay
to understand the interplay of target density and CAR surface expression.
We transduced T-cells with different amounts of supernatant to achieve
different ALK CAR surface densities and then exposed these T-cells to
varying amounts of immobilized protein-L in order to crosslink the CAR.
T-cell activation (measured by an NFAT reporter) is greatest when both
CAR surface expression and target antigen density are highest. As both
variables are decreased, there is a significant loss of T-cell activity.
Thus, diminished CAR surface density due to antigen-dependent and
independent CAR downmodulation may limit CAR T-cell efficacy, especially
in the context of low tumor antigen expression.In conclusion, we have
created a novel CAR targeting ALK that demonstrates in vivo efficacy
against NB. Efficacy is limited by low target antigen density on NB and
low CAR surface expression. We have identified phenomena in which CAR
T-cells lose surface expression of CAR over time and also quickly
internalize their receptors in response to antigen. These factors
contribute to the efficacy of other CAR T-cells and this data provides
important insights into future CAR target selection.

