Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors overcome resistance to
chemotherapy in malignant pleural mesothelioma


Background: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a cancer of the
pleura mainly caused by exposure to asbestos fibers. Current treatments
are unsatisfactory due to intrinsic chemoresistance of the tumor. We
hypothesized that chemoresistance was due to epigenetic errors and
evaluated the ability of HDAC inhibitors to improve treatment efficacy.
We previously showed that valproic acid (VPA) improves the first line
regimen of MPM both in vitro and in vivo (Vandermeers et al, 2009,
Clinical Cancer Research 15: 2818). A clinical trial also demonstrated
that VPA in combination with doxorubicin increases the response rate of
second line patients (Scherpereel et al, 2011, European Respiratory
Journal 37:129).Methods: Transcriptomic profiling was performed by
microarray analyses (Agilent). Gene expression was validated by
quantitative RT-qPCR. Modulation of TGF expression was performed by shRNA
interference and transfection of a cDNA vector. Onset of apoptosis was
assessed with the Annexin V assay.Results: To evaluate the mechanisms
associated with the response to chemotherapy, we compared two types of
MPM cell lines (M14K and H28) characterized by a difference in
sensitivity to doxorubicin+VPA. Microarray analyses and bioinformatic
modeling of gene expression profiles revealed the most relevant candidate
genes associated with sensitivity or resistance to this regimen. Among
these, TGF expression was associated with resistance to doxorubicin + VPA
in a series of MPM cell lines. Silencing of TGF by RNA interference in
H28 cells correlated with a significant increase in apoptosis. On the
other hand, overexpression of TGF desensitized M14K cells to
doxorubicin+VPA -induced apoptosis. Since TGF interacts with the EGF
receptor, we evaluated pharmacological inhibition using EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (erlotinib and gefitinib) and the dual HDAC/EGFR
inhibitor CUDC-101. As predicted, these TKI inhibitors improved efficacy
of doxorubicin+VPA.Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that TGF is involved
in resistance of MPM to chemotherapy and that TKI inhibitors overcome
resistance to second line regimen.

