Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different expression of programmed death 1 (PD1) and its ligand
(PD-L1) in esophageal and gastric cancer


Background: Prognosis of gastric and esophageal cancer remains poor.
Improvements in gastric and esophageal cancer treatments are urgently
needed. Programmed cell death 1 receptor (PD1) and its ligand 1 (PD-L1)
are known to interact with T cells promoting epithelial cancer tolerance.
Several therapeutic monoclonal antibodies blocking this interaction are
reaching the clinical praxis. Therefore it is relevant to investigate the
role of these biomarkers in different types of malignancy.Methods: Four
different copies of tissue microarrays (TMA), each including healthy
mucosa (n = 74) and a total of 241 clinically annotated malignancies of
the esophagus (n = 80) and stomach (n = 161) were constructed and stained
with PD1, PD-L1, and CD8 specific reagents.Results: Interestingly, only
two cancer samples out of the 241 specimens investigated weakly expressed
PD-L1. None of the normal mucosa epithelial cells expressed PD-L1.
Stromal PD1 expression correlated with infiltration by CD8+ lymphocytes
(rho = 0.4; PBackground: Prognosis of gastric and esophageal cancer
remains poor. Improvements in gastric and esophageal cancer treatments
are urgently needed. Programmed cell death 1 receptor (PD1) and its
ligand 1 (PD-L1) are known to interact with T cells promoting epithelial
cancer tolerance. Several therapeutic monoclonal antibodies blocking this
interaction are reaching the clinical praxis. Therefore it is relevant to
investigate the role of these biomarkers in different types of
malignancy.Methods: Four different copies of tissue microarrays (TMA),
each including healthy mucosa (n = 74) and a total of 241 clinically
annotated malignancies of the esophagus (n = 80) and stomach (n = 161)
were constructed and stained with PD1, PD-L1, and CD8 specific
reagents.Results: Interestingly, only two cancer samples out of the 241
specimens investigated weakly expressed PD-L1. None of the normal mucosa
epithelial cells expressed PD-L1. Stromal PD1 expression correlated with
infiltration by CD8+ lymphocytes (rho = 0.4; P<0.0001). Elevated
intraepithelial presence of CD8+ and/or PD1+ cells in gastric cancer was
significantly correlated with longer patients survival. No correlation
could be found in esophageal cancer.Conclusion: In contrast to other
epithelial cancers, PD-L1 expression was virtually absent in the
investigated malignancies of the esophagus and stomach. PD1 expression in
the stroma surrounding such malignancies correlated with intraepithelial
presence of T-cells CD8+ expression, and with better prognosis in gastric
cancer patients.

