Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug-like inhibitors of SGK1: Discovery and optimization of low
molecular weight fragment leads


Triple negative (ER, PR and HER2/neu negative) breast cancers (TNBC)
constitute 15-24% of breast cancers, but account for a disproportionate
share of mortality. TNBC tumors are more aggressive, lack a targeted
therapy, and are prone to relapse and metastasis after cytotoxic drug
treatments, the only drug therapy currently available. Serum and
glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) promotes the growth,
invasiveness and chemo-resistance of cancer cells and is overexpressed in
48% of breast cancers, yet is not detected in normal breast tissue. In
particular, SGK1 is overexpressed in TNBC cells and knockdown of SGK1
blocks the proliferation and invasiveness of TNBC cells. Thus, SGK1 is an
attractive targeted therapy for TNBC. In the SGK1 inhibitors that have
been reported previously, poor physicochemical properties have prevented
these inhibitors from being active in vivo and advancing to the clinic.
To discover drug-like inhibitors of SGK1, we used our technology platform
(Leap-To-Lead) and a fragment-based screening approach to find SGK1
inhibitor scaffolds. Low molecular weight inhibitors like ours are more
readily optimized for potency while retaining drug-like properties. From
this screen, we identified 11 scaffolds as novel inhibitors of SGK1. Four
scaffold series had clear structure activity relationships (SAR). To
illustrate the potential of these scaffolds, we carried out a limited
synthetic expansion around one scaffold and improved potency more than
600-fold (SGK1 IC50 = 1 M; LE = 0.4). Several compounds dose-dependently
inhibited the proliferation of a TNBC cell line (MDA-MB-231) and
inhibited the phosphorylation of the biomarker protein N-Myc downstream
regulated 1 (NDRG-1). Unlike previously reported SGK1 inhibitors, our
fragment lead compounds show excellent cellular penetration in Caco-2
assays.In summary, a fragment-based screening approach was used to
identify four novel scaffolds with clear SAR trends. A single scaffold
series was further optimized and shows anti-proliferative activity and
biomarker modulation in a TNBC cell line. These SGK1 inhibitor series
represent excellent starting points for further SAR studies and
development of a novel preclinical candidate.

