Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib/Refametinib potently inhibits Wnt/-catenin in vitro and
patient-derived xenograft models of human hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: Mutations affecting the Wnt/-catenin pathway have been found
in 26-40% of HCC samples. Aberrant constitutive activation of this
pathway leads to uncontrolled cell proliferation growth and survival of
tumor cells. Thus, identification of Wnt/-catenin pathway inhibitors
might lead to a new treatment option for a large subset of HCC patients.
In the present study, we aim to investigate the effects of Sorafenib plus
the allosteric MEK1/2 inhibitor Refametinib (Sorafenib/Refametinib) on
Wnt/-catenin signaling in vitro and in PDX models of HCC. Methods: We
treated 15 patient-derived HCC xenograft models with i) 10 mg/kg
Sorafenib QD, ii) 15 mg/kg Refametinib QD, and iii)
Sorafenib/Refametinib. Western blotting was employed to determine
pharmacodynamic changes in biomarkers relevant Wnt/-catenin signaling.
Apoptosis, cell proliferation and localization of -catenin were analyzed
by immunohistochemistry. In-vitro explant culture from 3 patient-derived
HCC lines was also tested. Results: In both wild-type and
activated-mutated -catenin HCC primary cells, Refametinib and
Sorafenib/Refametinib potently inhibited cell proliferation and caused
cell death, which were correlated with downregulation of Dvl3 and
-catenin target genes (Axin2, c-myc, cyclin D1 and survivin). Inhibition
of p-LRP6 at Ser1490 and p--catenin at Tyr142 and elevation of E-cadherin
were also observed. These changes were not observed in Sorafenib-treated
samples. In addition, the Sorafenib/Refametinib combination also
suppressed Wnt3a-induced p-LRP6 at Ser1490 and -catenin accumulation in
cells. In vivo, significant reductions in p-LRP6 at Ser1490 and
p--catenin at Tyr142 were observed in tumor samples from the
Sorafenib/Refametinib treatment group and to a lesser extent, samples
from the Refametinib. Although the overall protein levels of -catenin
were not significantly changed, non-phosphorylated (active) -catenin
Ser33/37/Thr41 and WNT/-catenin target genes in Refametinib- and
Sorafenib/Refametinib-treated tumors were significantly reduced. While
vehicle-treated -catenin-mutated tumors showed strong cytoplasmatic and
nuclear -catenin localization, most of -catenin in Sorafenib/Refametinib-
and, to a lesser extent, Refametinib-treated tumors was accumulated at
the membrane. Conclusion: Sorafenib/Refametinib and, to a lesser extent,
Refametinib inhibit the growth of patient derived explant cultures and
PDX models. They also inactivate -catenin signaling. Since activating
mutations in the Wnt/-catenin pathway are detected in a high proportion
of HCC, combination of Sorafenib and Refametinib may represent an
alternative treatment for -catenin-dependent HCC.

