Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of CD44v9, a cancer stem cell marker, in human
hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: CD44 is a cell-surface glycoprotein involved in cell-cell
interactions, cell adhesion, and migration. This protein has recently
been identified as one of the crucial cell surface markers for cancer
stem cells (CSCs) in several types of tumor. It has recently been
reported that CD44 variant 9 (CD44v9) interacted with the
glutamate-cystine transporter xCT, thereby contributing to increased
intracellular synthesis of glutathione (GSH), a strong scavenger of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). CSCs having such mechanism are highly
resistant to ROS (Cancer Cell 2011). Of note, the function of xCT is
inhibited by sulfasalazine (Leukemia 2001), a commonly used drug for
ulcerative colitis.Aim: The aims of this study were to assess 1) the
expression levels of CD44v9 and xCT in human HCC tissues and HCC cell
lines, and 2) possible synergistic anti-tumor effect of cisplatin and
sulfasalazine on HCC cells.Methods: Thirty HCC tissues were subjected to
immunohistochemistry for CD44v9 and xCT. The human HCC cell lines HAK-1A
and HAK-1B were used. HAK-1B was an aggressive sister cell line derived
from HAK-1A, a well-differentiated one (Hepatology 1993). The cells were
incubated with cisplatin with or without sulfasalazine at concentrations
of 0, 50, 100, and 200 M under attached and sphere-forming conditions.
Western blot analysis was employed to evaluate protein expression
levels.Results: Membranous localization of CD44v9 was found in 2 HCC
tissues, that were moderately and poorly differentiated ones. In such
cases, the standard isoform CD44s was also strongly expressed. Expression
levels of xCT were ubiquitously demonstrated in all HCC cases studied;
however, it was robustly upregulated in sphere-formed HAK-1B cells, in
concert with the upregulation of CD44v9 in these cells. Sphere formation
of HAK-1B was significantly inhibited by co-treatment with cisplatin and
sulfasalazine in a dose-dependent manner.Conclusions: The CD44v9-xCT
system was demonstrated in less differentiated HCC tissues. Indeed,
poorly differentiated HCC cells (HAK-1B) under sphere formation robustly
expressed both CD44v9 and xCT, suggesting that CSC-like cells favored
this system. To overcome the ROS resistance of CSCs, delivering
sulfasalazine in combination with anti-cancer drugs may open a new avenue
to a promising treatment of chemorefractory HCC.

