Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Skin cancer prevention by traditional Chinese medicinal formula
Si-Wu-Tang and its constituents


Si-Wu-Tang (SWT), comprising the combination of four herbs, Rehmanniae,
Angelica, Chuanxiong and Paeoniae, is one of the most popular Chinese
medicines for women's diseases. Previously we showed that SWT was able to
upregulate genes in the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
(Nrf2) pathway, suggesting a potential application for cancer
chemoprevention. The present study examined the chemopreventive activity
of SWT using models of skin carcinogenesis. In JB6 P+ cells, a
non-cancerous murine epidermal cell line for studying skin tumor
promotion, SWT inhibited epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced neoplastic
transformation. In a 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA)-induced murine
skin tumorigenesis model, both topical and oral treatment of SWT
inhibited epidermal hyperplasia, proliferating cell nuclear antigen
expression, and H-ras mutations induced by DMBA treatment. In addition,
SWT exhibited a significant antimutagenic activity against DMBA-induced
mutagenicity, determined by the Ames Test using Salmonella typhimurium
TA100 in the presence of metabolic activator S9 system. To identify
active components in SWT, among nine compounds previously reported in
commercial SWT products, in silico molecular docking analysis predicted
some as potential Nrf2 activators due to an ability of interfering the
forming of Nrf2-Keap1 complex. Three of these compounds, gallic acid,
Z-liguistilide and senkyunolide A, were confirmed with highest potency of
increasing the antioxidant response element luciferase reporter activity,
inducing Nrf2-regulated genes Hmox1, Slc7A11 and Nqo1, and inhibiting
EGF-induced JB6 P+ transformation. Further mechanistic studies showed
that SWT and the three compounds suppressed EGF-induced activation of the
activator protein 1 (AP-1), an essential transcription factor involved in
skin carcinogenesis. The antimutagenic activity for the three compounds
was also confirmed with the Ames Test. In conclusion, these results
provide evidence that SWT and its constituents are able to prevent skin
cancer, at least partly, by activating the Nrf2 pathway and blocking the
activation of AP-1. Thus, this widely used Chinese medicinal formula may
provide a promising option toward preventing skin cancer or may be other
types of cancer.

