Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ewing sarcoma progression associates with increasing chromosomal
instability: A role for neuropeptide Y and its Y5 receptor


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a tumor driven by EWS-ETS fusion proteins. Yet, the
same fusions are present in localized and metastatic tumors that carry
strikingly different prognoses. Despite low levels of genomic instability
in primary ES tumors, the presence of complex karyotypes is one of a few
adverse prognostic factors, implicating an acquired chromosomal
instability (CIN) in ES progression. As transcriptional targets of
EWS-ETS, neuropeptide Y (NPY) and its Y5 receptor (Y5R) are highly
expressed in ES and further activated by hypoxia. We have found that
overexpression of Y5R leads to defects in cytokinesis, followed by
formation of polyploid cells, chromosome loss and CIN. Thus, the goal of
our study was to determine whether CIN that is driven by hypoxia-induced
activation of NPY/Y5R axis promotes ES metastases. ES cells were injected
into gastrocnemius muscles of SCID/beige mice. Hypoxia in the resulting
primary tumors was created by 72h ligation of the femoral artery. Then,
the tumors were excised and mice were monitored for metastases. Tissues
and cells derived from primary tumors and metastases were subjected to
cytogenetic analyses. ES metastasis was associated with progressive
genomic changes in tumor cells. Cells derived from primary tumors
exhibited increases in nuclear sizes and ploidy, as compared to the
original cells. Tumor hypoxia exacerbated this effect. This initial
increase in ploidy was followed by a decrease in nuclear size, increase
in mitotic errors and reduced chromosome numbers in cells from metastatic
tissues, suggesting that ES progression associates with increased CIN and
is triggered by cell polyploidization. This notion was confirmed by
increased DNA copy number alterations in tissues from ES metastases
observed in xenografts derived from 2 different cell lines and a clinical
case of matched primary tumor and metastasis tissue (array-CGH). In
SK-ES1 xenografts, these alterations involved gains in the locus of Y5R.
Consequently, FISH identified an SK-ES1 clone with 3 copies of the Y5R
gene. The percent of cells with Y5R gene amplification increased with the
degree of SK-ES1 progression, with 16-24% cells in the original SK-ES1
cell line, 40-60% in primary tumors and 86-100% in metastases. This was
associated with an increase in Y5R expression in metastatic tissues.
Thus, the metastasis in SK-ES1 xenografts associated with a selection of
the clone with amplified Y5R. SK-ES1 cells subjected to hypoxia in vitro
presented with similar increases in nuclear sizes and enrichment in the
clone with amplified Y5R (48%), as was observed in primary tumors. Y5R
activation in normoxic SK-ES1 cells mimicked this effect. Our findings
support the role for acquired CIN in ES progression and metastasis and
implicate the hypoxia-induced activation of the NPY/Y5R axis as its
potential trigger. Thus, Y5R antagonist may serve as an adjuvant
treatment to prevent ES CIN and progression.

