Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A paradoxical observation for its upregulation and the prognostic
significance about miR-7 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most malignant
cancers of the gastrointestinal tract. However, molecular indicators of
the origin of cellular deregulation in ESCC have not been identified.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), noncoding RNAs 21-25 nucleotides in length, regulate
gene expression primarily at the posttranscriptional level. Growing
evidence suggests that miRNAs are aberrantly expressed in many human
cancers, and that they play significant roles in carcinogenesis and
cancer progression. A search for miRNAs with a tumor-suppressive function
in ESCC was performed using the miRNA expression signatures. miRNA
signatures from ESCC identified miRNAs that are downregulated in common,
and these miRNAs are candidate tumor suppressors. Gain-of-function
analysis revealed that 3 transfectants (miR-145, miR-133a and miR-133b)
inhibit cell proliferation and cell invasion. These miRNAs, which have
conserved sequences in the 3UTR of FSCN1, inhibited FSCN1 expression. The
signal from a luciferase reporter assay was significantly decreased at 2
miR-145 target sites and 1 miR-133a/b site, suggesting both miRNAs
directly regulate FSCN1. An FSCN1 loss-of-function assay found
significant cell growth and invasion inhibition, implying an FSCN1 is
associated with ESCC carcinogenesis. The identification of
tumor-suppressive miRNAs, miR-145, miR-133a and miR-133b, directly
control oncogenic FSCN1 gene. These signal pathways of ESCC could provide
new insights into potential mechanisms of ESCC carcinogenesis.On the
other hands, miRNAs upregulated in cancer is the candidates of tumor
marker. The miRNA expression signatures we perform for ESCC revealed
seven upregulated miRNAs in ESCC. In the upregulated miRNAs of miRNA
expression signatures, miR-7 downregulation is the independent poor
prognostic factor for ESCC patients paradoxically.miR-7 expression is
reported upregulated or downregulated variously in the same carcinoma
(eg. Gastric adenocarcinoma). The correlation between patients prognosis
and miR-7 expression has not yet reported in Pubmed research in Dec.
2015. And the target genes of miR-7 is not clarified.

