Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel predictive biomarker model for MEK sensitivity


KRAS mutations occur in approximately 25% of NSCLC (1). Tumors with these
mutations are predicted to be sensitive to MEK inhibition due to
activation of MAPK signaling. However, MEK inhibitors in multiple
clinical trials, either as a monotherapy or in combination with
chemotherapies, have not shown superior efficacy in the KRAS mutant
subgroup when compared to the KRAS wild-type subgroup, indicating a
limitation of utilizing KRAS mutation status as a predictive biomarker of
efficacy to MEK inhibition (2, 3). Furthermore, stratification based on
KRAS mutation status may inadvertently miss wild-type KRAS tumors that
could be addicted to MAPK signaling regardless of KRAS mutation status,
thus denying patients potential benefit from MEK inhibitors. Here we
describe a novel predictive model that more accurately forecasts the
sensitivity of the KRAS wild-type NSCLC subpopulation to MEK inhibitors
such as cobimetinib and trametinib. Cell viability data from cobimetinib
or trametinib-treated cells, with concomitant gene expression data
(RNAseq), from 46 colon, 106 lung, and 37 pancreatic cell lines were used
to create an elastic net regression model trained on gene expression
features (alpha = 0.5 and optimal lambda chosen by 5-fold cross
validation) (4). From the model, we established two distinct predictive
gene lists: (1) a longer low cross-validation list, and (2) a shorter low
error list. Initial analysis of the model demonstrated that predicted
mean viabilities of the cell lines used to create the model correlated
well with their actual mean viabilities (R: 0.65-0.7 for trametinib and
cobimetinib respectively). Predicted mean viabilities of 40 previously
unscreened NSCLC cell lines were then generated by the model based on
their expression features (RNAseq). The 40 cell lines were categorized
either as sensitive or resistant by the median of predicted mean
viabilities derived from the model. Subsequently, the actual experimental
GI50 values of cobimetinib were obtained for each of these cell lines. We
found that KRAS mutational status predicted that only 8 of the 40 cell
lines screened would be sensitive to MEK inhibition. In contrast, our
model predicted that 15 of the 40 cell lines screened would be sensitive.
Experimentally, we demonstrated that 24 of the cell lines were sensitive
to MEK inhibition with a measured GI50KRAS mutations occur in
approximately 25% of NSCLC (1). Tumors with these mutations are predicted
to be sensitive to MEK inhibition due to activation of MAPK signaling.
However, MEK inhibitors in multiple clinical trials, either as a
monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapies, have not shown
superior efficacy in the KRAS mutant subgroup when compared to the KRAS
wild-type subgroup, indicating a limitation of utilizing KRAS mutation
status as a predictive biomarker of efficacy to MEK inhibition (2, 3).
Furthermore, stratification based on KRAS mutation status may
inadvertently miss wild-type KRAS tumors that could be addicted to MAPK
signaling regardless of KRAS mutation status, thus denying patients
potential benefit from MEK inhibitors. Here we describe a novel
predictive model that more accurately forecasts the sensitivity of the
KRAS wild-type NSCLC subpopulation to MEK inhibitors such as cobimetinib
and trametinib. Cell viability data from cobimetinib or
trametinib-treated cells, with concomitant gene expression data (RNAseq),
from 46 colon, 106 lung, and 37 pancreatic cell lines were used to create
an elastic net regression model trained on gene expression features
(alpha = 0.5 and optimal lambda chosen by 5-fold cross validation) (4).
From the model, we established two distinct predictive gene lists: (1) a
longer low cross-validation list, and (2) a shorter low error list.
Initial analysis of the model demonstrated that predicted mean
viabilities of the cell lines used to create the model correlated well
with their actual mean viabilities (R: 0.65-0.7 for trametinib and
cobimetinib respectively). Predicted mean viabilities of 40 previously
unscreened NSCLC cell lines were then generated by the model based on
their expression features (RNAseq). The 40 cell lines were categorized
either as sensitive or resistant by the median of predicted mean
viabilities derived from the model. Subsequently, the actual experimental
GI50 values of cobimetinib were obtained for each of these cell lines. We
found that KRAS mutational status predicted that only 8 of the 40 cell
lines screened would be sensitive to MEK inhibition. In contrast, our
model predicted that 15 of the 40 cell lines screened would be sensitive.
Experimentally, we demonstrated that 24 of the cell lines were sensitive
to MEK inhibition with a measured GI50<1uM. In conclusion, we describe a
novel predictive model that more accurately predicts sensitivity to MEK
inhibition, provides a potentially larger patient segment, and could be
translatable to the clinic.References(1) Blumenschein GR. et al., (2015)
Annal Oncol. 26(5):894-901.(2) Gandara DL et al., (2013) J Clin Oncol 31,
(suppl; abstr 8028).(3) Laethem JLV et al, (2014) J Clin Oncol 32:5s,
(suppl; abstr 4025).(4) Barretina J. et al. (2012) Nature 483, 603-607.

