Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role for R191, potent and selective IRAK4 kinase
inhibitor, in treatment of hematologic malignancies


Recent advances in genome sequencing and tumor proteome and transcriptome
analysis uncovered a key role for MyD88-dependent Toll-Like Receptor
(TLR) and Interleukin-1 Receptor (IL-1R)-mediated signaling pathways in
multiple hematologic malignancies. A third of activated B-cell-like
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (ABC DLBCL) and nearly 100% of Waldenstrom
macroglobulinemia (WD) patients carry an activating Myd88 L265P mutation.
Overexpression of multiple TLR pathway components, associated with
deregulation of innate immune system and subsequent induction of
proinflammatory bone marrow environment, are prominent features of
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML).
IRAK4 kinase is a crucial enzyme in all MyD88-dependent signaling
pathways, potentially making it an ideal target for disease modification
with small molecule inhibitors. Through cell-based screening, we
identified a potent small molecule IRAK1/4 kinase inhibitor, R191. R191
blocks TLR- and IL-1R-induced cytokine production in primary cells with
potencies below 50nM while sparing unrelated pathways with at least
20-fold window. R191 is extremely potent in vitro against IRAK4 kinase (3
nM), yet exhibits good selectivity against a broad panel of kinases. In
vivo, it decreases serum IL-6 in an acute mouse model of IL-1-induced
cytokine release and blocks joint inflammation in the collagen-induce
arthritis model. R191 exhibited strong synergy with Bcl2 and BCR pathway
inhibitors against a number of DLBCL lines in vitro. In multiple AML
lines, R191 potently inhibited expression of PD-L1, potentially promoting
recognition of AML blasts by the immune system. Based on the potential
critical role of IRAK kinases in MDS, AML and Myd88 L265P lymphomas, R191
could provide a novel therapeutic modality in the management of multiple
inflammation-driven hematologic malignancies.

