Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beyond SNPs: Utilizing NGS methods to detect copy number
alterations at high sensitivity in clinical cancer samples


The emergence of novel technologies, including Next-Generation
Sequencing, has enabled the identification of actionable variants in
clinical specimens, which can then be targeted with molecular
therapeutics in a precision medicine approach. In human cancers, Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) have become powerful predictors of
response to certain targeted therapies. However, Copy Number Alterations
(CNAs) also represent a major class of clinically actionable variants
that are frequently identified in clinical cancer samples. CNAs account
for more than one third of all actionable mutations. A major question in
the clinical application of technologies such as NGS is whether CNAs are
faithfully detected; a particularly important question given the
prevalence of actionable CNAs in cancer samples. To address this question
we prepared tumor samples from eleven distinct patients and compared CNA
detection on two different NGS platforms. As an orthogonal method for
validation, we compared the CNA detection results to Fluorescent In Situ
Hybridization (FISH) performed on the same samples. We observed 20 copy
number amplification events across the eleven patient samples according
to FISH analysis. By comparison, our internal NGS assay, termed ICG100,
detected 19/20 (94%) amplification events, whereas an external,
commercially available NGS-based test detected only 12/20 (59%)
amplification events. Of the seven amplification events that were not
identified by the external NGS test, six were considered clinically
actionable variants. These findings highlight the discrepancies that
exist amongst NGS library preparation chemistries and their abilities to
accurately detect CNAs. The relevance of these findings is particularly
underscored by the clinically actionable nature of the variants that were
discordantly detected, including a high-level ERBB2 amplification.

