Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A83-01 inhibits TGF-/Smad3 and Wnt/-catenin-mediated EMT and tumor
metastasis in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells


Interactions between Wnt and TGF- (Transforming growth factor-) signaling
pathways play a critical role in promoting EMT (Epithelial to Mesenchymal
Transition) and tumor metastasis. We previously demonstrated that
activation of Wnt3/-catenin signaling pathway promoting EMT is an
important mechanism leading to HER2-cells becoming resistant to
trastuzumab. In this study, we used HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cells to investigate the interactions between TGF- and Wnt/-catenin
pathways in regulation of EMT and promoting breast cancer cells invasion.
Our data showed that phosphorylation of Smad3 at ser423/425 by TGF- led
to nuclear localization of Smad3 and upregulation of Twist protein
expression in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. Cells treated with
TGF- showed poor response to trastuzumab and exhibited EMT-like
phenotype; decreased E-cadherin and increased N-cadherin expression. A
small molecule inhibitor, A83-01 which inhibits phosphorylation of Smad3
repressed TGF--induced nuclear accumulation of Smad3 and Twist
expression. The A83-01 also inhibited TGF--induced cell migration and
invasion and enhanced anti-tumor activity of trastuzumab. The TGF-/Smad3
induced EMT in HER2-cells was found to be concordant with activation of
Wnt3/-catenin pathway. Following TGF- treatment, Chromatin
immunoprecipitation identified occupancy of Twist at promoter region of
Wnt3. This data suggests that Twist in response to TGF- activated Wnt3
gene transcription in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. Knock-down
of Twist by shRNA down-regulated Wnt3 expression and inhibited
TGF--induced nuclear accumulation of -catenin. Subsequently, TGF--induced
matrix metalloproteinases, MMP1, MMP7, MMP9, VEGF (Vascular endothelial
growth factors) and activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling were repressed
by the shRNA treatment.In summary, our data demonstrated for the first
time that the TGF-/Smad3 mediated Twist results in transcriptional
upregulation of Wnt3/-catenin pathway and promotes EMT and cell invasion.
The data suggests that therapeutic targeting of Twist by A83-01 and
similar small molecules could inhibit the interaction between TGF- and
Wnt pathways and prevent breast cancer progressing to EMT and metastases.

