Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel kinase connection between oncogenic signaling and
myeloid-derived suppressor cell functions in tumor evasion


Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) comprise a heterogeneous
population of immature myeloid cells that suppress anti-tumor immune
responses. The accumulation of CD33+HLA-DR- MDSCs correlates with tumor
stage and metastatic burden in various cancers including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) (1). Cancer cells can secrete a variety of cytokines and
chemokines to facilitate the peripheral expansion and tumor infiltration
of MDSCs. However, the cancer cell-specific signaling cascades that
promote MDSC expansion remain poorly understood. We previously
demonstrated that cell cycle-related kinase (CCRK) acts as a new
oncogenic signaling hub in hepatocellular proliferation and
transformation (2-4). To investigate whether CCRK regulates tumor
microenvironment in HCC, we determined the role of CCRK signaling in the
crosstalk between cancer cells and MDSCs.Our results showed that
treatment of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with
conditional medium of CCRK-over-expressing immortalized hepatocytes and
HCC cells resulted in expansion of CD33+ HLA-DR-MDSCs with increased
inhibitory effects on T cell responses. In contrast, knockdown of CCRK in
hepatic cells downregulated MDSCs. Cytokine profiling analysis revealed
that CCRK significantly induced hepatocellular interferon-6 (IL-6)
expression and release, which mediated MDSC expansion as shown by IL-6
interfering experiments. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that CCRK
triggered nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-B) signaling in an enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2)-dependent manner. Simultaneously, the phosphorylation of
p65 by CCRK facilitated the co-occupancy of IL-6 promoter by NF-B-EZH2
complex for transcriptional activation. Using a Hepa1-6 orthotopic HCC
model in immune-competent C57BL/6J mice, we showed that knockdown of Ccrk
significantly decreased hepatic tumorigenicity and the levels of
circulating and tumor-infiltrating MDSCs as well as related T cell
responses. Notably, adoptive transfer of MDSCs rescued the effects of
Ccrk knockdown. In a complementary experiment, we found that MDSC
depletion by anti-Gr-1 antibody significantly reduced CCRK-induced
tumorigenicity. Furthermore, transgenic over-expression of CCRK in mouse
liver led to activation of EZH2/NF-B signaling and elevated circulating
levels of MDSC. As we also showed concordant over-expression of CCRK,
IL-6 and MDSC markers (CD33, Arg-I) in human HCCs, our results uncover
CCRK to be a critical immune regulator to promote MDSC, thereby providing
a new mechanistic link between aberrant oncogenic signaling and tumor
evasion for therapeutic exploitation.Acknowledgement: This project was
supported by the University Grants Committee through the Collaborative
Research Fund C4017-14G.References1) Marigo I., et al., 2010. Immunity.2)
Feng H., et al., 2011. J Clin Invest.3) Yu Z., et al., 2014. Gut.4) Feng
H., et al., 2015. J Hepatol.

