Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction with NHERF1 enhances protein stability of G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor


G Protein-Coupled Estrogen Receptor (GPER), also called GPR30, has been
demonstrated to play important roles in a variety of physiological and
pathological responses, especially in cancer cells proliferation,
migration and invasion. Despite increasing evidences have showed clinical
correlations between GPER expression level and poor prognosis in human
cancer specimens, little is known regarding the regulation of GPER
expression level, especially in protein level. Our previous studies have
shown that PDZ protein NHERF1 can interact with ACTN4 (FASEB J. 2015) or
PTEN (Endocrinology. 2011) and prevent their degradation. In this study,
NHERF1 was demonstrated to interact with GPER in HEK293 cells and breast
cancer cells MCF7 and T47D. GST Pull-down, Co-IP and immunocytochemistry
analysis revealed that this interaction was mediated by the PDZ2 domain
of NHERF1 and the carboxyl terminal of GPER. Mutation of the last
c-terminal amino acid of GPER V375A could abolish the interaction of
NHERF1 with GPER. Change of NHERF1 expression level by overexpression or
knockdown affects the overall protein level of GPER. NHERF1
overexpression improved the GPER protein stability by inhibiting the
receptor degradation via ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in an interaction
dependent manner. Further analysis of public TCGA data revealed that
NHERF1 expression level positively associated with activation of GPER
downstream genes in invasive breast cancer, in which GPER mRNA level was
similar with that of normal breast tissue. Our findings identify NHERF1
as a novel binding partner for GPER and uncover a novel role of NHERF1 in
promoting GPER protein stability by inhibiting ubiquitin-proteasome
degradation of the receptor. Considering the importance of GPER in breast
cancer progression, these findings may help elucidate mechanisms
associated with breast cancer invasion and metastasis.

