Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic activation of RNA binding proteins and c-Myc signaling
in hepatocellular carcinoma


Global transcriptomic alterations of both coding and non-coding RNA
species are a ubiquitous feature associated with human cancers including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Dysregulation of RNA-binding proteins
(RBPs), the key regulators of RNA processing, is one mechanism in which
cancer cells select to promote tumorigenesis. We analyzed genomic
alterations amongst a family of more than 800 mRNA RBPs (mRBPs) in 1,225
clinical specimens from HCC patients and found that RBPs are
significantly activated through gene amplification in a subset of tumors
with poor prognosis, suggesting their potential oncogenic roles in HCC
progression. Amongst the top candidates, RD binding protein (RDBP) was
further characterized for its oncogenic role and effects on the HCC
transcriptome. While the activation of RDBP induced an oncogenic
phenotype, the abrogation of RDBP in HCC cells significantly decreased
cancer associated phenotypes such as cell proliferation,
migration/invasion and tumorigenicity in vivo. Further analyses revealed
that RDBP-dependent genes were tumor-related with a significant
enrichment for c-Myc targets, suggesting interplay between RDBP and c-Myc
signaling. Similar data were also found in HCC clinical specimens where
c-Myc amplification was uncommon. Consistently, the RDBP-dependent c-Myc
target gene signature was able to predict HCC patient survival in two
independent cohorts of more than 400 patients. Our results demonstrate
that oncogenic activation of RDBP is a novel mechanism that contributes
to global transcriptome imbalance, which is selective for the activation
of c-Myc oncogenic signaling in HCC. Concurrent with the current model
that indicates that c-Myc can promote tumorigenesis through transcription
dysregulation, our current work suggests that therapies focused on
targeting RDBP may be valuable for clinical treatment of many different
tumors with activated c-Myc signaling, including HCC.

