Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the role of tyrosine 1101 in the nuclear
translocation of the epidermal growth factor receptor


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subclass of breast cancers that
are negative for the estrogen receptor, the progesterone receptor, and
HER2. Currently, TNBCs have poor prognosis and very few proven molecular
targets. One promising target in TNBC has been the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), as it is overexpressed in as many as 80% of
TNBCs. Strikingly, however, antibody-based therapy directed against the
EGFR (cetuximab) in TNBCs has had modest clinical impact. Over the last
decade, advances in EGFR biology have established that the EGFR functions
in two distinct signaling pathways: classical membrane-bound signaling
and the nuclear EGFR signaling pathway. We previously demonstrated that
EGFR nuclear translocation is dependent on Src Family Kinases (SFKs) and
phosphorylation of tyrosine 1101 (Y1101) on the cytoplasmic tail of the
EGFR. In these studies, translocation of the EGFR to the nucleus led to
activation of the nuclear EGFR signaling pathway, which resulted in
cetuximab resistance. Resistance could be reversed by simultaneously
targeting both the nuclear EGFR signaling pathway and the classical EGFR
signaling pathway through the inhibition of its nuclear transport
(blockade of SFKs) and with cetuximab, respectively. Despite the
identification of nuclear EGFR as a functional molecular target in TNBC,
the role of Y1101 in EGFR translocation has yet to be identified.In this
study, we seek to better understand the role of Y1101 in the nuclear
translocation of EGFR in TNBC. Using a battery of TNBC cell lines, we
have created isogenic pairs that overexpress either wild type EGFR
(EGFR-WT) or EGFR with a mutant Y1101 (EGFR-Y110F). Using electron and
super-resolution confocal microscopy as well as cellular fractionation,
we have shown that EGFR-Y1101 undergoes normal endocytosis upon EGF
stimulation in multiple cell lines, but unlike EGFR-WT, EGFR-Y1101F
deposits around the perinuclear region. These data suggest that
EGFR-Y1101F is able to undergo normal translocation to the perinuclear
space, but that amino acid Y1101 is necessary for direct nuclear entry,
potentially due to its interactions with nucleoporins. Current work is
focused on the identification of nucleoporins with which EGFR-Y1101 may
interact. In addition, continued work focuses on allelic mutation using
CrisprCas9. Ultimately, the long-term goal of this project is to
understand how Y1101 mediates EGFR nuclear translocation. With this
information, we will then aim to develop allosteric inhibitors of Y1101
that may abrogate EGFR nuclear translocation and lead to a novel
therapeutic which targets the nuclear EGFR signaling pathway in TNBC.

