Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional disparity among BCL-2 members in tonsillar and leukemic
B cell subsets probed by next generation BH3 mimetic profiling


Introduction and aim. Long-lived humoral immunity, in the form of plasma
cells (PC) and memory B cells, as well as most B cell malignancies,
originate in the germinal center (GC). For successful therapies against
malignant B cells it is crucial to understand their survival requirements
in relation to their normal counterparts. It was previously shown that
murine GC B cells depend on pro-survival protein MCL-1, but not BCL-XL,
although both are expressed. In contrast, nave and memory B cells express
BCL-2, and as a consequence, they are sensitive to the BH3 mimetic
ABT-737, which blocks both BCL-2 and BCL-XL but not MCL-1. The divergent
roles of MCL-1 and BCL-XL in GC B cells still remain unexplained, and it
is unknown if this also holds for human B cells. We here dissect these
aspects in human tonsillar B subsets and in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) cells, a B cell cancer where expression of BCL-2 members is
influenced by signals that also occur in the normal GC.Experimental
procedures. We used FACS sorting of tonsil B subsets, mRNA and protein
profiling, co-culture of CLL cells, co-IP of BCL-2 members, cell death
assays with next generation BH3 mimetics specific for BCL-2, BCL-XL or
MCL-1 (ABT-199, WEHI-539, A-1210477).Results. Naive and memory B cells
are mainly sensitive to specific inhibition of BCL-2 by ABT-199. In
contrast, GC B cells and tonsil PC are insensitive to ABT-199, but
undergo apoptosis when MCL-1 is inhibited. Tonsil PC display yet another
profile and are remarkably sensitive to inhibition of BCL-XL. MCL-1
expression in GC B cells is regulated post-translationally and its
physiological importance is highlighted by exclusive binding to
pro-apoptotic BIM. In contrast, BCL-XL is transcriptionally induced in
the GC-light zone, and is solely bound to the weak BH3-only sensitizer
BIK, which may explain why BCL-XL is not required for GC B cell
survival.These approaches were extended to primary CLL cells either
resting or stimulated via CD40, as model for circulating and lymph node
resident cells. We showed recently that CD40 stimulation strongly induces
MCL-1, BCL-XL and BFL-1, similar to the pattern in healthy GC B cells,
and confers complete resistance to ABT-199, whereas untreated CLL cells
are highly sensitive. We now demonstrate that dual or triple BH3 mimetic
combinations are effective in killing CD40-stimulated CLL. In contrast to
GC B cells, BIK is absent in CLL cells while NOXA is highly expressed
and, like BIM, is bound to MCL-1. This may account for differential
sensitivity to (combinations of) BH3 mimetics.Conclusion. Using novel BH3
mimetics and interaction profiles, we were able to probe the contribution
of individual BCL-2 members in survival of normal and malignant B cells.
Our findings provide clues to determine therapeutic windows in novel
treatment strategies in B cell and other malignancies.

