Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical chemokine receptor ACKR3 expression is associated with
aggressive behavior and poor prognosis in gastric cancer


Chemokine and their receptors are key mediators of normal physiology and
a large number of pathologic conditions such as cancer, and this family
of receptors is the emerging therapeutic target in the field of cancer
treatment. ACKR3 is an atypical chemokine receptor first cloned from a
dog cDNA library as the orphan receptor and was initially named Receptor
Dog cDNA 1 (RDC1). Shortly after demonstrating that RDC1 binds with its
ligand, stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) and interferon-inducible
T-cell chemoattractant (I-TAC), RDC1 was officially deorphanized.
Accumulating evidence of recent studies have suggested that expression of
ACKR3 is augmented in most of tumor cells as compared to their normal
counterparts and is involved in cell proliferation, survival, migration,
invasion during the initiation and progression of cancer. However, there
is little information regarding their expression and clinical relevance
in gastric cancer. The expression status of ACKR3 was investigated in 221
specimens of primary gastric cancer using immunohistochemistry. The
correlation of ACKR3 expression with the clinicopathological features and
survival outcomes was analyzed as well. Immunohistochemical staining of
gastric cancer tissue sections revealed diverse cytoplasmic and membrane
staining patterns for ACKR3. One hundred-fourteen cases (51.6%) showed
low ACKR3 expression according to an arbitrary scoring system (grade 0-1;
grade 0, n = 26; grade 1, n = 88), and one hundred-seven cases (48.4%)
showed high expression (grade 2-3; grade 2, n = 58; grade 3, n = 49).
There were no significant differences in age, gender, histology, tumor
location, lymphatic and venous invasion among the two groups. However,
high CXCR7 expression in cancer cells tended to be associated with
proportion of tumor size greater than 5 cm (P = 0.055) and was
significantly correlated with depth of tumor invasion (P Chemokine and
their receptors are key mediators of normal physiology and a large number
of pathologic conditions such as cancer, and this family of receptors is
the emerging therapeutic target in the field of cancer treatment. ACKR3
is an atypical chemokine receptor first cloned from a dog cDNA library as
the orphan receptor and was initially named Receptor Dog cDNA 1 (RDC1).
Shortly after demonstrating that RDC1 binds with its ligand, stromal
cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) and interferon-inducible T-cell
chemoattractant (I-TAC), RDC1 was officially deorphanized. Accumulating
evidence of recent studies have suggested that expression of ACKR3 is
augmented in most of tumor cells as compared to their normal counterparts
and is involved in cell proliferation, survival, migration, invasion
during the initiation and progression of cancer. However, there is little
information regarding their expression and clinical relevance in gastric
cancer. The expression status of ACKR3 was investigated in 221 specimens
of primary gastric cancer using immunohistochemistry. The correlation of
ACKR3 expression with the clinicopathological features and survival
outcomes was analyzed as well. Immunohistochemical staining of gastric
cancer tissue sections revealed diverse cytoplasmic and membrane staining
patterns for ACKR3. One hundred-fourteen cases (51.6%) showed low ACKR3
expression according to an arbitrary scoring system (grade 0-1; grade 0,
n = 26; grade 1, n = 88), and one hundred-seven cases (48.4%) showed high
expression (grade 2-3; grade 2, n = 58; grade 3, n = 49). There were no
significant differences in age, gender, histology, tumor location,
lymphatic and venous invasion among the two groups. However, high CXCR7
expression in cancer cells tended to be associated with proportion of
tumor size greater than 5 cm (P = 0.055) and was significantly correlated
with depth of tumor invasion (P < 0.001), lymph node metastasis (P =
0.042), and higher stage (P = 0.002). Furthermore, patients with high
ACKR3 expression showed worse overall survival rate of 47% compared to
56% in patients with low ACKR3 expression. In conclusion, ACKR3 is
differentially expressed in gastric cancer cells, and high expression of
ACKR3 is associated with aggressive tumor behavior and poor survival in
patients with gastric cancer, suggesting that ACKR3 plays an important
role during gastric cancer progression.

