Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pro-tumorigenic effects of obesity are reversed by severe
weight loss via chronic or intermittent calorie restriction but not
weight normalization via a low-fat diet


Background: Breast cancer outcomes in both pre- and postmenopausal women
are negatively impacted by obesity, but the reversibility of these
pro-cancer effects via weight loss has not been well established. We
examined how weight loss via four different dietary interventions affects
mammary tumor progression in a mouse model of chronic obesity and
pre-menopausal basal-like breast cancer.Methods: Six week old C57BL/6
mice were randomized to a control (Con, 10% kcal from fat) or
diet-induced obesity (DIO, 60% kcal from fat) regimen and maintained on
these diets for 15 weeks. DIO mice were then randomized to remain on DIO
diet (Obese) or begin one of four weight loss regimens: low-fat control
(formerly obese, FOb), high-carb 30% calorie-restricted (HCCR), low-carb
30% CR (LCCR), or intermittent energy restriction (IER). IER mice
received a 14% CR diet 5 days/week and a 70% CR diet on 2 non-consecutive
days/week, such that their average daily kcal intake and macronutrient
distribution was equivalent to the LCCR group. The Con mice received the
same control diet through the end of the study to maintain a normal
weight. Mice were orthotopically injected with E0771 mouse mammary tumor
cells at week 25. All mice were euthanized when one tumor reached 1.5 cm
in diameter.Results: At study endpoint, Obese mice had a higher average
body weight and body fat percentage in comparison to all other diet
groups. These phenotypic measures were statistically equivalent in Con
and FOb mice, indicating that the FOb mice had returned to a normal
weight and body fat percentage, but they were significantly lower in the
3 CR groups. The CR mice all lost and then maintained an equivalent
amount of weight following the diet switch at 15 weeks, regardless of the
diet timing or macronutrient distribution. Tumor volume and weight at
sacrifice were significantly greater in the Obese mice relative to Con
mice and all CR mice, but not FOb mice, despite their weight loss to Con
levels. In contrast, tumors in the HCCR and IER, but not LCCR, mice were
significantly smaller than Con. Serum insulin and leptin levels were
statistically equivalent in Con, FOb, HCCR, LCCR, and IER, but serum
insulin-like growth factor 1 remained significantly elevated in FOb mice,
with levels statistically equivalent to Obese mice.Conclusions: These
results suggest that weight normalization via a low-fat control diet does
not reverse the mammary tumor-promoting effects of chronic obesity.
However, severe weight loss through various forms of calorie restriction
successfully reverses these effects. An improved understanding of the
energy responsive mechanisms mediating the anticancer effects of calorie
restriction in obese mice may lead to the identification of new
intervention targets and strategies to reduce the impact of obesity on
breast cancer outcomes.

