Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased PKR expression inhibits differentiation of hematopoietic
stem cells


Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is characterized by a differentiation
block at an early stage of hematopoiesis that results in the accumulation
of immature myeloid cells and an impaired production of blood cells. This
parallels findings in solid tumors that demonstrate differentiation stage
is often associated with tumor behavior and generally an immature tumor
is more aggressive than the more differentiated counterpart. Thus,
newresearch designed to more fully understand the mechanisms of cellular
differentiation may improve our understanding of neoplastic
transformation and identify new therapeutic targets. Recently our
laboratory has determined that increased expression and activation of the
interferon-inducible, dsRNA-activated kinase (PKR) is associated with
shorter remission duration and worse survival for patients with AML. PKR
is a key mediator of the cellular response to inflammatory stress that
has been found to be upregulated by chronic inflammation and aging. Since
we have previously reported that mice expressing a PKR transgene (TgPKR)
in hematopoietic cells have a reduced number of bone marrow (BM) Lin-,
Sca1+, cKit+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) and develop a
dysplastic BM with an increased frequency of BM blasts, we investigated
whether PKR may affect HSPC differentiation. Results indicate that BM of
TgPKR mice contains a significantly reduced number of multipotent
progenitor cells (MPPs) that are more frequently arrested in G0/G1 than
wild type (WT) mice. In contrast, BM of PKR knockout mice (PKRKO) have an
increased frequency of proliferating MPPs (S+G2/M) but a decreased
frequency of both Long-term (LT) and Short-term (ST) HSCs compared to
either WT or TgPKR mice. Although LT-HSCs of TgPKR mice are more
frequently quiescent in vivo they remain functional in vitro as
demonstrated by nearly double the colony forming capacity compared to BM
of PKRKO mice after >4 weeks in long term culture initiating cell
(LTC-IC) assays. In addition, when differentiation of the myeloid cell
line K562 is induced by PMA treatment, cells with reduced PKR expression
by siRNA knockdown display an increased rate and extent of megakaryocyte
differentiation compared to control cells. These findings suggest that
increased PKR expression has a previously unrecognized function to
inhibit hematopoietic cell differentiation. This may account for why
TgPKR mice accumulate quiescent LT-HSCs and develop BM dysplasia with
age. Furthermore, these results suggest that increased PKR
expression/activation as observed in high-risk MDS, AML and other
hematologic malignancies may contribute to leukemogenesis, at least in
part, by blocking hematopoietic cell differentiation. In addition, these
new findings may be applicable to solid tumors since increased PKR
signaling has also been reported to be associated with a more rapid and
aggressive course of tumor progression in breast cancer, melanoma and
colon cancer.

