Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA Fendrr as biomarker for lung cancer


Background. Carcinogenesis has been extensively studied at a molecular
level however, only since some years ago this research field has been fed
by the discovery of a new type of long non-coding RNAs that are able to
regulate gene expression and control various cellular mechanisms: Long
non-coding RNA (LncRNA). In this study we have focused on the LncRNA
Fendrr, which is located on chromosome 16 (16q24.1). This gene produces a
long non-coding RNA transcribed bidirectionally with the Forkhead box-F1
(Foxf1) transcription factor on the opposite strand. The distance between
Fendrr and FoxF1 is around 1700 bp and it seems to contain the promoter
of both genes. In addition, the function of LncRNA Fendrr is currently
unknown.There is controversial data about the possible correlation
between Fendrr and FoxF1. Szafranski et al (Genome Res. 2013) showed that
Fendrr downregulates FoxF1 (by using siRNA against Fendrr). On the other
hand, Cabili et al (Genome Biol. 2015) demonstrated that the mRNA of
Fendrr and Foxf1 are in the same proportion and localization (nucleus and
cytoplasm) and Grote et al (RNA Biol. 2013) indicated that Fendrr
interacts with PRC2 complex, which is able to inhibit FoxF1 expression.
However, Xu et al (J Hematol Oncol. 2014) showed that, regardless of an
overexpression or knockdown of Fenderr, any change in FoxF1 expression
was found.Objective. One of the principal aims of this study is to
investigate how Fendrr and FoxF1 are silenced in lung cancer and which
are their functions.Results. Our preliminary results show that 17 out of
20 (85%) human lung cancer cell lines tested, didnt express neither
Fendrr nor Foxf1. However, to date, it has not been identified any
mutation in Fendrr or FoxF1 in these cell lines.In addition, it has been
seen that methylation of the promoter and the response of 5-aza is
dependent of the p53 status. Moreover, we have observed that ectopic
overexpression of LncRNA Fendrr increases the expression of FoxF1 in some
lung cancer cell lines and, interestingly, inhibition of FoxF1 gene
increases expression of Fendrr. In contrast, inhibition of Fendrr does
not seem to produce any change in FoxF1 expression. This could mean that
Fendrr regulates FoxF1 expression but requires the help of other
components.Our main goal is to investigate whether Fendrr and FoxF1 are
silenced in lung cancer cell lines and how demethylating agents can
re-express Foxf1 and Fendrr genes. In addition, we will explore the
epigenetic patterns of lncRNAs in lung cancer cell lines using
sequencing-based methylome data.Conclusion. We demonstrate that Fendrr
and FoxF1 are silenced by methylation in p53 mutated human lung cancer
cells lines and we also have observed that Fendrr regulates the
expression of FoxF1. All there results could support the hypothesis the
role of Fendrr in regulating FoxF1 expression, a gene that could be a
putative tumor suppressor.

