Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting FoxA1 in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer:
biological characterization of kinase regulators


Estrogen receptor (ER) is the driving and defining transcription factor
in 75% of breast cancers and is directly inhibited by targeted therapies
such as tamoxifen. DNA interactions and transcriptional potential of ER
depend on the pioneer factor, FoxA1, which thereby plays an essential
role in determining tumour growth and progression - even when resistance
to existing drugs has developed. The aim of this study is to characterize
kinase regulators of FoxA1 function in order to identify druggable
targets for the indirect inhibition of ER.To identify kinase regulators
in ER+ breast cancer, primary screening of multiple cell lines was
performed using an siRNA library of the human kinome. After secondary
screening of ER+ specific growth-regulatory kinases using a stable
luciferase reporter of FoxA1 activation, 50 putative kinase regulators of
FoxA1 were identified. These were cross-referenced with kinase inhibitors
of FoxA1 activation discovered via a separate cell-based compound screen
and competitive-binding kinase displacement assay.This two-pronged
screening approach revealed 6 common putative FoxA1-regulatory kinase
enzymes. These were characterized by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
of FoxA1 and ER with quantitative PCR of archetypal ER enhancers, 48
hours after siRNA knockdown of the kinase. This revealed 3 kinases whose
inhibition prevented FoxA1 and ER from accessing the chromatin, and 1
kinase that had the opposite effect.Mass spectrometry-based proteomic
analysis of endogenous FoxA1-protein interactors using ChIP is underway
to assess the change in FoxA1 co-factors following inhibition of these 4
candidate kinases. We used a proteomic purification method called RIME
which permits analysis of phosphorylation events on FoxA1. We are
currently assessing whether silencing of specific kinases influences
phosphorylation of the putative substrate, FoxA1.In summary, the
identified kinases demonstrate promising FoxA1 specificity, and may
provide druggable targets for the inhibition of ER via FoxA1. This study
has potential clinical value for patients with tumours that have become
resistant to existing ER-targeted therapies.

