Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LKB1 loss is associated with resistance to VEGF inhibitors in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


BackgroundLKB1 is a protein kinase that is mutated and down-regulated in
20-30% of NSCLC. LKB1 mutations co-occur with KRAS alterations in 7%-10%
of NSCLC, resulting in an aggressive phenotype with short survival, and
frequent metastases. Because LKB1 activates AMPK, many of the best known
functions of LKB1 are attributed to its ability to control metabolic
alterations in the cells. However LKB1 also plays an important role in
regulating tumor progression, metastasis and angiogenesis, likely as a
compensatory strategy to overcome energetic depletion of tumor
microenvironment. Bevacizumab, the anti-VEGF antibody improves PFS in
NSCLC patients combined with chemotherapy but the benefit is modest and
transient and often patients develop resistance. Our laboratory has
identified alterations in cell metabolism and in vasculature of LKB1
deficient tumors when compared to LKB1 wild type. These findings may
indicate that loss of LKB1 could alter the tumor vasculature in
NSCLC.MethodsmRNA expression of angiogenesis related genes were analyzed
in wild type and LKB1 deficient NSCLC tumors (TCGA). In vitro validation
was performed by qPCR and western blot. CD31 IHC was performed to analyze
microvasculature density (MVD) in Krasmut and Krasmut LKB1f/f mice
tumors. HUVEC tube formation and migration assays were performed with
conditioned medium of LKB1 expressing and deficient NSCLC isogeneic cell
lines. Xenograft NSCLC models were established via s.c. injection of H460
(LKB1 deficient) and H460 LKB1 (LKB1 expressing) cells in nude mice.
Treatment consisting of human and/or mouse bevacizumab and nintedanib
were administrated. Tumor volumes were measured and vasculature analysis
was performed.ResultsIn vitro HUVEC cells exhibited an increase migration
and differences in endothelial network formation when incubated with
conditioned medium from LKB1 deficient cells compared to LKB1 expressing
cells medium (pBackgroundLKB1 is a protein kinase that is mutated and
down-regulated in 20-30% of NSCLC. LKB1 mutations co-occur with KRAS
alterations in 7%-10% of NSCLC, resulting in an aggressive phenotype with
short survival, and frequent metastases. Because LKB1 activates AMPK,
many of the best known functions of LKB1 are attributed to its ability to
control metabolic alterations in the cells. However LKB1 also plays an
important role in regulating tumor progression, metastasis and
angiogenesis, likely as a compensatory strategy to overcome energetic
depletion of tumor microenvironment. Bevacizumab, the anti-VEGF antibody
improves PFS in NSCLC patients combined with chemotherapy but the benefit
is modest and transient and often patients develop resistance. Our
laboratory has identified alterations in cell metabolism and in
vasculature of LKB1 deficient tumors when compared to LKB1 wild type.
These findings may indicate that loss of LKB1 could alter the tumor
vasculature in NSCLC.MethodsmRNA expression of angiogenesis related genes
were analyzed in wild type and LKB1 deficient NSCLC tumors (TCGA). In
vitro validation was performed by qPCR and western blot. CD31 IHC was
performed to analyze microvasculature density (MVD) in Krasmut and
Krasmut LKB1f/f mice tumors. HUVEC tube formation and migration assays
were performed with conditioned medium of LKB1 expressing and deficient
NSCLC isogeneic cell lines. Xenograft NSCLC models were established via
s.c. injection of H460 (LKB1 deficient) and H460 LKB1 (LKB1 expressing)
cells in nude mice. Treatment consisting of human and/or mouse
bevacizumab and nintedanib were administrated. Tumor volumes were
measured and vasculature analysis was performed.ResultsIn vitro HUVEC
cells exhibited an increase migration and differences in endothelial
network formation when incubated with conditioned medium from LKB1
deficient cells compared to LKB1 expressing cells medium (p<0.05). LKB1
deficient cells upregulated hypoxia and energetic stress related genes
(HIF1AN, EGLN1, HIF3A, EPAS1 and CA12) and increased the secretion of
angiogenesis related factors (VEGF, IL8, endoglin). IHC analysis of
baseline CD31 expression of tumors from Krasmut and Krasmut LKB1f/f
mutant mice showed no significant differences in MVD. However,
anti-angiogenic therapy significantly inhibited tumor progression in LKB1
expressing xenografts but did not show any therapeutic effect in LKB1
deficient tumors. LKB1 expressing xenografts treated with human or mouse
bevacizumab, or the combination of both and nintedanib, resulted in a
significant decrease in tumor volume (pBackgroundLKB1 is a protein kinase
that is mutated and down-regulated in 20-30% of NSCLC. LKB1 mutations
co-occur with KRAS alterations in 7%-10% of NSCLC, resulting in an
aggressive phenotype with short survival, and frequent metastases.
Because LKB1 activates AMPK, many of the best known functions of LKB1 are
attributed to its ability to control metabolic alterations in the cells.
However LKB1 also plays an important role in regulating tumor
progression, metastasis and angiogenesis, likely as a compensatory
strategy to overcome energetic depletion of tumor microenvironment.
Bevacizumab, the anti-VEGF antibody improves PFS in NSCLC patients
combined with chemotherapy but the benefit is modest and transient and
often patients develop resistance. Our laboratory has identified
alterations in cell metabolism and in vasculature of LKB1 deficient
tumors when compared to LKB1 wild type. These findings may indicate that
loss of LKB1 could alter the tumor vasculature in NSCLC.MethodsmRNA
expression of angiogenesis related genes were analyzed in wild type and
LKB1 deficient NSCLC tumors (TCGA). In vitro validation was performed by
qPCR and western blot. CD31 IHC was performed to analyze microvasculature
density (MVD) in Krasmut and Krasmut LKB1f/f mice tumors. HUVEC tube
formation and migration assays were performed with conditioned medium of
LKB1 expressing and deficient NSCLC isogeneic cell lines. Xenograft NSCLC
models were established via s.c. injection of H460 (LKB1 deficient) and
H460 LKB1 (LKB1 expressing) cells in nude mice. Treatment consisting of
human and/or mouse bevacizumab and nintedanib were administrated. Tumor
volumes were measured and vasculature analysis was performed.ResultsIn
vitro HUVEC cells exhibited an increase migration and differences in
endothelial network formation when incubated with conditioned medium from
LKB1 deficient cells compared to LKB1 expressing cells medium (p<0.05).
LKB1 deficient cells upregulated hypoxia and energetic stress related
genes (HIF1AN, EGLN1, HIF3A, EPAS1 and CA12) and increased the secretion
of angiogenesis related factors (VEGF, IL8, endoglin). IHC analysis of
baseline CD31 expression of tumors from Krasmut and Krasmut LKB1f/f
mutant mice showed no significant differences in MVD. However,
anti-angiogenic therapy significantly inhibited tumor progression in LKB1
expressing xenografts but did not show any therapeutic effect in LKB1
deficient tumors. LKB1 expressing xenografts treated with human or mouse
bevacizumab, or the combination of both and nintedanib, resulted in a
significant decrease in tumor volume (p<0.05). The blockade of human and
mouse VEGF showed an optimal therapeutic effect with approximately 70%
reduction of tumor volume (pBackgroundLKB1 is a protein kinase that is
mutated and down-regulated in 20-30% of NSCLC. LKB1 mutations co-occur
with KRAS alterations in 7%-10% of NSCLC, resulting in an aggressive
phenotype with short survival, and frequent metastases. Because LKB1
activates AMPK, many of the best known functions of LKB1 are attributed
to its ability to control metabolic alterations in the cells. However
LKB1 also plays an important role in regulating tumor progression,
metastasis and angiogenesis, likely as a compensatory strategy to
overcome energetic depletion of tumor microenvironment. Bevacizumab, the
anti-VEGF antibody improves PFS in NSCLC patients combined with
chemotherapy but the benefit is modest and transient and often patients
develop resistance. Our laboratory has identified alterations in cell
metabolism and in vasculature of LKB1 deficient tumors when compared to
LKB1 wild type. These findings may indicate that loss of LKB1 could alter
the tumor vasculature in NSCLC.MethodsmRNA expression of angiogenesis
related genes were analyzed in wild type and LKB1 deficient NSCLC tumors
(TCGA). In vitro validation was performed by qPCR and western blot. CD31
IHC was performed to analyze microvasculature density (MVD) in Krasmut
and Krasmut LKB1f/f mice tumors. HUVEC tube formation and migration
assays were performed with conditioned medium of LKB1 expressing and
deficient NSCLC isogeneic cell lines. Xenograft NSCLC models were
established via s.c. injection of H460 (LKB1 deficient) and H460 LKB1
(LKB1 expressing) cells in nude mice. Treatment consisting of human
and/or mouse bevacizumab and nintedanib were administrated. Tumor volumes
were measured and vasculature analysis was performed.ResultsIn vitro
HUVEC cells exhibited an increase migration and differences in
endothelial network formation when incubated with conditioned medium from
LKB1 deficient cells compared to LKB1 expressing cells medium (p<0.05).
LKB1 deficient cells upregulated hypoxia and energetic stress related
genes (HIF1AN, EGLN1, HIF3A, EPAS1 and CA12) and increased the secretion
of angiogenesis related factors (VEGF, IL8, endoglin). IHC analysis of
baseline CD31 expression of tumors from Krasmut and Krasmut LKB1f/f
mutant mice showed no significant differences in MVD. However,
anti-angiogenic therapy significantly inhibited tumor progression in LKB1
expressing xenografts but did not show any therapeutic effect in LKB1
deficient tumors. LKB1 expressing xenografts treated with human or mouse
bevacizumab, or the combination of both and nintedanib, resulted in a
significant decrease in tumor volume (p<0.05). The blockade of human and
mouse VEGF showed an optimal therapeutic effect with approximately 70%
reduction of tumor volume (p<0.001).ConclusionsLKB1 deficiency may
promote resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy by regulating compensatory
angiogenic pathways along metabolic adaptations to energetic stress in
NSCLC.

