Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP1 expression (PARP1expr) drives synergy between PARP1
inhibitors (PARP1-Is) and trabectedin (TR)


Purpose of study. An attractive strategy to improve antitumor treatments
is to inflict cytotoxic DNA damage with chemotherapy, and then impede DNA
repair by molecular targeting. TR is a new drug characterized by a
peculiar mechanism of action: TR traps DNA repair machinery leading to
DNA damage, particularly in BRCA1/2-deficient tumors. We speculated that
TR might activate PARP1, a key player in DNA-repair, and that subsequent
PARP1 inhibition perpetuates TR-induced DNA damage leading to cell
death.Experimental procedures and results. We developed a preclinical
platform of 31 cell lines from different histotypes to explore the
potential synergy between TR and the PARP1-Is olaparib (OL) and
veliparib. We demonstrated that, regardless of BRCA1/2 status, PARP1-Is
significantly increased TR activity, but a 15-fold range of sensitivity
to the combination was observed. OL was proven the best PARP-I to combine
with TR, probably due to its PARP1 trapping activity. In selected
experiments, whole-genome expression profiling and GSEA analysis
comparing cells displaying high vs. low synergism of the combination
(HS-C vs. LS-C) revealed that DDR, G2/M cell cycle checkpoint, and DNA
repair pathways were mechanistically involved in TR+OL synergy. TR
induced PARP1 activation in 3/6 cell lines and PARP1-Is completely
blocked both basal and TR-induced PARP1 activation. OL enhanced DNA
damage response in 6/6 cell lines, but unrepairable DNA fragmentation was
obtained in cells with high PARP1expr only. In two independent cell
panels TR+OL synergism was directly related to PARP1expr both at mRNA
(Pearson score r: 0.70, p = 0.00079) and protein level (r: 0.71, p =
0.015). Silencing and overexpression experiments validated the functional
role of PARP1expr in determining TR+OL synergism: in HS-C the
downmodulation of PARP1expr reduced sensitivity to TR+OL while the
overexpression of PARP1 in LS-C rose TR+OL activity to levels observed in
HS-C. Subcutaneous, intravenous and orthotopic xenografts of one HS-C
(DMR) and one LS-C (SJSA-1) in NOD/SCID mice revealed OL significantly
increased antitumor and antimetastatic activity of TR in cells with high
PARP1expr only. Finally, we demonstrated that basal PARP1expr PARP1
activation by other cytotoxics with a stronger PARP1 activation observed
in cells with high vs. low PARP1expr, regardless of the considered
drug.Conclusions. OL enhances and potentially broaden TR cytotoxicity.
TR+OL combination is particularly attractive in tumors harboring high
PARP1expr and specific DDR-R gene signatures that might become predictive
biomarkers of response. Future clinical validation of TR+OL combination
may extend the use of PARP1-Is beyond BRCA1/2 defective tumors. Indeed,
the crucial role of PARP1expr is confirmed regardless of tumor histotype
and BRCA1/2 status. Further studies of combination between PARP1-Is and
other cytotoxics should consider basal PARP1expr and activation after
drug exposure.

