Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KPNA4 promotes prostate cancer metastasis through TNF/ mediated
cytokine crosstalk in tumor microenvironment


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most common types of cancer for man
in worldwide. Distant metastasis to multiple organs is the key lethal
factor for PCa patients, still, little is known about the molecular
mechanism. Here, we reveal that Karyophorin 4 (KPNA4), an importin family
member, mediated cytokine crosstalk plays a critical role in PCa skeletal
metastasis. Both IHC staining of KNNA4 on human PCa tissue microarray
slides and KPNA4 expression in a TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) dataset
demonstrates a positive association between KPNA4 and the pathological
stages as well as the Gleason scorse of human prostate cancer.
Accordingly, transient knockdown of KPNA4 in multiple PCa cell lines
reduces cell migration in vitro. Furthermore, stable knockdown of KPNA4
in PC3 cell line (PC3-shKPNA4) significantly attenuates the primary tumor
invasion and bone metastasis in our experimental orthotopic and
metastatic mouse models. Cytokines array assays reveal that KPNA4
knockdown reduces to the production of primary cytokines TNF- and in PCa
cells. Since TNF and are the central inflammatory cytokines in the
complicated cytokines network as well as immune response, TNF and could
mediate the effects of KPNA4 on PCa metastasis through priming tumor
microenvironment. As expected, TNF-/ can rescue the migration capacity of
PC3-shKPNA4 as well as the M2 polarization of tumor-associated
macrophages. Furthermore, PC3-shKPNA4 derived conditioned medium
suppresses the inflammatory response of RAW264.7 cells, supporting the
critical role of KPNA4 in regulating the tumor-microenvironment. It is
known that the formation of metastatic lesion in bone environment is
enhanced by activated bone resorption. In addition to modulating the
tumor microenvironment adjacent to the primary tumors, TNF-/ also favor
PCa metastasis by restoring the osteoclast formation and activity
suppressed by PC3-shKPNA4. Interestingly, only the protein but not the
RNA level of KPNA4 is dramatically increased in PCa cells. Therefore, the
dysregulation of KPNA4 in PCa cells could be mediated by a
post-transcriptional process. Indeed, through bioinformatical screening
and transient infection, KPNA4 is identified as a target of miR-708, a
tumor suppressive miRNA reported in multiple types of cancer. Supporting
the increased expression of KPNA4, miR-708 level is radically inhibited
in PCa cells. Collectively, our data reveal a novel mechanism mediated by
KPNA4 that links the loss function of miR-708 and the activation of
cytokines in facilitating the metastasis of prostate cancer. The
KPNA4/TNF axis stimulates PCa metastasis by promoting cancer cell
mobility, priming tumor micro-environment nearby and distantly. These
findings shed light on the molecular mechanism of prostate cancer
metastasis in terms of the regulation of cytokines crosstalk which
provides a potential new diagnosis biomarker and therapeutic target for
prostate cancer treatment.

