Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy for EBV-associated B-cell neoplasms


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is directly implicated in several B-cell
lymphoid malignancies. EBV associated B-cell neoplasms occur in both
organ and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantations due to
immunosuppression in these patients to maintain the function of
transplant. Treatment of these B-cell neoplasms is limited to reduction
in immunosuppression and antineoplastic chemotherapy. EBV associated
lymphomas are characterized by prominent activation of Nuclear Factor
kappa (NF-kB) pathway and targeting this pathway establishes a rationale
for therapeutic approach. The ubiquitin/proteasome signaling pathway
plays an important role in regulation of NF-kB pathway. Bortezomib (BZ)
is the first FDA approved proteasome inhibitor for treating both newly
diagnosed and relapsed/refractory multiple myelomas, and mantle cell
lymphomas. BZ acts through inhibition of the 26S proteasome, a large
protease complex that degrade ubiquitinated proteins. BZ stabilizes
various cellular proteins involved in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
including p21, p27, p53, and IkB by inhibiting proteasome function.
Stabilization of IkB results in inhibition of NF-kB signaling pathway
which promotes tumor cell survival, growth, and angiogenesis. The major
limiting factor for long-term administration of BZ through intravenous or
subcutaneous is risk of peripheral neuropathy. There is a need to develop
bioavailable proteasome inhibitor with low toxicity profile to overcome
this conundrum. Ixazomib is an investigational orally bioavailable
proteasome inhibitor which inhibits the activity of the 20S catalytic
core subunit of the proteasome and currently in clinical trials for
patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma. Here we report the
first preclinical evaluation of oral proteasome inhibitor ixazomib growth
inhibitory effects on EBV-infected B-lymphoblastoid cell lines Raji and
Daudi. In these cell lines, treatment with Ixazomib significantly induced
apoptosis dose dependently (10-50 nM), in association with poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage. Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry
showed that Ixazomib treatment induced G2/M arrest dose dependently with
concomitant decreases in the percentage of cells in G0/G1 and S phases.
Immunoblotting analysis revealed increase in p53 and p27 levels without
significant change in the relative levels of p21. Mechanistically,
ixazomib treatment resulted in accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins
including accumulation of phosphorylated IkB as demonstrated by western
blot analysis concomitant with significant reduction in NF-kB activity
and subunit translocation to the nucleus. Altogether, our pre-clinical
data indicate that ixazomib induces apoptosis in EBV-associated lymphoma
cells by blocking NF-kB signaling cascade and support the rationale for
testing ixazomib in patients with EBV-associated B-cell neoplasms.

