Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tubulin hyper-acetylation in blood lymphocytes: pharmacodynamic
(PD) biomarker for the selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 inhibitors
ricolinostat and ACY-241 in multiple myeloma (MM) patients


INTRODUCTION: HDACs are a family of enzymes that remove acetyl groups
from proteins and are involved in key cellular processes. Nonselective
HDAC inhibitors have shown promise in treating MM in combination with
standard therapies such as proteasome inhibitors (PIs) and
immunomodulatory agents, but are limited by adverse effects. The
selectivity profile of clinical HDAC inhibitors is critically important
as the same drug may exert its effects via alternative mechanisms
depending on the partner therapeutic. An example is HDAC6 inhibitors in
combination with bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor (PI). Delivery of
protein-bearing vesicles to the aggresome involves HDAC6 through its role
in vesicle trafficking, thus supporting a secondary survival pathway. In
the case of lenalidomide or pomalidomide, inhibiting class I HDACs can
suppress MYC protein levels, which potentially enhances activity in a
clinical setting. Ricolinostat (ACY-1215) and ACY-241 that are currently
in clinical trials have a selectivity profile tuned toward HDAC6 over
HDACs 1, 2, and 3, which is hypothesized to enhance anti-cancer activity
with multiple standard of care regimes while minimizing toxicity.METHODS:
Peripheral blood from patients that received escalating oral doses of
ricolinostat or ACY-241 that range from 40 mg to 360 mg was collected for
matched PK and PD assessment. Lymphocytes were examined for tubulin and
histone hyper-acetylation by flow cytometry.RESULTS & CONCLUSION: Plasma
concentration for both ricolinostat and ACY-241 reach a maximal level
(Cmax) 1-2 hr after administration. An exposure plateau was reached at
dose levels 160 mg of ricolinostat, with Cmax observed to be 2 M. ACY-241
exposures reached higher levels, Cmax of 3 M and 7 M at 180 and 360 mg,
respectively, and no evidence of an exposure plateau. Correlating to the
PK levels, acetyl-tubulin increases to a maximal level by 1-2 h after
dosing compared to predose, and declines to basal level by >4 hr. As
plasma levels increased with dose from 40 mg to 160 mg for ricolinostat
so do the number of patients that have an increase in acetyl-tubulin such
that at dose levels 80 mg all patients have a measurable increase in
acetylated tubulin. Levels of acetyl-tubulin were similar at dose levels
of 180 and 360 mg of ACY-241. Acetyl-histone levels were low- moderate at
the 160 and 180 mg dose level for ricolinosat and ACY-241, respectively,
and for ACY-241 increased with increasing exposure at doses > 180 mg
similar to results observed in vitro by immunoblot analysis of MM cells
treated with ACY-241. In conclusion, the PK and PD results suggest that
both ricolinostat and ACY-241 have reached a pharmacologically relevant
level of HDAC inhibition as determined by acetylated tubulin and histone
at the clinical dose levels examined.

