Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recapitulating the BETH adjuvant breast cancer trial (NCT00625898)
using clinically accurate orthotopic surgical resection models


Background: An overwhelming majority of phase III clinical trials in the
oncology setting fail as promising results observed in the pre-clinic are
not successfully translated to patients. As such, improved models which
more accurately predict outcomes are now required. Herein, we have
established orthotopic surgical resection models of Her2+ breast cancer,
which replicate the phenotype of clinical post-resection metastasis
[1,2]. Using these models we have recapitulated the BETH adjuvant breast
cancer trial (NCT00625898) where the addition of bevacizumab (BVZ) to
chemotherapy plus trastuzumab (TRAST) failed to provide additional
benefit in the adjuvant setting. Methods: SCID mice were orthotopically
implanted with bioluminescent Her2+ MDA-MB-231or HCC1954 cells and
palpable tumors resected approximately 5 weeks later. 3 weeks after
resection, mice were treated with 10 mg/kg TRAST + 5mg/kg paclitaxel IP
once weekly for 6 cycles with or without weekly BVZ (5mg/kg IP).
Metastasis was monitored by weekly bioluminescence imaging. Results:
Tumor growth and imaging data confirmed that the addition of BVZ to
adjuvant TRAST + chemotherapy provided no additional benefit compared
with TRAST + chemotherapy alone. Previous pre-clinical studies using
inappropriate non-resection models failed to predict this response.
Furthermore, Reverse Phase Protein Array analysis of treated tumors
implicated HER2, VEGF, mTOR and the intrinsic mitochondrial cell death
apoptotic pathways in treatment resistance. Conclusion: In summary, our
data provides evidence for pre-clinical models which better predict
clinical outcome in the breast cancer adjuvant setting, and which
represent an important resource for interrogating resistance pathways and
identifying novel biomarker signatures. [1]. Breast. 2013 Aug;22 Suppl
2:S57-65; [2]. Cancer Res. 2013 May 1;73(9):2743-8.This work was
performed under Irish HPRA Authorization AE18982 and was supported by the
Clinical Cancer Research Trust. ATB receives funding from the Irish
Cancer Society Collaborative Cancer Research Centre BREAST-PREDICT Grant
(CCRC13GAL).

