Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of androgen receptor regulated long
non-coding RNA in prostate cancer


Androgen receptor (AR) plays a critical role in the development and
progression of prostate cancer. AR regulates a large repertoire of genes;
however, the effect of androgen signaling on the regulation of long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) remains incompletely understood. Using
transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) of AR-positive cell lines VCaP and
LNCaP treated with dihydroxytestosterone (DHT), we identified genes,
including lncRNAs, which were strongly regulated by AR. To confirm direct
regulation by AR, we interrogated AR-ChIP-seq data from VCaP and LNCaP
cells, identifying the lncRNAs with direct AR binding. Existence of these
lncRNAs in prostate cancer tissue samples was confirmed by analysis of
RNA-seq data from prostate tumors, and the degree of differential
expression in prostate tumors (localized and castration resistant
metastases) versus benign was determined. The most highly overexpressed
lncRNA in this analysis was a 2.7kb multi-exonic transcript present on
chromosome 16 called ARlnc1. RACE was utilized to determine the exact
exon structure of this gene, and its expression levels in various
prostate cancer cell lines as well as independent prostate cancer tissue
cohorts was assessed. Further, knockdown of ARlnc1 in AR dependent cell
lines inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis. Knockdown of
ARlnc1 affected molecular signatures related to cell cycle, mitosis and
DNA damage. Interestingly, ARlnc1 knockdown also suppressed global
androgen signaling as determined by Gene set enrichment analysis using AR
gene signature. Upon investigation of the mechanism through which PRCAT47
regulate AR signaling, we discovered that ARlnc1 regulates AR at the
level of translation. Taken together, our data suggests that many lncRNAs
are regulated by androgen signaling, and we identify one such lncRNA that
is involved in a protein-lncRNA positive feedback loop.

