Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cell vesiculation is driven by calpain: implications
in cancer therapy


Microparticles (MPs) are small membrane vesicles (0.1 to 1 m in diameter)
released from the plasma membranes of most cell types, (malignant and
non-malignant) upon cellular activation or during apoptosis. We
discovered that MPs provide a non-genetic mechanism for the acquisition
of multidrug resistance and increased metastatic capacity in tumour cell
populations, whereby they serve as vectors in the intercellular transfer
of functional cancer proteins and nucleic acids. By this mechanism, MPs
effectively confer the transfer, dissemination and dominance of within
cancer cell populations within a matter of hours.The aim of this study
was to define the pathways governing membrane vesicle biogenesis in
malignant and non-malignant cells with the aim of identifying cancer
specific mediators, which could serve as novel therapeutic targets in
preventing microvesicle induced deleterious traits in cancer.We preformed
a comparative analysis using the non-malignant human brain endothelial
cell line (HBEC-D3) cells and drug sensitive and resistant human breast
adenocarcinoma cells (MCF-7) and (MCF-7/DX) respectively. Cell surface
topography and vesiculation pits were visualized at rest, and in the +/-
calcium ionophore, A23187 and the Calpain inhibitor ALLM using contact
mode Atomic Force Microscopy (Nanowizard, JPK Instruments, Germany) on
fixed cells. We observed that at rest, cells from both malignant cell
lines were high vesiculators relative to the HBEC-D3 cells. In the
presence of ALLM we observed a direct inhibition of vesiculation in the
malignant cells whilst vesiculation was enhanced in the non-malignant
cells. Upon the release of calcium from intracellular stores using
A23817, we observe an increase in vesiculation across all cell types,
however to a greater extent in the HBEC-D3 cells. Interestingly, only
upon the release of intracellular calcium in HBEC-D3 cells do we see an
inhibition of vesiculation by ALLM. These results clearly demonstrate an
alternative pathway governing vesiculation at rest for the non-malignant
HBEC-D3 cells. Whereas contrary to this, vesiculation at rest in
malignant cells appears to be calpain dependent. Future work aims to
validate these findings and examine the presence of distinct pathways of
vesiculation in malignant cells relative to non-malignant cells. These
results have important implications in defining novel strategies to
selectively targeting malignant cells and for the circumvention of
deleterious traits acquired through intercellular exchange of
extracellular vesicles.

