Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RASSF1A gene promoter methylation in primary tumors, adjacent
morphologically normal tissues and plasma samples of patients with high
grade serous ovarian cancer


Introduction: RASSF1A promoter methylation is frequent in high grade
serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), the most common histological subtype. We
examined RASSF1A promoter methylation in primary tumors, adjacent normal
tissues and corresponding plasma samples of patients with HGSC, using
real-time methylation specific PCR (real-time MSP) and
methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting analysis
(MS-HRMA).Materials and methods: A training group of 78 primary HGSC
FFPEs was first analyzed using both real-time MSP and MS-HRMA. Our
validation group consisted of 61 primary HGSC FFPEs, 58 adjacent tissues
(analyzed using both real-time MSP and MS-HRMA), and 59 corresponding
plasma samples (analyzed using real-time MSP). The specificity of both
assays was evaluated by analyzing a group of 16 fallopian tube samples
from healthy individuals. OVCAR29 and IGROV1 cell lines were used as
positive controls.Results: In the training group, RASSF1A promoter
methylation was detected in 33/78 (42.3%) by real-time MSP and in 33/78
(42.3%) by MS-HRMA (Agreement = 94.9%, P = 0.001, k = 0.895). The
validation group results are shown in Table 1. According to the
semi-quantitative MS-HRMA, RASSF1A promoter methylation was detected at
significantly lower percentages in the adjacent morphologically normal
tissues, compared to the paired primary tumors. In corresponding plasma
samples, methylation was detected in 15/59 (25.4%) (Agreement with paired
tumors = 60.7%, P = 0.259, k = 0.143). Both real-time MSP and MS-HRMA
revealed no RASSF1A promoter methylation in the small group of normal
fallopian tubes (n = 16).Conclusion: RASSF1A promoter is highly
methylated in primary tumors and at lower percentages in the adjacent
normal tissues. In all cases, MS-HRMA gave comparable results with
real-time MSP. Evaluation of the clinical significance of RASSF1A
promoter methylation in corresponding plasma requires further
investigation.


