Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systems immunology analysis to detect prognostic biomarkers in
patients with squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck


In 2015, an estimated 59,340 people will develop head and neck cancer and
an estimated 12,290 deaths will occur. Recent evidence has demonstrated
that the immune system plays a key role in the development,
establishment, and progression of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). Here, we conduct comprehensive immune profiling to better
understand the immunophenotype of HNSCC patients, assess the
applicability of immune-modulatory drugs, and identify prognostic
biomarkers of response to cetuximab treatment.Our systems immunology
approach is composed of three complimentary, high-dimensional
technologies: time-of-flight mass cytometry (CyTOF), luminex, and the
HIMChip microarray platform. Mass cytometry quantifies protein expression
on a single-cell basis by utilizing transition element, isotope-tagged
antibodies. The Luminex immunoassay measures plasma cytokine levels. The
HIMChip microarray is a custom Agilent SurePrint HD 815k format array
containing over 7,000 unique probes for over 4,274 human immune-related
genes. We employed these technologies to study the global immune status
of thirty HNSCC patients receiving treatment with cetuximab, an IgG1
monoclonal antibody (mAb) targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR). Patients were consented to participate on the Phase 0
biomarker-focused clinical trial (NCT01114256) and peripheral blood was
obtained before and after cetuximab treatment. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells and plasma were isolated from each time point and
utilized in downstream analysis.Via manual gating, our CyTOF-based
phenotyping measured 24 distinct populations and the expression of 5
activation markers and 5 checkpoint receptors. The results of manual
gating were confirmed with an automated, unsupervised algorithmic
analysis combining stochastic neighbor embedding and k-means clustering.
The resulting 2D representation of our single-cell data preserved global
geometries and facilitated exploration of unique subsets within the
natural killer (NK) compartment. To assess the prognostic value of these
NK cell subsets, we applied a lasso-regularized logistic regression model
to stratify patients based on their clinical response to cetuximab
therapy. We identified an NK cell subset that is associated with clinical
benefit to therapy. Luminex analysis revealed a cetuximab-induced
cytokine signature composed of VCAM1, IP-10, and VEGFD that may play a
role in increasing NK cell trafficking to tumor (T-statistics of 1.77,
2.17, and 1.55 respectively). The HIMChip microarray results support our
proteomic findings.These results provide the first known comprehensive
immune profiling of HNSCC patients as they undergo treatment with
cetuximab. Validation in a large cohort of patients is needed and future
mechanistic studies will investigate the efficacy of our novel NK cell
population in disease control.

