Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen and nuclear respiratory factor 1 act as joint mediators
of redox modulation and stem cell aging that contribute in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer


Deterioration of adult stem cell function with increasing age is a risk
factor of breast cancer. Metastasis of breast cancer seems to be also
influenced by aging or senescent cells overexpressing mitophagy/autophagy
genes. Recently, estrogen, ROS, mitochondria and NRF1 activity have been
implicated with stem cell aging, health and longevity. The exact
underlying mechanisms of how aging of stem cells may increase the
susceptibility to estrogen-induced carcinogenicity remain unknown. The
main objective of this study was to examine whether estrogen, through
activation of NRF1-mediated redox modulation and autophagic genes
involved in senescence of stem cells, contributes in the development of
breast cancer. To test this hypothesis, first we investigated the role of
NRF1 to induce stemness by re-programming of breast epithelial cells
(MCF-10A) and breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB231). We found that
NRF1 promoted pluripotency markers: Oct4, Sox 2, and Nanog compare to
MCF10A, MCF-7 or MDAMB 231 control cells. Loss of E-cadherin expression
and gain of N-cadherin and vimentin expression in NRF1 overexpressing
cells suggested that NRF1 promotes epithelial- mesenchymal transition.
NRF1 promoted the ability to differentiate in vitro into a variety of
cells (e.g chondrocytes, neurons, and smooth muscle cells). This
suggested that NRF1 promotes multilineage differentiation potentials. Our
data also showed that higher expression of NRF1 increased sizes of
spheroids and ROS levels compared to controls. Mitophagy/Autophagy that
regulates clearance of damaged mitochondria/apoptotic cells has important
functions in regulating stem cell aging and tumorigenesis. Therefore, we
examined the effect of estrogen on aging-associated diseases-related
genes in NRF1 overexpressing as well as NRF1 silenced cells.
Autophagy/Mitophagy/Apoptosis-related genes - BNIP3, PINK1, DJ-1 and LKB1
were altered in response to exposure of a carcinogenic concentration of
estrogen. This effect of estrogen on these genes was further amplified by
NRF1 overexpression and was inhibited by loss of NRF1. In summary,
estrogen and NRF1 act as joint mediators of stem cell fate and
reprogramming through a panel of critical stem cell proteins involved in
modulating senescence and cell death. NRF1 seems to function as a
rheostat to coordinate various cellular processes, such as resistance to
apoptosis, autophagy and mitophagy of stem cells required for the stem
cell aging as well as for the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

