Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The LSD1 inhibitor INCB059872 is synergistic with ATRA in models
of non-APL acute myelogenous leukemia


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease characterized by the expansion
of a hematopoietic stem cell like population caused in part by a block of
myeloid differentiation. In AML, an altered epigenetic landscape, often
arising from genetic lesions in epigenetic regulators, enforces an
oncogenic expression profile and suppresses myeloid differentiation.
Lysine specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) catalyzes the demethylation of
lysine 4 and 9 of histone H3 through an FAD-dependent redox process.
Aberrant LSD1 activity has been proposed to maintain oncogenic programs
and prevent differentiation of multiple subtypes of AML. Intriguingly,
recent studies indicate that LSD1 inhibition can reactivate an all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA)-dependent differentiation program in non-acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) hematologic malignancies, a genetically
heterogeneous group of blood cancers that normally respond poorly to ATRA
therapy. In this study, we assessed the in vitro and in vivo effects of
combining ATRA with INCB059872, a potent and selective FAD-directed LSD1
inhibitor, in non-APL AML models. As a single agent, INCB059872 induced
differentiation of AML cells and when combined with ATRA, synergistically
promoted differentiation as indicated by induction of CD86 and CD11b
expression. In addition, the combination of INCB059872 and ATRA increased
apoptosis in a panel of non-APL AML cell lines. Similarly, the
combination significantly increased the fraction of CD86+CD11b+ cells and
reduced cell viability in a panel of primary AML cells ex vivo. These
effects in both human AML cell lines and human primary AML cells were
observed across distinct FAB subtypes and genetic mutation profiles.
Microarray profiling coupled with bioinformatic analysis of MV-4-11 cells
demonstrated that the number of regulated genes related to
differentiation and apoptotic pathways was markedly elevated in cells
treated with the combination of LSD1 inhibition and ATRA relative to
single agents. The synergistic increase in levels of myeloid lineage
transcription factors GFI1, PU.1, CEBP and a decrease in levels of the
oncogene c-MYC in the combination groups were validated by q-RT-PCR and
western blot analyses. In vivo, the combination of INCB059872 and ATRA
enhanced CD86 and CD11b induction and reduced tumor growth in the THP-1
xenograft model of AML compared with monotherapy. Similarly, oral
administration of INCB059872 and ATRA in PDX mouse models markedly
increased levels of CD11b+ cells in bone marrow. Collectively, these data
underscore the synergy that can exist between LSD1 inhibition and
retinoic acid receptor agonism, and provide a scientific rationale for
the clinical evaluation of INCB059872 and ATRA in non-APL AML patients.

