Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the ATM-SPOP pathway in prostate cancer
tumorigenesis


The Speckle type Poz Protein (SPOP), an E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor, has
recently been identified as the gene that has the most common somatic
point mutations in prostate cancer. SPOP mutations are associated with
genomic alterations, indicating a role for SPOP in the maintenance of
genome stability. We, and others, have recently demonstrated a critical
role of SPOP in the DNA damage response (DDR), suggesting SPOP mutants
may represent a subgroup of patients that have hyper sensitivity to DNA
damaging therapies. However, how SPOP mutations might impact its function
and their roles in the progress of prostate tumorigenesis remain to be
extensively studied. Genomic studies have found that SPOP mutations are
clustered within its substrate binding pocket. Of a particular interest,
Serine119 is found to be frequently mutated to Asparagine (S119N). Using
computational modeling, we found that Ser119 resides in the SBC-MATH
binding interface and is in close contact with the non-polar residue of
the SPOP-binding consensus motif. Therefore we hypothesized that
phosphorylation of Serine 119 might directly affect substrate binding.
First we characterized prostate cancer cells expressing this mutation and
we found that they displayed a suboptimal DNA damage response with
prolonged DNA repair. Using an in situ proximity ligation assay, we
demonstrate that Serine 119 is essential for SPOP ionizing irradiation
induced interaction with the Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated kinase (ATM),
a major hub protein in the DDR. With the evidence of SPOP being a
phospho-protein, we further provide in vitro evidence that ATM
phosphorylates SPOP on Serine 119 in response to DNA damage.
Characterization of the functional significance of ATM-mediated SPOP
phosphorylation indicates a wide range of downstream targets regulating
cell cycle progression and DNA repair. Taken together, our data reveal a
critical pathway linking ATM and SPOP in regulation of prostate cancer
initiation and therapeutic responses to DNA damage. This also provides
the first evidence of a pathophysiological relevant mutation linked to
ATM phosphorylation in the DDR.

