Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chloroquine-induced lysosomal membrane permeabilization restores
sensitivity to cisplatin in refractory lung cancer cells


Introduction: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death.
Resistance to treatment contributes to poor outcome. A form of resistance
to antineoplastic agents involves the sequestration of chemotherapy
inside lysosomes followed by its delivery outside the cell through
exocytosis. Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) not only releases
the trapped drug, but also allows the translocation of lysosomal
proteases into the cytosol, triggering cell demise. Since lysosomes in
cancer cells are more susceptible to LMP than normal cells, we
hypothesize that targeting LMP in cisplatin-resistant cells may provide a
successful strategy to restore sensitivity to chemotherapy.Materials and
Methods: Cisplatin-resistant (cisR) A549 lung cancer cells, obtained by
treating parental A549 cells with incremental concentrations of
cisplatin, were kindly provided by Dr. Martin Barr. To detect LMP,
lysosomes were loaded with FITC-dextran 40KDa and immunofluorescence
images were obtained by confocal microscopy. To confirm LMP, cells were
homogenized, cytosolic and lysosomal fractions were separated by
ultracentrifugation, and cell lysates were immunoblotted with specific
antibodies against cathepsin D, -tubulin and LAMP-1. Cell viability was
evaluated using CellTiter blue assay. To measure apoptosis, cells were
stained for Annexin-V/Propidium iodide, or FITC-conjugated caspase 3
substrate, and mounted on the Cellometer vision CBA platform, an
automated image-based fluorescence microscope equipped with bio-analysis
system.Results: cisR A549 cells loaded with FITC-dextran, and incubated
with different concentrations of chloroquine (25-100M) for 24 hours
demonstrated increased green haziness in the cytosol and loss of the
punctate pattern of the dextran-loaded lysosomes, indicative of dextran
leakage following LMP. Release of cathepsins into the cytosol due to LMP
was confirmed by the increase in cathepsin D signal in the cytosolic
extract on western blot. Next, cisR A549 cells were treated with
chloroquine, cisplatin or the drug mix. Cell viability assay revealed a
synergistic effect of the combination, with a combination index of 0.70
for cisplatin 25M and chloroquine 100M at 48 hours. Notably, there is
significant increase in Annexin V stained apoptotic cells, accompanied by
a corresponding increase in caspase 3 activity, in the combination.
Interestingly, inhibition of lysosomal proteases using E64 was
cytoprotective for cells treated with cisplatin and chloroquine,
suggesting that chloroquine-induced cell death is LMP
mediated.Conclusion: Chloroquine re-sensitizes cisR A549 cells to
cisplatin in an LMP-mediated manner. Our preliminary results support the
concept that targeting LMP may provide a viable therapeutic strategy to
restore sensitivity to chemotherapy in refractory lung cancer. Screening
for other repurposed LMP inducer drugs is ongoing.

