Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tunneling nanotube conduits facilitate the bystander effect after
oncolytic viral infection


Background: Oncolytic viruses have come to the forefront of cancer
therapeutics following FDA approval for treatment of metastatic melanoma
in 2015. Efficacy of viral therapy is enhanced by the bystander effect, a
cellular phenomenon that amplifies the effects of the virus following
activation of the prodrug ganciclovir (GCV) by virally-expressed
thymidine kinase (TK) and intercellular spread of GCV via gap junctions.
In the complex and stroma-rich tumor microenvironment, gap junctions may
not completely account for cell-to-cell communication. Tunneling
nanotubes (TNTs) are a novel and recently characterized alternative form
of direct cell-to-cell communication in the tumor matrix. TNTs are fine,
long, F actin-based cell extensions that serve as short and long-range
conduits for efficient transfer of cellular cargo. Here, we investigate
the ability of TNTs to mediate a TK-based bystander effect after
oncolytic viral infection and administration of GCV.Methods: We infected
3 mesothelioma cell lines with NV1066, a mutant replication-competent
strain of herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) that encodes viral eGFP and
viral TK. Confocal microscopy and time-lapse imaging were performed 12-36
hours later. A modified Transwell assay was used to separate infected
cells from uninfected cells to assess TNT propagation of eGFP-tagged
NV1066. GCV was added to infected cells in the top chamber to assess TNT
propagation of TK-activated GCV. Apoptosis was measured using TUNEL assay
in the bottom chamber to quantify the extent of the bystander
effect.Results: Confocal microscopy demonstrated effective intercellular
transfer of GFP-tagged virus between cells via TNTs prior to oncolysis.
Quantification of TUNEL-positive cells at 48 hours indicated that
addition of NV1066 to the top chamber resulted in 33% of the initially
uninfected cells in the bottom chamber dying by 48 hours. The addition of
GCV to virally infected cells in the top chamber significantly increased
apoptosis in recipient cells in the bottom chamber, from 33% to 71%,
producing a 2.3-fold increase in cell killing attributed to TNT transfer
of viral TK-activated GCV (p = 0.007). Thus, TNTs were shown to transfer
viral TK-activated GCV to non-infected cells, leading to cell death via a
long-range form of the bystander effect.Conclusions: Here we demonstrate
that TNTs provide a previously unknown and alternative mechanism for the
bystander effect in which viral TK-activated GCV is transferred via TNTs
and induces apoptosis in non-infected recipient cells.

