Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin enhances the anti-prostate cancer activity of
abiraterone and enzalutamide


The standard treatment for advanced castration sensitive prostate cancer
(CSPC) is androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), generally in the form of
suppression of gonadally produced androgens via medical or surgical
castration. The selective inhibitor of androgen biosynthesis Abiraterone
(Abi), and the androgen receptor (AR) antagonist Enzalutamide (MDV3100),
are second line hormonal therapies used to treat PC patients failing ADT.
However, these drugs provide treatment response for a limited duration of
time due to the development of resistance to them. Included among the
mechanisms leading to resistance to ABI or MDV is the expression of the
AR variant AR-V7. Metformin, a widely used oral anti-diabetic drug, has
been reported to reduce prostate cancer mortality in PC patients with
type II diabetes. In this study, we explored the effects of ABI, MDV and
metformin in a pre-clinical model of PC. Both Abi and MDV inhibited cell
proliferation and the expression of prostate specific antigen (PSA) in
androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells. However, neither induced cell death, and
in fact MDV appeared to actually inhibit apoptosis in LNCaP cells. Both
agents increased AR and AR-V7 expression, which in part may account for
development of resistance to ABI or MDV. In contrast, metformin inhibited
AR, AR-V7 and PSA expression in a dose-dependent manner, and induced
apoptotic cell death in PC cells. Metformin, in combination with ABI or
MDV, further enhanced apoptosis and inhibited expression of PSA than it
did as single agent. Interestingly, at near physiological concentrations
metformin induced apoptosis in a caspase-independent manner rather than
by a caspase-dependent apoptotic program that is reported to occur with
high doses of metformin. In conclusion, Abi or MDV inhibits AR signaling
and PC cell proliferation, but also induces AR and AR-V7 expression.
Metformin decreases AR and AR-V7 expression and induces apoptotic cell
death. The combination of metformin with androgen biosynthesis/AR
inhibitors results in caspase-independent apoptotic cell death in
addition to inhibition of both cell proliferation and AR signaling.
Further studies will be needed to evaluate the clinical efficacy of these
combination treatments in patients with PC.

