Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular landscape of dermal neurofibromatosis


Background: Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is a genetic disorder that
disrupts neurological tissue growth and can lead to a diverse set of
symptoms including systematic growth of benign tumors, learning disorders
and bone deformities. It is a rare disease occurring in only 1 in 3,000
people worldwide. While the disease has been linked to loss of function
in the NF1 gene - a known tumor suppressor - there is a high degree of
phenotypic diversity in the NF1 patient population, making it difficult
to identify the underlying cause of the disease and treat it effectively.
In this work we seek to improve overall knowledge of dermal NF1 through
global molecular characterization of the disease.Methods: We have
collected four dermal neurofibromas and peripheral blood from each of 11
NF1 patients. We analyzed each sample using (1) Whole genome sequencing
(WGS) on the Illumina HiSeq X platform, (2) Illumina OMNI2.5 Arrays (3)
RNA-Sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq v4 machine and (4) iTRAQ-labeled
proteomics. WGS data for both tumor and blood samples from each patient
were used to identify patient-specific germ-line mutations as well as
tumor-specific somatic mutations in each sample. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms identified by the OMNI Arrays were used to identify copy
number alterations in both blood and tumor samples. RNA-Seq data and
proteomics data were mapped to transcripts and proteins
respectively.Results: Preliminary analysis of this data illustrates a
diverse genomic landscape of NF1. Hierarchical clustering of copy number
alterations largely show samples clustering by tissue, suggesting that
most copy number alterations are somatic and not shared across the
germline. However, there are two patients that show germline copy number
alterations, including one patient with loss in the NF1 region. WGS
analysis suggests similar diversity with each patient possessing a
distinct combination of germline and somatic mutations of NF1 and other
cancer-related genes. Cluster analysis of the RNA-Seq data shows no
patient-specific clusters, suggesting that that each tumor executes a
unique transcriptional program.Conclusion: This work represents a
first-ever attempt to profile the diversity of dermal neurofibromatosis
at a molecular level. Preliminary analysis of the data underscores the
complexity of this disease and explains, in part, previous difficulty in
identifying effective treatments. Ongoing work includes expanding the
analysis to include more patient samples and other types of NF1-derived
tumors. As an orphan disease, NF1 has been poorly characterized compared
to more common cancers. To rectify this, the Children's Tumor Foundation
and Sage Bionetworks are collaborating to make NF1 data available to the
public to accelerate research and the drug discovery pipeline. We expect
that this data will be a resource for other NF1 researchers to assist in
the study of this disease at the molecular level. All data and
preliminary results are publicly available at
http://www.synapse.org/dermalNF

