Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A method to examine spatial relationships between tumor cells and
vasculature using a mouse orthotopic PDX glioblastoma model


Introduction: Glioblastoma progression requires angiogenesis and/or
vascular co-option. A major pathway for its infiltration is the
perivascular space. We present herein a method to visualize glioblastoma
cells with respect to tumor-associated vasculature within and beyond the
tumor mass.Experimental procedures: A neurosphere cell line, HF3253,
developed from cultures of a human glioblastoma biopsy sample was labeled
with PKH26, a red fluorescent dye, using a commercially available kit
(Sigma-Aldrich). The labeled cells were implanted into the right striatum
in immunocompromised nude mice (n = 5) and allowed to grow for 2-4 weeks.
Terminally (one mouse at 2, two at 3 and the remaining two at 4 weeks),
the mice were intravenously injected with fluorescent isothiocyanate
(FITC) dextran of 70 kDa molecular weight. The brains were removed after
5 min of dextran circulation, immersion fixed in 10% neutral buffered
formalin for 2 days and then sectioned into 100 m thick coronal slices
using a vibratome. Slices were stained with the nuclear counterstain
4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to visualize native mouse brain cells
at 405 nm in an Olympus FV1200 laser scanning confocal microscope.
Relative distributions of the dextran and PKH26 fluorochromes were also
examined using the same microscope. FITC-dextran (green
fluorochrome)-labeled microvessels and PKH26-labeled tumor cells (red
fluorochrome) were excited by a laser beam at 488 and 568 nm,
respectively, and emissions were detected with a photomultiplier tube
through 522 and 585 nm emission filters, respectively.Results: The normal
vasculature on the contralateral side appeared well perfused, filled with
the green dextran fluorescence. Intricate, fine networks of microvessels
were present. The ipsilateral hemisphere showed bright red spots of tumor
cells in the striatum in closely distributed groups among the blue
DAPI-stained mouse cells. Compared to contralateral side, the vasculature
associated with such groups was dilated and irregular, with fewer
interconnections. Interestingly, these irregular networks were also
observed away from the main tumor cell mass in 3- and 4-week-old tumors,
suggesting probable future infiltrative pathways. Red-labeled single
cells and groups of tumor cells could be seen along vascular branches
penetrating brain tissue adjacent to the tumor. The strong fluorescence
of the tumor cell tracer PKH26 persisted over the 4 week experimental
period, suggesting its utility in imaging tumor infiltration in this
model.Conclusions: This technique generated high resolution images of
tumor cell distribution and associated microvasculature in an orthotopic
glioblastoma model. With further quantification, it can help in
establishing infiltrative patterns of different PDX tumor models, and may
also be useful to measure discrete responses to therapies that affect
tumor cells and/or vasculature.

