Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular drivers of endothelial hypoxic adaption during
angiogenesis deciphered using the Berg Interrogative Biology platform


Angiogenesis is a key feature of tumor progression providing oxygen and
nutrients required for tumor cell growth, hypoxia being a major driver of
this phenomenon. A systems biology approach using the Berg Interrogative
Biology platform was implemented to identify drivers of the endothelial
cell (EC) angiogenic response to hypoxia. To determine the proteomic
profile of proliferating ECs and non-proliferating confluent ECs exposed
to normoxia or hypoxia, a functional proteomic approach employing
activity-based probes and phosphorylation analysis was utilized. Kinases
and ATPases were labeled with ATP-binding domain enrichment probes and
titanium dioxide enrichment of phosphopeptides was employed for capture
of protein phosphorylation events. Phenotypic assays including
proliferation rates, apoptosis, mitochondrial superoxide and ROS/NO
signaling were included as a measure of EC phenotype. Comparative
proteomics, kinase activity, phosphoproteomics and assay data were
integrated using an AI based Bayesian Network Inference approach to
investigate causal signaling networks in order to elucidate the
complexity and dynamics of angiogenesis and more specifically, the role
of hypoxia in driving intracellular signaling in response to changes in
oxygen tension. High confidence causal networks identified novel proteins
that modulate the EC hypoxic response, validation of which are in
process. Previously characterized proteins that are responsive to hypoxia
were also identified in the hypoxic, but not normoxic signaling networks,
namely Aldoc, Rac1, mTor, Cav-1 and Bax. Endothelial proliferation rate
is closely related to both hydrogen peroxide and nitric oxide signaling,
as has previously been reported. Novel regulatory networks that determine
these interactions were identified. Using the Berg Interrogative Biology
platform, we are deciphering both the effects of the hypoxic
microenvironment, and the unique characteristics of proliferating ECs by
applying integrated functional proteomic assays and a systems approach to
determine global changes in intracellular signaling in response to
hypoxia.

