Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome-wide approach to identify novel biomarkers in oral
tumorigenesis


Oral cancer is the most common type of intraoral head and neck cancer in
humans, with a worldwide prevalence of more than 400,000 cases. In India,
oral cancer ranks in top three in comparison with other cancer types. The
majority of oral cancer patients are diagnosed at an advanced disease
stage. Although, there have been many advances in oral cancer treatment,
the overall survival rate of oral cancer patients only improved
marginally over the past 30 years. The treatment regimen of oral cancer
is mainly based on the tumor, node and metastasis (TNM) classification
and histopathological diagnosis. These methods are subjective and often
have low sensitivity to detect the disease in early stages. Hence, there
is an urgent need for early diagnosis to develop biomarkers; to identify
high risk individuals, to improve cancer detection at early stages, to
predict disease outcome and response to therapy. Proteomics have been
successfully employed in studies of lung, breast, prostate,
gastrointestinal cancer, and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Reports are not much available to describe well characterized biomarkers
which will aid for early detection of oral cancer. Racial differences
were reported in many cancers including its morbidity, mortality,
treatment response and survival rates. In Indian patient population,
there is a significant knowledge gap exists in utilizing proteomics for
biomarker discovery.The aim of this study is to identify novel candidate
genes which may be used as prognostic or diagnostic biomarkers for Indian
oral squamous cell carcinoma. The tongue tumor and adjacent normal
samples were subjected to 2D - Differential in Gel Electrophoresis
(2D-DIGE). Differentially expressed proteins in tumor samples were
identified using nano-LC-MS/MS and validated by quantitative real time
PCR. We found 800 protein spots were differentially expressed and seventy
proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. Among them twelve proteins
including Myosin isoforms, hemoglobin beta, Annexin A1, Creatinine
kinase, Carbonic anhydrase, HSPA8 showed decreased expression while
eighteen proteins including Apolipoprotein A1, HSPA5, Alpha 1
antitrypsin, Annexin isoforms, Peptidyl prolyl cis trans isomerase,
Serpin isoforms, Tropomyosin, Thioredoxin, Alpha enolase, Calpain,
Glutathione S Transferase, Heat shock protein beta 1, S100 isoforms
showed increased expression in tongue tumor tissues.Most of the
differentially regulated proteins were known to be involved in calcium
homeostasis, cell cycle, cell growth and migration. The major outcome of
this study was the identification of novel protein molecules which might
be used as predictive, prognostic and diagnostic biomarkers for oral
cancer. These proteins can also serve as a therapeutic intervention
targets for oral cancer progression. This study would be the first study
to map the whole proteome profile of the cancerous as well as normal
tongue cheek tissue in Indian scenario.

