Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of infusion devices for hepatic artery delivery of CAR-T


We previously tested the efficacy of chimeric antigen receptor T cell
(CAR-T) treatment via hepatic artery infusion in a phase I clinical
trial. Though these results were promising, our current protocol for
hepatic immunotherapy for metastasis (HITM) includes transcatheter
arterial embolization in order to reduce off-target toxicity from CAR-T
delivery to gastric, enteric, or pancreatic tissues. Surefire Infusion
System devices employ a soft fabric one way valve that prevents back-flow
during hepatic artery infusion and generates a pressure gradient, which
is clinically shown to increase delivery of therapeutic agents into
tumor. We performed in vitro and in vivo testing in preparation for a
phase Ib trial to ensure that the SIS does not adversely affect CAR-T
performance. Viability, phenotype and activation status of CAR-T with no
catheter (NC) and following passage through a standard microcatheter
(STD), Surefire Infusion System (SIS), or Surefire Precision (SP)
infusion system were tested via flow cytometry. CAR-T viability was
preserved as measured by Zombie NIR. We did not detect a significant
phenotype shift when examining CD4, CD8, CD25, and CD69. A CFSE assay and
an LDH were done to track proliferation and measure the cytotoxicity of
the CAR-T when stimulated by tumor. NC CAR-T had significantly more
proliferation than each of the catheter groups. Specific Lysis was not
significantly different between the NC, STD, SIS, and SP groups. We also
performed in vivo testing in mice with intraperitoneal (IP) tumor with IP
NC or SIS CAR-T. By Day 10, there was significantly less tumor present in
the NC (5.7- fold reduction, p = 0.02) and the SIS (44- fold reduction, p
= 0.04) groups than in the tumor only control group. The SIS CAR-T group
and the NC CAR-T group were not significantly different (p = 0.38). The
SIS and SP devices did not adversely impact CAR-T viability, phenotype,
or performance implying that these catheters could be interchangeably
used for more efficient and targeted CAR-T dose delivery.In Vitro
Experimental Data


