Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of anti-DLL4 treatment on non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) human xenograft tumors


Background: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for the vast
majority of lung cancers, the leading cause of cancer-related deaths.
Notch signaling has been shown to play an important role in lung cancer
initiation and progression. Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) activates the
Notch pathway and is important for cancer stem cell (CSC) survival.
Demcizumab (OMP-21M18) is a humanized IgG2 anti-DLL4 antibody currently
being tested in a Phase 2 trial in combination with pemetrexed and
carboplatin for first-line treatment of patients with NSCLC. Previously,
OMP-21M18 in combination with its mouse anti-DLL4 surrogate has been
shown to inhibit tumor growth, decrease cancer stem cell frequency, and
cause dysfunctional sprouting of new vessels resulting in an
anti-angiogenic effect in patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) models in
breast, colon, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers. Here we show results from
NSCLC PDX models.Methods and Results: Anti-DLL4 treatment was tested in a
series of NSCLC PDX models. Because DLL4 inhibition has been shown to
have effects on the tumor as well as the vasculature, the combination of
OMP-21M18 (targeting human DLL4) and 21R30 (antibody targeting mouse
DLL4) treatment in the PDX models was used to model demcizumab treatment
in humans. Treatment with anti-DLL4 in combination with chemotherapy
inhibited tumor growth in a series of NSCLC PDX models. Additionally, a
tumorigenicity assay showed a decrease in the frequency of
tumor-initiating cells following treatment with anti-DLL4 and
chemotherapy. Gene expression analysis of tumor samples provided insights
into the mechanism of action.Conclusions: Anti-DLL4 treatment in a panel
of NSCLC PDX tumor models in vivo showed inhibition of tumor growth and a
decrease in the frequency of tumor-initiating cells. Mechanism of action
and gene expression analysis of these models treated with anti-DLL4 will
be presented. These findings provide additional evidence supporting
demcizumab as an effective treatment for NSCLC patients.

