Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model for highly metastatic, nonfunctioning pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors


Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are generally classified as functioning
or nonfunctioning. Patients with functioning tumors can have severe
hypoglycemia because their tumors express high amounts of insulin as well
as chromogranin A; fortunately, these tumors are seldom metastatic.
Patients with nonfunctioning tumors express high amounts of chromogranin
A but little insulin; unfortunately these tumors are highly metastatic to
the liver. Nonfunctioning tumors are more common, and a more severe
health issue. The highly studied RT2 B6 mouse, in which the SV40 T
antigen is expressed from an insulin promoter in an inbred C57Bl/6
genetic background, is a model for functioning pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors: liver metastasis is uncommon in RT2 B6 mice, which are very
hypoglycemic and often die when tumors are very small. We have changed
the genetic background and are studying RT2 AB6F1 hybrid mice, which have
a C57Bl/6 father and a mother from an A/J inbred background. RT2 AB6F1
mice are much less hypoglycemic, and these mice develop liver metastasis
with high frequency. We have mated the hybrid AB6F1 mice to their
littermates in order to map metastasis genes by F2 analysis, and have
discovered that a locus at mouse chromosome 2qG1 links tightly to liver
metastasis. One gene within this locus, InsM1, is less expressed in the
primary tumors of mice with liver metastatic disease. InsM1 is also less
expressed in primary tumors from humans with liver metastatic disease.
Previous studies of InsM1 have shown that this protein maintains the
differentiated status of pancreatic beta cells. We find that tumors from
mice with low expression of InsM1 also express lower amounts of several
distinctive markers of differentiated beta cells, but higher amounts of
several markers of liver cells. These data suggest that dedifferentiation
to stem cells, which can then redifferentiate to other cell types such as
liver cells, promotes metastasis of pancreatic beta cell tumors.
Intratumoral expression of liver markers may be a useful predictor of
metastatic disease in these patients. Dedifferentiation of mature beta
cells is also a mechanism by which type 2 diabetes occurs, so there may
be similarities between these two diseases.

