Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triptolide pro-drug decreases tumor burden and halts tumor
progression in a murine model of acute myeloid leukemia


IntroductionStandard treatment for acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) has
not changed over the past few decades and relies primarily on the
traditional 7 + 3 regimen of daunorubicin, administered over 3 days and
Cytarabine, administered over 7 days. This chemo-intensive regimen is
poorly tolerated by patients and is characterized by a high rate of
relapse and treatment failure. Triptolide is a diterpenoid tri-epoxide
compound isolated from the Chinese herb Tripterygium wilfordii. The
water-soluble pro-drug of triptolide, Minnelide has been shown by our
group to be highly effective in a number of pre-clinical models of solid
tumors and is currently undergoing Phase I Clinical trial for
gastrointestinal tumors. Interim analysis of the Phase I data has shown
that the equivalent mouse dose of 0.2 mg/kg/day is well tolerated by
patients with no reported dose limiting toxicity.MethodsPrimary AML
apheresis samples from patients with acute myeloid leukemia and multiple
AML cell Lines (THP1, KG1, Kasumi1, HL-60) were treated with Triptolide
at doses from of 2.5 nM to 50nM and cell viability was measured using a
formazan based colorimetric assay. Apoptosis was measured using Annexin V
via flowcytometry and colony forming ability of AML cell lines was
measured using a methylcellulose based assay.To generate an engraftment
model of AML, NOD.Rag1-/-;cnull (NRG) animals expressing human
interleukin-3 (IL-3) and human GM-CSF (NRGS) were injected luciferase
expressing THP1 cells after sublethal irradiation of 250 cGy. These
animals were then serially evaluated using In Vivo Imaging System (IVIS)
and leukemic burden was calculated the total bioluminescent signal after
intra-periotneal injection of luciferin. Treatment with vehicle or
Minnelide at a dose of 0.1mg/kg/day and 0.15 mg/kg/day was started on the
10th day after confirming engraftment using IVIS.ResultsTriptolide at a
dose range of 2.5 nM to 50 nM produced a dose and time dependent killing
of leukemic cells in both cell lines and primary AML patient samples. The
IC-50 for THP1, KG1, Kasumi1 and HL-60 cell lines with triptolide
treatment at 48 hours were 5 0.8 nM, 8 0.7 nM, 7.2 0.6 nM, 10 nM 2 nM
respectively. Treatment with triptolide at a dose of 2.5 nM induced cell
death and apoptosis as measured by Annexin V posiitvity in primary AML
apheresis samples.Colony formation by THP1 cells and KG1 cells was
completely abrogated by treatment with Triptolide at 2.5 nM and 25 nM
respectively.Vehicle treated mice showed a rapid progression of disease
burden when compared to Minnelide treated mice. At a dose of 0.1
mg/kg/day and 0.15 mg/kg/day, these mice had no appreciable increase in
leukemic burden over normal mice when assessed by IVIS.ConclusionWe show
that Minnelide induces cell death at therapeutically relevant
concentrations in vitro and decreased leukemic burden in a murine model
of AML. Minnelide may emerge as a novel therapeutic strategy in treating
patients with AML.

