Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tamoxifen analog, GA-11, as potential breast cancer
therapeutic


Tamoxifen is the most commonly used treatment for patients with ER+
breast cancer (BC). Although many patients benefit from tamoxifen in the
adjuvant and metastatic settings, resistance is an important clinical
problem. We hypothesized that tamoxifen structure can be modulated to
generate a more effective and a better drug-like compound. Over the past
three years, extensive structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies were
carried out in our laboratories to optimize tamoxifen structure. We
generated over 50 tamoxifen analogs and evaluated their activity against
MCF-7 (ER+) and the triple negative MDA-MB-231 (ER-, PR-, and HER2 -)
human breast cancer cell lines following MTT assay. Both ER+ and triple
negative cell lines were used to evaluate if the novel analogs were
selectively cytotoxic to the ER+ cells similar to tamoxifen. These
studies identified a novel compound GA-11 that non-selectively targeted
both the ER+ and triple negative cells, interestingly being more
cytotoxic to MDA-MB-231 cells. GA-11 exhibited remarkable activity with
IC50 values 7 times lower against MDA-MB-231 (triple negative) and 3
times lower against MCF-7 (ER+) than tamoxifen. GA-11 contains a methoxy
group in place of N,N-dimethylethyl functionality of tamoxifen, and an
additional polar amine group, which makes it more cytotoxic than
tamoxifen to both the cancer cell lines (ER+ and triple negative) while
being non-toxic to normal mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells,
suggesting that the cytotoxic response of GA-11 is selective for cancer
cells. In addition, GA-11 inhibited the expression of MMP-9, c-Myc and
Caveolin, the proteins associated with adhesion, migration and
metastasis, in a dose-dependent manner. The response of GA-11 in triple
negative MDA-MB-231 cells was more dramatic as compared to MCF-7 (ER+)
cells, again suggesting its relative selectivity towards triple negative
cells and its potential to target triple-negative breast cancer for which
currently no effective chemotherapy options exist. Furthermore, GA-11
inhibited the migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells clearly
demonstrating its anti-metastatic properties. In silico evaluation showed
that GA-11 with cLogP 4.8 and MW 329, fits better into the requirements
of Lipinski's Rule-of-Five, formulated to determine the drug-likeness of
a small molecule; than tamoxifen (cLogP 7.34). GA-11 is thus expected to
have a better oral bioavailability than tamoxifen. These in vitro studies
thus indicate GA-11 to be an effective agent that is superior to
tamoxifen both in potency and drug-likeness.

