Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Programmatic re-splicing of the hypoxia transcriptome regulates
the DNA damage response


BackgroundHypoxia occurs within the majority of solid tumors. It has
multiple impacts on tumor biology including angiogenesis, suppression of
immune reactivity, enhanced receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, down
regulation of DNA repair pathways, promotion of pro-survival phenotypes
and increased proclivity for invasion and metastasis. Levels of hypoxia
vary between and within tumors, correlate with patient outcomes, and can
lead to differences in response to therapy. Despite considerable
advances, our understanding of the regulatory processes that control
these diverse and heterogeneous changes in cancer phenotype remain
incomplete. A better understanding of how they are mediated will inform
strategies for personalized medicine and promise to substantially advance
our understanding of tumor heterogeneity.MethodsUntil recently,
techniques for RNA-expression profiling have lacked the resolution
necessary to detect genome wide changes in splicing. We exploited the
increased precision offered by deep sequencing to investigate genome-wide
remodelling of transcript architectures in both cell line and tumor
samples. Using novel computational strategies we generated
sample-specific gene models from RNA sequencing data generated over a
timecourse of HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells following a switch to 1%
oxygenation and used these data to identify widespread changes in
splicing. We applied similar strategies to raw RNA-sequencing data
derived from TCGA.ResultsWe detected the expression of thousands of novel
isoforms and a systematic, pathway-dependent switch to the expression of
noncoding transcripts at multiple genes, including many constituents of
the Fanconi Anemia, nucleotide excision- and double strand break repair
pathways. Of particular note were HDAC6 and 53BP1: critical regulators of
DNA damage response. Both loci exhibited a hypoxia-dependent expression
of retained-intron transcripts and a concomitant decline in protein
levels, thus providing a novel and unanticipated mechanism by which
hypoxia can drive genetic instability. Predictions made using our cell
line model were recapitulated in a large cohort of 458 colorectal
carcinomas derived from TCGA. Validation of the cell line data revealed,
for the first time, a strong signature of isoform switching in which a
widespread transition to noncoding expression is associated with poor
patient outcome. These data were derived from independent patient
biopsies sequenced by others, thus demonstrating the robustness of our
findings.ConclusionsThese data therefore have clear, substantial, and
immediate implications both for our understanding of the basic aetiology
of solid tumors and for the development of RNA-based signatures and
biomarkers in diagnostics and personalized medicine.

