Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear morphometry predicts prostate cancer progression


Introduction:The progression of prostate cancer (PCa) involves tissue
morphometric changes, which laid the base for current pathological
diagnosis of prostate cancer with the Gleason Scoring system. Nuclear
morphometry (NM) changes contribute significantly to these tissue
morphometric changes, but accurate and autonomous quantification of NM
changes are challenging. Here we created a macro to quantify the changes
of size, shape, DNA content, etc., and used these parameters to predict
PCa progression in 80 men that underwent radical prostatectomy
(RP).Materials & Methods:Two tissue microarrays (TMAs) with 80 RP PCa
cases, stratified by Gleason scores (GS) were used for this study. The
two continuous sections of TMAs were stained with H&E and Feulgen
reagents and the H&E slides were used for pathological diagnosis of PCa.
Both kinds of slides were scanned with Aperio scanner and image of each
core were separated using Aperio ImageScope software. The H&E or Feulgen
stained nuclei of cancer core were quantified using Smart Segmentation of
ImagePro Premier 9.1 software. For each core, data of all ROIs were
pooled and the covariance of each parameter were generated. Data were
first analyzed alone and then in combination using multivariate logistic
regression (MLR) to predict the aggressive RP cases or biochemical
recurrence (BCR). Decision curve analysis (DCA) was used for the MLR
models to evaluate their power and effectiveness for clinical decision
making. For all analysis, a p = 8) from less aggressive PCa (Gleason
score 3+3 & 3+4) on the TMAs of RP cases, our Feulgen NM model generated
a receiver operating characteristic curve-area under the curve (ROC-AUC)
of 0.90 with a sensitivity of 75.51% and specificity of 86.21% while our
H&E NM model yield an ROC-AUC of 0.96 with a sensitivity of 82.00% and
specificity of 90.00%. DCA analysis both showed better decision using
both models compared with considering the patients as all or none of them
as aggressive. Both models also show strength in differentiating two
Gleason score 7 (3+4 vs 4+3). Feulgen NM model showed moderate power in
the prediction of BCR based on the MLR (ROC-AUC = 0.79) and DCA analysis,
while H&E MLR model performed better with a ROC-AUC of 0.86. Further
Kaplan-Meier analysis of BCR with GS and NM (H&E and Feulgen) showed that
the combination of GS with either Feulgen or H&E NM showed significant
power in the differentiation patients with BCR survival time (HR = 3.14 &
3.89, respectively).Conclusions:Our accurate quantification of tissue
morphometry demonstrated its translational clinical relevance since it
can predict PCa aggressiveness in men that have undergone RP. Future
application of this tool in active surveillance biopsies may provide an
early diagnosis and prognosis prediction of PCa patients effectively.

