Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-15 overexpression protects cerulein-induced fibrosis in the
mouse model of chronic pancreatitis


Introduction: Earlier, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IL-1 and IL-10 are
implicated in the pathogenesis of pancreatitis. Recently, we observed
reduced level of IL-15 in cerulein- induced acute and chronic mouse model
of pancreatitis. IL-15 is a pleiotropic cytokine that has an important
role in innate immunity. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that IL-15
overexpression improves the pathogenesis of cerulein-induced
pancreatitis.Experimental procedure: Accordingly, we tested our
hypothesis by inducing chronic pancreatitis in rIL-15 pretreated Balb/c
mice. Cerulein was given by repetitive intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections
as reported earlier (50 g/kg, 6 hourly injections/day, 3 days/week) along
with the rIL-15 (5 g in 100l saline/ two-times/week/mice) for up to 4
weeks; the control mice received 100l saline or saline with 5 g IL-15.
Mice were sacrificed 3 days after the last cerulein injection.
Histopathological evaluation of H&E stained tissue sections was performed
including tissue remodeling and the accumulation of collagen by Masson's
trichrome stain in the tissue sections. Additionally, pro-inflammatory
and pro-fibrotic gene i.e. TGF-1, IL-6, IL-8, Collagen 1 and -SMA levels
were measured by ELISA, immunofluorescence, qPCR and immunoblot
analysis.Summary: We report acinar cells atrophy, induced inflammatiory
cells and cytokines in the pancreas of cerulein treated mice along with
perivascular collagen deposition compare to saline treated mice.
Interestingly, rIL-15 treated and cerulein given mice showed
significantly improved morphology of acinar cells and reduced
perivascular collagen. Further, we also report that protein levels of
TGF-1 and -SMA is also reduced in the pancreas of cerulein injected and
IL-15 treated mice compare to cerulein treated mice by performing western
blot and immunohistochemistry.Conclusion: Our data show that IL-15
overexpression protects mice from cerulein-induced pancreatic
pathogenesis including fibrosis. Taken together, rIL-15 therapy may be a
novel strategy to treat pancreatic fibrosis, and may also helpful to
treat pancreatic cancer patients by down-regulating tissue
fibrogenesis.Funding: NIH R01 DK067255 (AM), NIH R01 AI080581 (AM),

