Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of RNA Pol I transcription and PIM kinase as a new
therapy to treat prostate cancer


Background: The MYC oncogene is commonly over-expressed in prostate
cancer (PC). Upregulation of ribosome biogenesis and function is a
characteristic feature of MYC-driven tumors. Accordingly, inhibition of
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) synthesis with CX-5461, a potent, selective and
orally bioavailable inhibitor of RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcription
has been successfully exploited therapeutically in models of
hematological malignancy characterized by elevated MYC expression.
Additionally, PIM kinases activate MYC signaling and mRNA translation in
PC and cooperate with MYC to accelerate tumorigenesis. Here we
investigate the efficacy of a dual approach targeting ribosome biogenesis
and function to treat PC by combining CX-5461 with the pan-PIM kinase
inhibitor CX-6258 in murine and human modelsMethods: The efficacy of
CX-5461 and CX-6258, alone and in combination, was tested in PC cell
lines, in the Hi-MYC mouse model of PC (n = 8-11 per group) and in PC
metastatic tissues. Primary cell lines derived from Hi-MYC mice were used
to analyze signaling events underpinning therapeutic efficacy. Triplicate
experiments were analyzed with ANOVA followed by Dunnett's post hoc test.
All statistical tests were two-sided.Results: CX-5461 reduced anchorage
independent growth and induced cell cycle arrest in human PC cell lines
and in primary prostatic epithelial cells from Hi-MYC mice (PBackground:
The MYC oncogene is commonly over-expressed in prostate cancer (PC).
Upregulation of ribosome biogenesis and function is a characteristic
feature of MYC-driven tumors. Accordingly, inhibition of ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) synthesis with CX-5461, a potent, selective and orally
bioavailable inhibitor of RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcription has been
successfully exploited therapeutically in models of hematological
malignancy characterized by elevated MYC expression. Additionally, PIM
kinases activate MYC signaling and mRNA translation in PC and cooperate
with MYC to accelerate tumorigenesis. Here we investigate the efficacy of
a dual approach targeting ribosome biogenesis and function to treat PC by
combining CX-5461 with the pan-PIM kinase inhibitor CX-6258 in murine and
human modelsMethods: The efficacy of CX-5461 and CX-6258, alone and in
combination, was tested in PC cell lines, in the Hi-MYC mouse model of PC
(n = 8-11 per group) and in PC metastatic tissues. Primary cell lines
derived from Hi-MYC mice were used to analyze signaling events
underpinning therapeutic efficacy. Triplicate experiments were analyzed
with ANOVA followed by Dunnett's post hoc test. All statistical tests
were two-sided.Results: CX-5461 reduced anchorage independent growth and
induced cell cycle arrest in human PC cell lines and in primary prostatic
epithelial cells from Hi-MYC mice (P<0.001). CX-5461 treatment of Hi-MYC
mice induced p53 expression and activity and significantly reduced
prostate epithelial cell proliferation (P = 0.02) and invasion. While
CX-6258 showed little effect alone, its combination with CX-5461 further
suppressed proliferation (P = 0.01), dramatically reduced the incidence
of large invasive lesions from 64% to 9% and preserved prostate ductal
architecture.This promising combination strategy prevented the growth of
PDX tissue characterized by elevated MYC and resistance to conventional
therapy (P = 0.04).Conclusions: Our results demonstrate preclinical
efficacy of combination therapies targeting the ribosome at multiple
levels and provide a new approach for treatment of PC with high MYC
activity.

