Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining optimal dose schedules for ATR inhibitors in combination
with DNA damaging drugs: Informing clinical studies of VX-970, the
first-in-class ATR inhibitor


Proficient repair of DNA damage is a cause of the poor response many
patients experience when treated with commonly used DNA-damaging drugs
such as cisplatin, carboplatin and gemcitabine. The protein kinase ataxia
telangiectasia mutated and Rad3 related (ATR) is recruited to DNA damage
lesions caused by such drugs during the S and G2 phase of cell cycle,
where it coordinates a series of responses including checkpoint
activation and DNA repair by homologous recombination.Inhibition of ATR
potentiates the cytotoxic activity of DNA damaging drugs in many cancer
cells. In stark contrast, non-cancer cells survive inhibition of ATR with
just transient growth arrest. Cancer cells carrying common defects in a
compensatory repair pathway mediated by the kinase ataxia telangiectasia
mutated (ATM) and its principle substrate, p53, are especially sensitive
to ATR inhibition. Two ATR inhibitors are in clinical development in
combination with DNA damaging drugs, however a comprehensive assessment
of dose schedule considerations has not been reported.In pre-clinical
models, the efficacy of an ATR inhibitor in combination with multiple DNA
damaging drugs was shown to be dependent on dose schedule. In vitro,
transient exposure of cancer cells to an ATR inhibitor (2 hours) was
highly effective when added after the DNA damaging drug. Maximum activity
was observed when addition of the ATR inhibitor was timed to coincide
with peak accumulation of cells in S-phase and concomitant activation of
ATR (P-Chk1), following treatment with the DNA damaging drug. In mouse
xenograft models, strong synergistic activity was achieved from just a
single dose of the ATR inhibitor given once per cycle of the DNA damaging
drug.Optimal efficacy was achieved by administering the ATR inhibitor
12-24 hours after the DNA damaging drug. Dosing the ATR inhibitor prior
to, or greater than 48 hours after, the DNA damaging drug provided
limited benefit. On this schedule, addition of the ATR inhibitor had
minimal impact on the tolerability profile of the DNA damaging drug.
VX-970, the first-in-class ATR inhibitor, is being assessed as
monotherapy and in combination with gemcitabine, cisplatin and
carboplatin in Ph1/2 clinical studies. Based on pre-clinical data, VX-970
is being dosed approximately 24 hours after the DNA damaging drug.
Preliminary tumor biomarker data from three patients showed high P-Chk1
24 hours after treatment with carboplatin, which is inhibited by
VX-970.These data suggest the importance of dose scheduling on the
efficacy of ATR inhibitors and DNA damaging drug combinations and inform
the design of ongoing clinical studies.

