Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Musashi-2 (MSI2) drives TGFBR1/SMAD3 dependent partial EMT and
supports VEGFR2 expression and metastasis of human and mouse NSCLC cells


About 221,200 new patients will be diagnosed with lung cancer and 158,040
will succumb to this disease in the United States in 2015. Non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) has a 17.4% overall 5-year survival, with metastasis
contributing to the vast majority of deaths. Analyzing NSCLC tumors
spontaneously arising in KrasLA1/+; P53R172HG/+ (KP) mice, we identified
Musashi-2 (MSI2) protein, a stem cell-associated factor that is regulates
mRNA translation, as upregulated in the metastasis-competent mouse cell
lines. Importantly, MSI2 shRNA depletion in either mouse or human NSCLC
cells decreased invasion in Matrigel in vitro and decreased metastasis
upon orthotopic injection 129Sv immunocompetent mice in vivo.
Mechanistically, by both overexpressing Msi2 cDNA in 393p murine NSCLC
and shRNA depleting MSI2 in four independent mouse and human NSCLC cell
lines, we defined MSI2 as a driver of a partial epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) program in NSCLC cells. In support of EMT, MSI2
increases the expression of the Snail and Slug pro-EMT transcription
factors, as well as the mesenchymal protein vimentin (VMN). MSI2 also
downregulates expression of the extracellular matrix component
fibronectin (FN1) and tight junction proteins Claudin-3, 5 and 7.
However, MSI2 also inhibits protein expression of Zeb-1 and Zeb-2, while
sustaining expression of E-cadherin (E-Cad), associated with epithelial
identity. Moreover, MSI2 represses NOTCH-1 and upregulates VEGFR2 at the
mRNA and protein levels. This is of interest, as NOTCH-1 has been shown
to regulate VEGFR2 in angiogenic signaling. We found that knockdown of
NOTCH-1 in MSI2-depleted mouse and human NSCLC cells rescued the loss of
VEGFR2 expression, suggesting MSI2 increases VEGFR2 expression in a
NOTCH-1 dependent manner. Additionally, siRNA of VEGFR2 in the highly
metastatic NSCLC cell line 344sq significantly decreased Matrigel
invasion, but had only a limited effect in 344sq derivative lines with
stable depletion of MSI2, and human NSCLC experiments are ongoing.
Together, these results indicate a possible role of MSI2/NOTCH-1/VEGFR2
axis in NSCLC, and suggest that MSI2 connects cancer cell stemness, EMT,
and angiogenesis in lung cancer metastasis.

