Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tetrandrine promotes pancreatic cancer cell apoptosis in vitro and
tumor regression in vivo


Introduction: Resistance to apoptosis is a hallmark of tumor progression
and therapeutic failure in cancer, including Pancreatic Cancer.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer related deaths in the United States with an overall five-year
survival rate of less than five percent. The current standard treatment/s
for PDAC are largely ineffective. There is an urgent yet unmet need for
development of therapeutic agents for the treatment of PDAC. In the
present study, we investigated the effects of Tetrandrine (a
bis-benzylisoquinoline alkaloid) derivative- TET, on growth and viability
of pancreatic cancer in vitro and in Xenograft models in vivo.Methods:
Pancreatic Cancer cell lines: PANC-1 (epitheloid carcinoma), BxPC3
(Pancreatic Ductal Adeno-Carcinoma) and MiaPaCa2 (pancreatic carcinoma)
were used in this study. Cytotoxicity was evaluated using the Crystal
violet and MTT survival assays. Apoptosis was monitored by Flow cytometry
following Annexin V/PI staining. Nuclear morphology was visualized by
Immunofluorescence. Western Blot analysis was used to measure protein
expression. Human pancreatic cancer (BXPC3) derived xenografts were
generated in NOD/ SCID mice and TET (40 mg/kg body weight) was orally
administered daily for four weeks. Tumor growth (measured as tumor volume
by Vernier Caliper) and body weights were measured on alternate days.
Tumor weight was measured at the end of the experimental period, prior to
xenograft tissue harvesting.Results: TET inhibited growth and promoted
cell death of pancreatic cancer cells in both dose and time dependent
manner with an IC50 in the range of 5-10M at 72 hr. The effects of TET
were irreversible and there was progressive cell death with increasing
time and at higher concentrations of TET. Treatment with TET resulted in
nuclear condensation and apoptotic body formation, activation of caspase
3 and PARP cleavage, indicating apoptotic cell death. Moreover apoptosis
was confirmed by flow cytometry after Annexin V and PI staining. TET
administration not only halted the growth of BXPC3 derived xenografts,
but also decreased tumor volume (TET treated vs PBS treated) over
treatment period. Apoptosis (measured by TUNEL assay) was also observed
in tumor tissues following TET treatment in vivo.Conclusion: These
results show for the first time, that TET inhibits pancreatic cancer cell
growth in vitro and induces pancreatic tumor regression in vivo in part
by apoptosis. These results highlight the potential use of TET in
treatment of pancreatic cancer.Acknowledgement: Financial support from
following Sources is gratefully acknowledged: Carroll W. Feist endowed
Chair Funds (Koul H), FWCC support and Chair commitment funds (Koul H)
from the Chancellor and from the Dean School of Medicine-
LSUHSC-Shreveport. All the members of Koul laboratory for their
suggestions and help.

