Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced uptake and accumulation of temozolomide and irinotecan in
orthotopically-implanted gliomas by vascular priming with RRx-001


Background and ObjectiveRRx-001 is a radio-, immune- and chemosensitizing
pan-epigenetic inhibitor with vascular normalizing properties under
investigation in multiple Phase II clinical trials. Vascular
normalization refers to the remodeling of the immature, crowded and
dysfunctional tumor capillary network that is pruned typically through
the action of anti-VEGF therapy and results in improved tumor blood flow
and oxygenation. One benefit of vascular normalization is the improved
penetration of cytotoxic and other therapies into the tumor leading to
better responses and potentially improved survival.MRI studies in a Phase
1/2 clinical trial of RRx-001 with radiation in brain metasteses showed
alterations in tumor blood flow suggesting vascular normalization. The
purpose of these experiments was to determine whether vascular
normalization after administration of RRx-001 that had been previously
observed both clinically and preclinically in heterotopically implanted
syngeneic tumors, would increase the delivery and accumulation of
systemically administered irinotecan (CPT-11) or temozolomide (TMZ) in
orthotopically implanted gliomas and whether an increase in survival
would be observed.MethodsHuman glioblastoma cells (GBM43), maintained as
serially passaged subcutaneous xenografts in athymic mice were implanted
intracranially in six-week-old athymic mice. In three separate
experiments, 12 days after implantation, mice were treated with (1)
RRx-001, (10 mg/kg IV); (2) TMZ, (20 mg/kg, IV or 25 mg/kg, PO) or
irinotecan (0.4 mg); (3) TMZ (20 mg/kg or 25 mg/kg, PO) or irinotecan
(0.4 mg) 4 hours after RRx-001 (10 mg/kg) and (4) saline control. Dosing
was every 6 days in 4 cycles. Animals were euthanized as the symptoms
from the increasing tumor burden prevented access to food or water. Tumor
tissue was collected from a subset of animals 24 h after last dose of
chemotherapy. Analysis of irinotecan content in tumor tissue was carried
out by HPLC and temozolomide by LCMS.ResultsIn all three experiments,
pretreatment with RRx-001 increased the concentration of irinotecan and
IV and PO temozolomide in the tumor tissue. The combination groups also
had statistically significant greater survival compared to the cytotoxic
drug and RRx-001 alone and against control.ConclusionVascular
normalization-enhanced delivery of standard cytotoxics mediated by
RRx-001 may improve the delivery of cytotoxic therapy into tumor tissue,
particularly in difficult to treat brain cancers, leading to enhanced
responses and improved survival and warrants further preclinical and
clinical investigation.

