Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor-4 (FGFR-4) as a novel
therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer


The fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) family plays crucial roles
in development, tissue repair, and malignant tumors. FGFR-1, -2, and -3
each exist in two isoforms, IIIb and IIIc, due to alternative splicing of
the extracellular domain, whereas FGFR-4 does not have these isoforms.
FGFR-4 is reportedly over-expressed in various cancers such as breast,
prostate, hepatocellular, ovarian, gastric, colorectal, and pancreatic
cancers, wherein it contributes to tumor progression. Recent studies have
shown that a decrease in FGFR-4 levels suppresses the aggressiveness of
gastric, colorectal, and ovarian cancers. We found that pancreatic cancer
cell lines expressed similar levels of the IIIb and IIIc isoforms of
FGFR-1 to -3, but showed different FGFR-4 levels. These findings suggest
that the cancer cells surviving after treatment with recently developed
anti-FGFR drugs, which target FGFR-1 to -3, tend to express high levels
of FGFR-4. Moreover, a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in exon 9 of
the gene encoding FGFR-4 that results in the substitution of glycine with
arginine at codon 388 (388 Gly/Arg) in the transmembrane domain is
associated with poor outcomes of high-grade soft tissue sarcoma,
prostate, lung, head and neck carcinoma, and advanced and
treatment-resistant breast cancer. It has been reported that 40-50% of
Caucasians carry at least one copy of the 388 Gly/Arg SNP of FGFR-4. In
the present study, we examined the expression and roles of the 388
Gly/Arg SNP in pancreatic cancer and tried to clarify whether FGFR-4 may
be a novel therapeutic target for cancer treatment. In human pancreatic
tissues, FGFR-4 was weakly localized in the normal exocrine and endocrine
pancreas, and was strongly expressed in 67 of 136 pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cases (49%). FGFR-4 expression positively correlated with
larger primary tumors and more advanced stages of pancreatic cancer.
FGFR-4 mRNA was expressed in 5 pancreatic cancer cell lines at various
levels, and the mutation in codon 388 was detected in 3 of the cell
lines, including PK-1 cells. A short hairpin RNA expression vector
targeting FGFR-4 was stably transfected to these mutant-expressing PK-1
cells (388 Gly/Arg), which then showed lower growth rates and cell
migration and invasion abilities compared to sham vector-transfected
cells. DNA microarray analysis showed that decreased expression of FGFR-4
in PK-1 cells altered the expression levels of molecules related to
cellular movement, cellular development, and cell-to-cell signaling and
interactions. FGF-19one of the major ligands for FGFR-4was expressed in
all 5 of the pancreatic cancer cell lines tested. These findings suggest
that inhibition of the expression of FGFR-4 harboring the 388 Gly/Arg SNP
may be a novel therapeutic strategy for pancreatic cancer, especially
after treatment with the newly developed anti-FGFR-1 to -3-targeted drugs.

