Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency in Diamond-Blackfan anemia
potentially leads to osteogenic sarcoma


Background: Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA) is an inherited bone marrow
failure syndrome characterized by red cell aplasia and congenital
anomalies, notably skeletal defects. DBA is known in the majority of
cases to be caused by haploinsufficiency of one of the small or large
ribosomal protein (rp) subunits. In addition, there is a cancer
predisposition in DBA. Indeed, somatic and germline rp mutations have
been associated with a number of malignancies. In DBA patients one of the
common malignancies is osteogenic sarcoma (OS). It is proposed that
selective pressure caused by faulty translation may lead to clonal
expansion of cells with acquired interdicting mutations leading to
cancer.Purpose: To quantitate the incidence of cancer in patients with
DBA and to examine osteoblast formation in vitro using a mouse embryonic
stem (mES) cell model haploinsufficient for ribosomal protein Rps19 to
identify putative bone defects that may promote tumorigenesis.Methods:
The DBA Registry of North America (DBAR), the largest established patient
cohort with prospective follow-up since 1991, was interrogated to
ascertain the incidence of cancer in DBA. For in vitro studies, mES cells
were differentiated towards osteoblasts using 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3,
dexamethasone, ascorbic acid and -glycerophosphate for 10 days. qRT-PCR
and histologic stains (alizarin red, alcian blue and alkaline
phosphatase) were used to assess osteoblast production in wild type and
Rps19+/- cultures.Results: The DBAR reported the first quantitative
assessment of cancer incidence in DBA. The significantly elevated
observed to expected ratios were 287, 36, 33 and 28 respectively, for
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), colon carcinoma, OS and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). As of Nov 2015 (N = 751), with a median patient age of 20
years, 11 patients with gastrointestinal carcinoma, 5 with OS, 2 with AML
and 8 with MDS are reported to the DBAR. The incidence of
gastrointestinal carcinoma and OS is highly significant in this young
population. We elected to study OS due to the skeletal defects and poor
growth encountered in DBA patients. Using mES cells induced to
differentiation towards osteoblasts, we observed reduced mineralization
and therefore, bone formation, by alizarin red staining in Rps19+/-
cells. Furthermore, rp haplo-insufficient cultures displayed a
significant increase in alcian blue staining, a marker for
chondrogenesis; these results suggest that regulation of
osteochondrogenic potential was altered. In support of this phenotype,
qRT-PCR analyses revealed that Rps19 haploinsufficiency induced abnormal
expression of the master transcription factors and p53 involved in
osteoblast and chondrocyte development.Conclusions: The most common
cancers in DBA are AML, OS and adenocarcinoma of the colon. With regards
to OS, we are now creating a conditional Rps19 CRISPR murine model, in
order to clarify the contribution of both rp and p53 in the etiology of
OS.

