Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rigosertib synergistically enhances the anticancer activity of
Cisplatin in various preclinical models of upper gastrointestinal cancers


Background: Upper Gastrointestinal Cancers (UGCs) respond poorly to
conventional chemotherapy due to overactive intrinsic mechanisms that
mediate drug resistance.] Rigosertib is an investigational anticancer
agent, that inhibits cellular signaling by acting as a Ras mimetic to
effect the activation of multiple pathways associated with oncogenic
transformation and drug resistance. Previous studies have demonstrated
the inhibitory effect of rigosertib with conventional platinum based
anticancer agents in various pre-clinical cancer models. We hypothesized
that the novel mechanism of action of rigosertib would complement the
DNA-damaging activity of Cisplatin (CDDP), the standard of care in UGC.
To test this hypothesis, we investigated the potential therapeutic
benefit of rigosertib alone and in combination with CDDP in P53 wild type
and mutant models of UGCs. Methods: For this study, we evaluated the
effect of rigosertib treatment alone and/or in combination with CDDP on
AGS (P53 wild type) and FLO-1 (P53 mutant) UGC cell viability, survival,
and expression of apoptotic markers. The MTT cell viability assay and
Compusyn mediated median effect plot analysis (MEPA)(Chou and Talaly)
were used to determine synergistic drug combinations of rigosertib and
CDDP in AGS and FLO-1 UGC cells, respectively. Results: The cell
viability data and MEPA indicated that rigosertib and CDDP show optimal
synergistic anticancer activity in both AGS and FLO-1 UGC cells at a
ratio of 1:10, respectively. The clonogenic cell survival assay data
showed that in comparison to treatment with Rigosertib (AGS: 100nM;
FLO-1: 50nM) or CDDP (AGS: 1000nM; FLO-1: 500nM) alone, the combination
treatment at a ratio of 1:10 significantly increased (pBackground: Upper
Gastrointestinal Cancers (UGCs) respond poorly to conventional
chemotherapy due to overactive intrinsic mechanisms that mediate drug
resistance.] Rigosertib is an investigational anticancer agent, that
inhibits cellular signaling by acting as a Ras mimetic to effect the
activation of multiple pathways associated with oncogenic transformation
and drug resistance. Previous studies have demonstrated the inhibitory
effect of rigosertib with conventional platinum based anticancer agents
in various pre-clinical cancer models. We hypothesized that the novel
mechanism of action of rigosertib would complement the DNA-damaging
activity of Cisplatin (CDDP), the standard of care in UGC. To test this
hypothesis, we investigated the potential therapeutic benefit of
rigosertib alone and in combination with CDDP in P53 wild type and mutant
models of UGCs. Methods: For this study, we evaluated the effect of
rigosertib treatment alone and/or in combination with CDDP on AGS (P53
wild type) and FLO-1 (P53 mutant) UGC cell viability, survival, and
expression of apoptotic markers. The MTT cell viability assay and
Compusyn mediated median effect plot analysis (MEPA)(Chou and Talaly)
were used to determine synergistic drug combinations of rigosertib and
CDDP in AGS and FLO-1 UGC cells, respectively. Results: The cell
viability data and MEPA indicated that rigosertib and CDDP show optimal
synergistic anticancer activity in both AGS and FLO-1 UGC cells at a
ratio of 1:10, respectively. The clonogenic cell survival assay data
showed that in comparison to treatment with Rigosertib (AGS: 100nM;
FLO-1: 50nM) or CDDP (AGS: 1000nM; FLO-1: 500nM) alone, the combination
treatment at a ratio of 1:10 significantly increased (p<0.05) inhibition
of cellular survival in AGS and FLO-1 UGC cell lines. The Combination
Index of 0.5 suggests a strong synergism between the two drugs.
Similarly, the western blot data after treatment with Rigosertib (100nM)
and/or CDDP (1000nM) for 24h induced higher levels of P53/P73, P21, and
cleaved PARP with Rigosertib (100nM) and CDDP (1000nM) combination
treatment in UGC cells. Conclusions: Our in vitro data indicate that
rigosertib, as a single agent, is an effective therapeutic strategy for
inducing apoptosis in UGC cells Additionally, rigosertib in combination
with CDDP synergistically enhances the anti-tumor activity of CDDP
against UGC cells. The observed synergism can translate into lower drug
toxicity as significant anticancer activity can be achieved with much
lower doses of rigosertib and CDDP when used in combination.

