Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells reveal the genetic evolution of metastatic
breast cancer


BACKGROUND. Anti-cancer treatment failure is caused by the genetic and
phenotypic heterogeneous properties of the disease. Early dissemination
of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) into the blood circulation of cancer
patients allows for parallel genetic evolution of the primary tumor and
metastases. This study investigated the genomic make-up of CTCs
originating from metastasis as a so called liquid biopsy and compared
these with the different clones of the archived autologous primary tumor
on single cell level.METHODS. From two breast cancer patients, individual
CTCs were isolated from blood using Ficoll density gradient followed by
micromanipulation of keratin positive cells. Single cells from archived
primary breast tumors from the same patients were captured by laser
microdissection. DNA was isolated and amplified by whole genome
amplification and copy number alterations (CNA) were obtained by shallow,
whole genome next generations sequencing (NGS).RESULTS. From the first
breast cancer patient, the genomes from 50 single cells from the primary
tumor were sequenced. An unsupervised phylogenetic cluster analysis based
on CNA revealed five distinct subclones that displayed increasing
chromosomal instability from the first to the last cluster. Using support
vector machine (SVM) learning, the CNA profiles of 42 CTCs were residing
mostly to the first three clones with few chromosomal aberrations,
whereas only one CTC resided to the fourth clone and none to the last
with many chromosomal aberrations. The tumor from a second breast cancer
patient displayed the presence of three genetically distinct clones with
increasing chromosomal instability after sequencing 11 single cells. CTCs
(n = 12) from this patient at metastatic disease were classified to the
last branch using SVM, however with low probability. After repeating
unsupervised clustering on the genomes of the primary tumor tissue and
CTCs, a fourth branch was formed with CTCs only.CONCLUSION. Our results
suggest that therapy resistant metastases in breast cancer patients can
originate from tumor clones from early stages of tumor evolution and may
genetically still be similar (patient 1). On the other hand, further
genetic progression may also take place (patient 2) after which the
genetic landscape of the metastasis does not resemble the primary tumor
anymore. These results underline the importance of liquid biopsy in the
diagnosis of metastatic cancer.

