Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-deoxy-5-methylthioadenosine (MTA) impairs human T-cell functions
and constitutes a novel immuno-suppressing tumor metabolite


Establishment of an immunosuppressive microenvironment is one mechanism
of tumor immune escape. Elevated levels of 5-deoxy-5-methylthioadenosine
(MTA) were detected in various tumor entities and spurred interest as
putative immuno-inhibitory metabolic dysregulation. Loss of MTA
phosphorylase (MTAP) activity in tumor cells was identified as major
cause of MTA accumulation. Lack of MTAP expression is associated with an
inferior response towards adjuvant interferon- therapy and a higher risk
for metastatic disease in malignant melanoma. Here we examined the role
of tumor-secreted MTA in suppression of anti-tumor T cell responses.The
effect of MTA was investigated in human polyclonal or antigen-specific T
cells. We evaluated proliferation, viability, activation,
differentiation, clonal expansion and effector function of the T cells as
well as the phosphorylation of major signaling pathways. In addition,
co-culture experiments of T cells with an MTA-secreting tumor cell line
were performed. Finally, we used retroviral transduction to generate
MTAP-overexpressing T cells as a strategy to overcome MTA-mediated
inhibitory effects.MTA strongly reduced proliferation, expression of
activation markers, viability, induction and expansion as well as
differentiation and effector functions of antigen-specific T cells in a
dose dependent manner. Moreover, MTA-mediated suppression could be
confirmed using an MTA-secreting tumor cell line, which impaired T cell
proliferation in mixed lymphocyte-tumor cell cultures. Mechanistically,
we found MTA to interfere with different T cell signaling pathways, with
the most noteworthy influence on AKT phosphorylation, thereby explaining
the reduction in proliferation and viability. Moreover, we found that MTA
also influences intracellular protein methylation, also a critical factor
for proper T cell function. To address these broad inhibitory functions
of MTA as tumor metabolite we aimed to enhance T cell resistance to MTA
by equipping T cells with higher levels of the MTA catabolizing enzyme
MTAP. We thus successfully generated stable MTAP-overexpressing T cells,
which revealed less sensitivity against MTA mediated effects such as
inhibition of proliferation, cytotoxicity, or viability upon co-culture
with MTA when compared to mock controls. These results suggest a
promising approach to reconstitute T cell function in presence of a
normally inhibitory tumor microenvironment.Our data emphasizes the
importance of tumor metabolites such as MTA in the tumor microenvironment
for tumor immune escape. Furthermore, we were able to identify potential
molecular mechanisms for MTA induced T cell inhibition, which offer the
opportunity to study pharmacological approaches to overcome tumor induced
immune inhibition in T cells and will help to develop more effective
immune-based therapies against MTAP-deficient tumors.

