Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ST3GAL1-associated transcriptomic program portends poor prognosis
in glioblastoma


Cell surface sialylation has been associated with tumor cell invasiveness
in several cancers. Patients with grade IV glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
often show a median survival period of fifteen months, even with the
current standard-of-care treatment. Among the reasons for this poor
prognosis lies in the cellular and molecular heterogeneity of tumor
cells. The Cancer Genome Atlas efforts have shown that histologically
identical GBM tumors can be divided into four molecular subtypes based on
gene expression, with each subtype corresponding to unique genomic
aberrations and clinical outcome. These findings highlight the limitation
of relying solely on morphological approaches to diagnose and
subsequently treat patients. We conducted a lectin screen with the goal
of identifying candidates that stained normal and tumor cells
differentially. We identified a sialyltransferase, ST3Gal1 as a mediator
of the binding pattern of one such lectin, Peanut Agglutinin. We
demonstrate that ST3Gal1 promotes tumor cell invasiveness and enriches
for self-renewal potential in the mesenchymal tumor subclass of patients,
typified by highly aggressive and recurrent profiles. Depletion of
ST3Gal1 extends tumor latency and prolongs survival in mice. Importantly,
an enrichment of the ST3GAL1 transcriptomic program portends poor
prognosis in glioma patients. Moving forward, since there are no
mutations or changes in copy number of ST3GAL1, we explored epigenetic
regulation as a possible mechanism. By tapping into data from the NIH
Roadmap Epigenome, and transcriptomic analysis of our patient
tumor-derived cells, we identified a histone clustering signature that
correlates with survival outcome and disease progression. We are
currently investigating one such histone modifier, lysine (K)-specific
demethylase 1A (LSD1) and its role at modifying ST3GAL1 transcription and
activity.

