Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell phone use is associated with an inflammatory cytokine profile
of parotid gland saliva


There is controversy on the effects of the non-ionizing radiation emitted
by cell phones on cellular processes and the impact of such radiation
exposure on health. Conflicting results were reported on the association
between cell phone use and parotid tumor development. Chronic
inflammation is associated with an increased risk for cancer, such as
seen in ulcerative colitis. To evaluate the effect that cell phone use
has on the parotid gland, cytokine expression profile was determined in
the saliva produced by the parotid glands in healthy volunteers, and
correlated with self-reported cell phone use and laterality. The
following parameters were determined, in 83 Brazilian individuals in
saliva produced by the parotid glands comparing the saliva from the gland
exposed to cell phone radiation (ipsilateral) to that from the
contralateral parotid: salivary flow, total protein concentration, IL-1,
IL-6, IL-10, IFN- and TNF- by ELISA. After multiple testing correction,
decreased IL-10 and increased IL-1 salivary levels in the ipsilateral
side compared with the contralateral side (pThere is controversy on the
effects of the non-ionizing radiation emitted by cell phones on cellular
processes and the impact of such radiation exposure on health.
Conflicting results were reported on the association between cell phone
use and parotid tumor development. Chronic inflammation is associated
with an increased risk for cancer, such as seen in ulcerative colitis. To
evaluate the effect that cell phone use has on the parotid gland,
cytokine expression profile was determined in the saliva produced by the
parotid glands in healthy volunteers, and correlated with self-reported
cell phone use and laterality. The following parameters were determined,
in 83 Brazilian individuals in saliva produced by the parotid glands
comparing the saliva from the gland exposed to cell phone radiation
(ipsilateral) to that from the contralateral parotid: salivary flow,
total protein concentration, IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, IFN- and TNF- by ELISA.
After multiple testing correction, decreased IL-10 and increased IL-1
salivary levels in the ipsilateral side compared with the contralateral
side (p<0.05) were detected. Subjects who used cell phones for more than
10 years presented higher differences between IL-10 levels in ipsilateral
versus contralateral parotids (p = 0.0012). No difference was observed in
any of the tested parameters in correlation with cell phone monthly usage
in minutes. We conclude that exposure of parotid glands to cell phones
can alter salivary IL-10 and IL-1 levels. These findings suggest a
pro-inflammatory profile on parotid naturally exposed to cell phones,
which can be associated not only to the radiation emitted by the device
but with the warming caused by radiation and the battery of the cell
during use.Supported by: FAPEMIG (Fundao de Amparo Pesquisa de Minas
Gerais), CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientfico e
Tecnolgico) and CAPES (Coordenao de Aperfeioamento de Pessoal de Nvel
Superior), Brazil

