Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diffuse gastric adenocarcinoma often harbors KMT2C mutations
resulting in malignant phenotypes and worse overall survival


Purpose: The Lauren diffuse type of gastric adenocarcinoma (DGA) is
genomically stable compared to the intestinal type, but the primary
driver mutations in DGA are still being defined. Lysine (K) -specific
methyltransferase 2C (KMT2C), also known as mixed lineage leukemia 3
(MLL3), is a histone methyltransferase involved in transcriptional
coactivation and can be mutated in gastric cancer. The purpose of this
study was to determine the frequency of KMT2C mutation in DGA and to
elucidate the role of KMT2C in DGA tumorigenesis and progression.Methods:
Whole exome sequencing was performed on matched tumor samples of 27
patients with DGA who underwent potentially curative surgical resection.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed for KMT2C protein expression on
these same tumors and on an additional 289 tumors from a separate cohort
of patients with DGA. KMT2C overexpression in DGA cell lines (MKN-45 and
SNU-668) using lentiviral transduction and KMT2C shRNA knockdown in
normal gastric epithelial cells were examined in several in vitro
assays.Results: Thirty-eight percent of the 27 sequenced DGA specimens
harbored somatic mutations in KMT2C. The next most frequent mutation,
CDH1, which encodes E-cadherin, was found in 28% of specimens. Patients
with KMT2C mutation tended to have worse overall survival (OS) compared
to patients without the mutation (p = 0.194). Additional tumor tissue for
IHC analysis was only available from 11 of 27 patients. Among this group,
patients with tumors expressing KMT2C protein had better OS compared to
patients whose tumors did not express KMT2C (p = 0.034). In an external
validation set of 289 DGA samples, KMT2C expression again correlated with
better OS (p = 0.009). In the DGA cell lines, KMT2C overexpression
reduced proliferation by 32-39%, soft agar colony formation by 75-77%,
spheroid cell formation by 77-78%, cell migration by 52-60%, and cell
invasion by 50-74%. KMT2C overexpression also increased resistance to
5-FU and cisplatin chemotherapy. KMT2C shRNA knockdown in gastric
epithelial cells increased proliferation, soft agar colony formation,
migration, and invasion by 1.7- to 25-fold.Conclusions: KMT2C is
frequently mutated in DGA, and loss of KMT2C protein expression
correlates with worse OS. Restoration of KMT2C expression in DGA cell
lines reduces cancer stem-like cell and malignant phenotypes. Thus, KMT2C
may be a novel therapeutic target for patients with DGA.

