Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel immunotherapy, INT230-6, is able to induce high rates of
complete response in mice through a cytotoxic T-cell-dependent mechanism


INT-230-6 is a combination of cisplatin, vinblastine and an amphiphilic
cell penetration excipient that when administered intratumorally (IT) can
induce complete regression in drug-injected and bystander established
colon26 tumors. INT230-6 also has the ability to induce long term
protection in mice against intravenous (IV) or subcutaneous (SC)
re-inoculation of the cancer cells. This long term protection is
dependent on induction of both CD4 and CD8 cells as evidenced by in vivo
depletion prior to tumor re-inoculation. Previous studies had not
elucidated whether the initial drug-injected tumor regression in naive
mice was mainly due to the formulation's direct cytotoxicity or whether
early tumor regression is dependent also on immune- based cell killing.
To address this question, BALB/c mice were inoculated with 1106 Colon26
cells SC. Tumors were grown to a mean of 300mm3. INT230-6 was
administered intratumorally daily for 5 days (day 0 to 4). At the same
time mice were treated either with an IgG control, or with rat anti mouse
anti-CD4, anti-CD8 or both anti -CD4/CD8 on days 0,1,5,8,15. T cell
subset depletion was confirmed by flow cytometry. In preliminary data,
INT230-6 treatment resulted in regression from baseline in all mice with
a complete regression of the large tumors in 40-80% of mice in the
INT230-6 arm alone or the arm with IgG control. The CD4 depleted mice had
a similar CR rate of 70%. However, in the CD8 depleted or the dual
depleted (CD4/8) mice, tumors regrew after initial regression and no CR
was observed. These results suggest that intratumoral administration of
INT230-6 in addition to improving the direct cytotoxicity of cisplatin
and vinblastine (data shown previously), also induces a potent CD8
tumor-specific T-cell response which participates in regression of the
injected lesion, and may be able to similarly target distant lesions such
as metastases.

