Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of estrogen receptor status on acquisition of
doxorubicin resistance in breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed invasive cancer in women.
Doxorubicin is being the mainstay treatment for solid cancers including
breast cancer. However, chemotherapy resistance, either innate or
acquired, is a major limitation in breast cancer treatment. The mechanism
of resistance as well as the role of estrogen receptor (ER) status in
doxorubicin resistance in breast cancer is not clear. Therefore,
objective of this study was to determine whether ER status influence the
doxorubicin resistance, and to further identify the molecular mechanism
in this process. To address this question, ER-positive MCF-7 and
ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines were given continuous
treatment of clinically relevant concentration of doxorubicin and the
pattern of resistance was monitored. Resistance was evaluated using
various parameters such as cell count, cell growth and cytotoxicity by
MTT assay, cell cycle analysis using flow cytometer. Expression of genes
and protein related to cell cycle and cell survival, drug transport, DNA
damage repair, metastasis/invasion and epigenetic regulatory complex were
measured by qRT- PCR and western blot respectively. Soft agar assay and
wound healing assay were performed to determine the anchorage-independent
growth and migration potential of resistance cells. Results of MTT assay,
and cell cycle revealed that ER-positive MCF-7 cells developed relatively
earlier and high level of resistance when compared to MDA-MB-231 cells.
This was further confirmed by additional features such as, cancer stem
cell markers, epithelial to mesenchymal transition, and increased
tumorigenicity in MCF-7 cells than in MDA-MB-231 cells during resistance
development. These changes were associated with alteration in drug
transporters, cell cycle genes and epigenetic regulatory proteins such as
HDAC1 and DNMT1. Pretreatment with demethylating agent
5-aza-deoxycytidine and HDAC inhibitor Trichostatin A significantly
resensitized resistance MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells to doxorubicin in
comparable to sensitive parental cells. However, this resenstitivty was
higher in MCF-7 cells when compared to MDA-MB-231 cells. In summary,
result of this study suggests that acquisition of doxorubicin resistance
depends on status of estrogen receptor in breast cancer cell lines.
Additionally, this differential resistance pattern could be due to
differences in epigenetic changes in these two types of breast cancers,
thus the acquired resistance could be potentially resensitized using
epigenetic therapy

