Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spatial and temporal clonal evolution during development of
metastatic urothelial carcinoma


Background: To better treat metastatic bladder cancer, it is important to
understand the clonal evolution in space and time and to identify
aggressive subclones giving rise to metastatic spread. Patients with
metastatic bladder cancer have a median survival of 3-6 months if
untreated and 13-14 months median survival if they receive adjuvant
chemotherapy. Targeted therapy using e.g. antibodies or small molecule
cancer drugs has not yet shown convincing results - likely due to lack of
genetic profiling prior inclusion to therapy. Here we performed a
thorough characterization of the spatial and temporal tumor heterogeneity
in three patients with metastatic bladder cancer by whole exome
sequencing (WES) of multiple small cellular regions from primary and
metastatic tumor biopsies.Methods: Biopsies from primary tumors, lymph
node metastases, and distant metastases from three patients were studied.
DNA was extracted from small cellular regions procured by
laser-microdissection or punctures along with matched germline DNA. WES
was performed using either Nextera Rapid Exome Capture or TruSeq Nano DNA
Library Prep combined with SeqCap EZ Exome Capture and sequenced on the
Illumina HiSeq2000 or NextSeq500 platforms.Results: Exome sequence
information from 24 cellular regions and germline DNA was obtained. The
average mean target coverage obtained for tumor samples was 68X(27-215X)
and germline was 167X(95-301X). Mutation calling using MuTect identified
256, 265 and 378 somatic SNVs in tumors from the three patients. We
observed low spatial intra-tumor heterogeneity but large inter-tumor
(primary vs metastasis) heterogeneity. We further identified 6-12 SNVs in
known disease driver genes per patient. Public (present in all sampled
regions) disease driver mutations could be identified in all cases,
however, over time regional driver mutations emerged, especially
following metastatic spread. We observed low allele frequencies across
all cellular regions, and based on this we hypothesize that the
distribution of the individual clones is intermixed. Further, we observed
a similar intermix of sub clones in the metastatic lesions, which may be
explained by metastases seeding as cell clusters or in individual clones
in parallel.Conclusions: The three patients studied showed low spatial
intra-tumor heterogeneity but large genetic diversity between primary
tumor and metastatic lesions. The differences between primary tumors and
metastatic lesions observed emphasize the challenges in designing
rational targeted therapy solely based on the genetic profile of the
primary tumor.

