Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene fusion database to create custom panels: Enabling detection
of fusion transcripts and gene expression assays


Gene fusions play an important role in tumorigenesis and are increasingly
recognized as important entities for the diagnosis and treatment of
hematological malignancies and solid tumors. Fusion events generate a
hybrid mRNA transcript comprising sequence from multiple otherwise
distinct genes. Oncogenic fusion events often involve tyrosine kinases or
transcription factors, leading to aberrant growth signaling, making these
events potentially attractive drug targets. For instance, targeted
therapies such as known tyrosine kinase inhibitors are currently approved
to treat ALK fusion positive Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinoma (NSCLC)
patients. Detection of known gene fusion events is an important part of
genomic characterization which can inform patient diagnosis. Current
methods for fusion detection include chromosome banding analysis (CBA),
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). New developments in next-generation
sequencing (NGS) enable the efficient and simultaneous assessment of
multiple gene fusion targets with high sensitivity. To enable researchers
to design their own custom panels and assess a set of gene fusions of
interest, we developed a comprehensive RNA gene fusion database. Oncology
researchers now have the capability to create custom panels from this
comprehensive database which includes over 1,000 well annotated and
optimized gene fusion assays and over 20,000 gene expressions assays.To
build this comprehensive gene fusion database, we identified breakpoint
information for 1,178 well annotated fusions described in publications
and in the COSMIC and NCBI databases. We prepared a target RNA sequence
for each breakpoint using transcript sequences from the Ensembl database.
We used a proprietary primer designer to generate candidates for each
fusion target amenable to the AmpliSeq product line requirements. Quality
control was performed throughout the design process to identify the best
primer set for each target, to avoid primers overlapping common germline
SNPs, potential primer/primer or primer/amplicon interactions, or
off-target or wild-type amplifications.With this comprehensive database
we provide a complete range of solutions available on ampliseq.com.
Making use of the AmpliSeq technology, researchers now have the
capability to create their own custom fusion panel and place the order
within an hour. These custom panels are used with AmpliSeq Library
reagents and Ion Torrent sequencing platforms for targeting
next-generation sequencing. The analysis solution is provided through the
Ion Reporter (IR) software package. Custom fusion panel workflows in IR
are used to analyze sequencing data coming from the custom panels, which
includes visualization of fusion transcripts and gene expression levels
in a heat map feature.

