Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restrictions on access to systemic therapy limit the application
of whole genome sequencing in clinical care


Background: Whole genome analyses have the potential to identify the full
landscape of activating and inactivating genomic abnormalities at work
within cancers, and can thus be used to provide rationales for selection
of treatment agents or clinical trials in a broad range of
patients.Patients & Methods: Eligible patients (pts) with metastatic
cancers were recruited within a general oncology practice across the
province of B.C., Canada. Each pt underwent a fresh tumor biopsy and a
blood sample and had comprehensive DNA (80X) and RNA sequencing. In-depth
bioinformatic analyses were preformed to identify genomic changes that
may be cancer drivers or therapeutically actionable targets. Aberrant
pathways were matched to drug databases and manual literature reviews
undertaken to identify drugs or clinical trials of potential utility for
the individual pt.Results: Between July 2012 - Oct 2015: 380 pts (358
adult + 22 peds) consented; 227 have completed whole DNA and RNA
sequencing and analysis to date (remainder ongoing). For this analysis,
data is available on 160 pts. Genome bioinformaticians assessed the
genomic data to be potentially druggable in all cases. Medical
Oncologists assessed this data to be directly clinically actionable in
135 (84%); the difference being that clinicians did not agree that some
putative druggable drivers (such as p53) or pathways with no current
drugs available (MMP, AURA, WNT) were actionable.Of the 135 cases, 58
(43%) pts received therapy based directly on this genomic information; 6
on a phase 1 clinical trial. The most common reasons for 77 pts defined
as actionable but who have not received genomically-informed therapy
were: drug only available on a clinical trial but trial not available to
pt - 22 (26%); drug approved but not available off label - 18 (23%); pt
presently on first-line therapy that is working - 14 (18%); or death/too
unwell 13 (17%). The limited availability of clinical trials was
primarily because of highly restrictive trials entry criteria, primarily
limiting patients to one primary tumour type or narrowly defined
biomarker entry criteria.The most commonly mutated cancer genes
identified by the genome analysts were: p53 as the predominant driver in
42%; APC in 16%; KRAS and PI3KCA mutations in 14%. Going forward it is
essential to distinguish what driver mutations might be clinically
actionable from those that are still only theoretically druggable; and
similarly learn to distinguish which targets are actionable but not truly
drivers.Conclusions: Genomic DNA and RNA sequencing data were found to be
clinically actionable in 84% of pts with advanced cancers in a population
cancer care setting. However, the ability to act on this information is
limited by the restrictive nature of clinical trials and the lack of
accessibility of off-label drugs despite an identified biomarker. As
genome sequencing becomes integrated into cancer management these drug
access issues need to be addressed.

