Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evaluation of the post-stroke cancer risk among post-menopausal
women: The Women's Health Initiative


Links between cancer history and incident stroke have been established,
such that 15% of cancer patients experience a stroke at some point during
their clinical course. However, we do not know whether stroke history is
associated with cancer risk, especially for those cancers with
overlapping risk factors with stroke. To address this, we used data from
the observational and clinical trial of the Women's Health Initiative (n
= 145,075), to test whether stroke history was associated with cancer
risk and tumor type, and whether variation in cancer risk and tumor type
exist by race/ethnicity. Time to incident cancer (in months) was
estimated with bivariate and multivariate adjusted cox proportional
hazards models, accounting for competing risks, comparing women with
incident or prevalent stroke to women without stroke at baseline or at
any point during follow-up, and models were stratified by race/ethnicity.
Women with a stroke history, compared to those without, had significant
differences in the following baseline characteristics: age, body mass
index, smoking status, hormone replacement therapy usage, hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia and diabetes, and differences were consistent among
race/ethnic groups. In unadjusted and adjusted competing risk models of
the overall sample, lower cancer risk was observed for women who had a
prior stroke, compared to those with no stroke history (adjusted HR:
0.81; 95% CI: 0.75, 0.88). In race-stratified models, Non-Hispanic White
(NHW) women experienced significantly lower risk of cancer following
stroke, compared to those with no stroke history (adjusted HR: 0.81; 95%
Confidence Interval: 0.74-0.89), and the magnitude of the association was
similar, although not significant, for African American (AA) and Other
racial/ethnic groups. The associations with stroke were stronger for
African American women with invasive breast (p = 0.02), lung (p = 0.04),
and other (p = 0.001) cancers, compared to NHW women. The results of the
current study suggest that overall, women have lower cancer risk
post-stroke, but that AA women, compared to their NHW counterparts, have
higher risk of certain types of cancers after stroke. Future studies
should investigate the mechanisms underlying the lower cancer risk among
all stroke survivors, as well as examine why AA women develop certain
tumors more often than NHW women.

