Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling for cancer classification in circulating
tumor cells


Background: Enumeration and molecular characterization of circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) offer a non-invasive method for tumor analysis,
particularly in cases where the biopsy is difficult to obtain or has been
exhausted by conventional diagnostic methods. The 92-gene assay
(CancerTYPE ID, bioTheranostics, Inc.) is a clinically-validated cancer
classifier based on the collective expression of 87 informative genes,
many of which are involved in lineage commitment and signal transduction.
The objective of this study was to determine the feasibility of a
blood-based application using differential gene expression.Methods:
Technical feasibility studies for cancer cell enrichment and RNA
viability were conducted by purifying cancer cell lines that were spiked
into donor blood using a microfluidic chip (Celsee PREP100 system, Celsee
Diagnostics) followed by immunodepletion of leukocytes. Quantitative
RT-PCR and immunoflourescence were performed on cells harvested at
different steps of the purification workflow. Quantitative RT-PCR on
individual genes specific to each lineage compartment was used to
estimate cell types and cell numbers that were co-purified by the
workflow. Gene expression was evaluated by the 92-gene assay.Results: An
integrated workflow was established that allows for the molecular
characterization of cancer cells purified from blood. Cell enrichment on
the microfluidic chip followed by purification using immunodepletion
resulted in efficient recovery (> 80% of input cells) and viable RNA from
cancer cells spiked into whole blood. A key result of this study was the
demonstration that the level of cancer-specific gene expression in
purified samples was similar to the level of expression from an
equivalent number of unspiked cancer cells suggests that significant cell
loss does not occur during the purification workflow. A comparison of
gene expression profiles from purified and mixed cell populations allowed
for the identification of subsets of genes that are differentially
expressed in cancer cells compared with leukocytes.Conclusion: A
functional workflow with viable RNA and efficient recovery of cancer
cells that are within the technical specifications of the 92-gene assay
was established. Findings from this feasibility study are fundamental to
the potential for CTC-based cancer classification.

