Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DRAM1 regulates EMT of lung cancer A549 cells via SQSTM1/p62 in
vitro


Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been linked to the
regulation of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) progression, migration,
invasion, metastasis, and chemoresistance as well. Recent studies showed
that autophagy was a novel target to mediate EMT of cancer cells through
regulating the migration and invasion in cancer. The DNA Damage-Regulated
Autophagy Modulator 1 (DRAM1) is an evolutionarily conserved
transmembrane protein and localizes predominantly to lysosomes, while
also colocalizing with the autophagosome marker LC3. Previous
investigation discovered that DRAM1 played an important role in
regulating autophagy, inducing apoptosis of NSCLC cells. However, the
function and mechanism of DRAM1 mediated autophagy in regulating EMT in
NSCLC remains poorly understood. In this study, transforming growth
factor- (TGF-) and starvation were employed to induce autophagy for
investigating EMT in NSCLC A549 cells. The results showed that after
exposure to TGF- 24h, the protein levels of DRAM1, autophagy marker
SQSTM1/p62, LC3I/II and EMT marker vimentin significantly increased while
another EMT marker E-cadherin protein decreased obviously compared with
the control by western blot. Also the similar results were observed after
starvation 48h in this study. To further illustrate the role of DRAM1 in
regulation of autophagy and EMT, wildtype DRAM1 overexpression plasmid
and DRAM1 siRNA was transfected into A549 cells respectively to check the
autophagy markers and EMT markers expression, meanwhile wound healing
test and cell invasion transwell chamber test were assayed after the gene
manipulation. These experiments results demonstrated that DRAM1
overexpression dramatically increased the SQSTM1/p62, LC3I/II and
vimentin protein levels and inhibited the expression of E-cadherin,
promoting the migration and invasion abilities of A549 cells. Conversely,
down-regulation of DRAM1 restrained SQSTM1/p62, LC3 I/II and vimentin
protein levels and elevated the expression of E-cadherin, leading to the
inhibition of migration and invasion abilities of A549 cells.
Interestingly, our further study showed that after p62 siRNA transfected
into A549 cells E-cadherin upregulated while vimentin reduced compared to
the control group. Consistently, knockdown of p62 suppressed the
migration and invasion abilities of A549 cells and down regulated the
expression of twist, which is an EMT related transcription factor. These
data suggested that DRAM1 played an important role in regulating the EMT
of lung cancer A549 cells through SQSTM1/p62 modulating, which might be a
novel potential target for lung cancer treatment.

