Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of intratumor heterogeneity with genetic and
epigenetic aberrations during colorectal cancer evolution


[background] Intratumor heterogeneity (ITH) is presumably generated by
branching clonal evolution of cancer cells. Recently, a multiregional
sequencing approach, which sequences DNA sampled from geographically
separated regions of a single tumor, has revealed branched evolution and
ITH. In this study, we present genetic and epigenetic analysis of ITH in
a series of nine colorectal cancers[material and method] We conducted
analysis of samples from geographically separated regions from nine
colorectal tumors. From each of the nine tumor, we obtained 5-21
multiregional samples, which were 75 samples in total, together with 9
paired normal mucosa samples. For two cases, samples from liver
metastases were obtained. We performed exome sequencing and copy number
(CN), methylation, and mRNA expression array profiling.[Result] Each of
the multiregional mutation profiles harbored founder and progressor
mutations; founder mutations are shared by all regions while progressor
mutations are not. We found that mutations in well-known driver genes
such as APC, KRAS, and FBWX7 were acquired as founder mutations, while
mutations in PIK3CA recurrently occurred as progressor mutations,
suggesting that PIK3CA mutations are a late event in the evolution of
colorectal cancer. We counted each category of mutation and then
identified a correlation between the number of founder mutations and the
age of the patients. Our analysis showed that C > T transitions at CpG
sites are more prominent in founder mutations than in progressor
mutations. Then, the multiregional CN profiles showed that amplifications
of 7p, 13q, 10q, 20p, and 20q frequently occurred across all samples in
multiple tumors, namely as founder CN alterations. Finally, our data
showed that hypermethylations in CpG islands were more prominent in
founder methylations than in progressor methylations, suggesting that CpG
island hypermethylations mainly occur in the early phase of colorectal
cancer evolution.[Conclusion] In this study, our integrated analysis
revealed not only extensive ITH, but also the evolutionary histories of
the nine tumors. In particular, by focusing on founder and progressor
mutations, we identified clues for decoding the life history of the
tumors.

