Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-aza-2-Deoxycytidine induces cellular senescence in non-small
cell lung cancer


Background: Lung cancer is one of the refractory malignancies and the
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Although prognosis of
lung cancer was improved by the anticancer drugs and molecular targeted
therapies, the results are not sufficient. Cellular senescence is
irreversible cell cycle arrest. The drug-dependent induction of cellular
senescence in neoplastic cells is considered an important tumor
suppressive mechanism. 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) causes cellular
senescence in solid tumors. Hypermethylation of CpG islands is well known
as a major inactivation mechanism of tumor suppressor genes such as
E-cadherin. Loss of E-cadherin confers a poor prognosis in lung cancer
patients and is associated with in vitro resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitors. This study was designed to assess the
relationship of E-cadherin expression cellular senescence induced by
5-aza-dC in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines.Materials and
Methods: We investigated two NSCLC cell lines; H1299 and A549 reported
they have hypermethylation in promoter lesion of E-cadherin. There are
two clinically approved DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTi),
5-aza-dC and 5-azacytidine (5-aza-CR). We also used Sodium Butyrate
(NaB). We treated them with each drug for 120 hours. Flow cytometry
analysis, immunofluorescence staining for E-cadherin and senescence
associated beta-galactosidase assays and immunoblotting for senescence
related proteins assessed NSCLC cell outgrowth and morphology.Results:
Both cell lines with 5-aza-dC or NaB treatment changed morphology and
increased size but decreased cell numbers. 5-aza-CR causes apoptosis in
both cell lines. In A549, E-cadherin expression increased after 5-aza-dC
treatment. There is no E-cadherin expression in H1299 with or without
treatment. Both cell lines with 5-aza-dC were positive for
Senescence-associated beta-galactosidase staining, H3K9me3 and
gamma-H2AX.Conclusion: Taking together these findings strongly suggest
the ability of 5-aza-dC to induce cellular senescence in NSCLC cells. The
cellular senescence induced by a 5-aza-dC approach has to be considered a
therapeutic option for NSCLC and an important phenomenon to further
investigate in the next future.

