Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological and genetic dissection of one carbon pathway
provides novel insights into generation, transformation and utilization
of one carbon units


Tumorigenesis, tumor progression and metastasis require metabolic
rewiring to support the need for rapid biomass accumulation, reduction of
oxidative stress and epigenetic remodeling. One carbon (1C) metabolism
provides essential substrates for such metabolic rewiring and enzymes of
1C pathway are frequently overexpressed in tumors consistent with the
increased demands on these biochemical pathways. While 1C pathway
modulators such as antifolates are efficacious, the clinical utility of
antifolates is limited by their inability to distinguish between the
metabolic requirements of proliferating cells vs transformed cancer
cells. Precise targeting of 1C metabolism in transformed cells can
potentially lead to highly effective and safe anticancer therapies.The
enzymes of 1C metabolism are organized in a spatially distinct set of
parallel reactions in the cytosol and the mitochondrion. The core 1C
machinery extracts 1C units from donors such as serine onto a folate
backbone. The oxidation state of the folate associated 1C unit can then
be manipulated according to the needs of the 1C utilization reactions.
The quantitative contribution of cytosolic vs mitochondrial pathway,
regulation of 1C metabolism and biochemical basis of partitioning of 1C
units between different downstream reactions is not fully understood. To
understand the role of the mitochondrial and cytosolic pathways in the
generation and transformation of 1C units, we generated potent and
selective inhibitors of MethyleneTetraHydroFolate Dehydrogenase Type 2
(MTHFD2) and dual inhibitors of Serine HydroxyMethyl Transferase (SHMT) 1
and 2. We also generated knockout cells lacking various enzymes of
mitochondrial and cytosolic 1C pathway. The combined
pharmacological-genetic approach allowed quantitative dissection of the
contribution of cytosolic and mitochondrial pathways. Interestingly,
genetic disruption of the mitochondrial pathway dramatically increased
sensitivity of cells to inhibition of SHMT1 while deletion of SHMT1
increased the sensitivity to MTHFD2 inhibitors suggesting interdependence
and flexibility between the mitochondrial and cytosolic 1C pathway arms.
The effects of 1C inhibitors on cell viability could be rescued by other
1C donors as well as 1C pathway products, further informing on the
critical products of 1C metabolism and potential escape mechanisms.Our
observations show that cancer cells can utilize multiple routes to
generate 1C units and identify the contribution of specific enzymes.
Pharmacological inhibition of some of these enzymes strongly affects cell
viability and combination of inhibitors of cytosolic and mitochondrial 1C
enzymes in the same or different molecules can be particularly effective.
In addition, genetic lesions in the mitochondrial or cytosolic 1C arms
can also sensitize tumors to inhibitors of specific 1C pathway enzymes.

