Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis suppressors regulate the tumor microenvironment by
blocking recruitment of prometastatic TAMs


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients have the highest risk of
recurrence and metastasis. Because they cannot be treated with targeted
therapies, and many do not respond to chemotherapy, they represent a
clinically underserved group. While physiological inhibitors of
metastasis (metastasis suppressors) play key roles in regulating tumor
growth, invasion and metastasis, their role in regulating the tumor
microenvironment and immune system is unknown. We hypothesized that the
metastasis suppressor Raf Kinase Inhibitory Protein (RKIP) regulates
stromal cells, which then affect tumor invasiveness.Using
species-specific RNAseq we determined that expression of RKIP in tumors
markedly reduces the number and metastatic potential of infiltrating
TAMs. While TAMs isolated from TNBC xenografts drive in vitro invasion,
RKIP+ derived TAMs did not drive invasion and had decreased secretion of
pro-metastatic factors including SLPI, OPN, MMP-12, Galectin-3, VEGF-A,
VEGF-D, TNFR2, and PGRN. We determined that RKIP regulates TAM
recruitment by blocking HMGA2, which activates CCL5 expression. CCL5
rescued pro-metastatic TAM infiltration as well as tumor intravasation.
We additionally showed that factors decreased in RKIP-derived TAMs were
restored in CCL5-derived TAMs. CCL5 derived TAMs were also able to
promote metastasis when co-injected with MDA-MB-231 tumors. These tumor
cells demonstrated permanent increases in both growth and invasive
potential after co-injection with highly pro-metastatic CCL5 derived
TAMs.To determine the clinical utility of these TAM genes we combined
their expression with RKIP signaling in the tumor to create a signature
that strikingly separates TNBC patients based on outcome. Our results
demonstrate for the first time that metastasis suppressors can regulate
the microenvironment, regulating invasion through TAMs. Our results also
suggest aggressive triple negative breast cancers could be controlled by
attacking CCL5 derived TAMs crucial for promoting metastasis.Funded by:
GM087630, CA184494, and CA192780

