Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy resistance in pediatric neuroblastoma is associated
with reduced ER-mitochondria tethering


Development of multidrug resistance poses a persistent problem in cancer
treatment, yet its underlying causes remain obscure. A principal role for
mitochondria has been sought as this organelle integrates diverse stress
signals to impact cell fate. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria
(mito) interact at specialized coupling sites called
mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAMs). MAMs serve as micro-domains
for the transfer of essential calcium and lipid signals to mitochondria
and regulate apoptotic sensitivity. Tightening of ER-mito tethering
constitutes an early response to cellular stress leading to apoptosis,
and alterations in ER-mito tethering have been implicated in diabetes and
neurodegeneration, suggesting that the deregulation of this process may
have broad relevance in disease. Here, we define a novel mechanism for
chemotherapy resistance due to selection for reduced ER-mito tethering.
Most high-risk neuroblastoma patients initially respond to chemotherapy
before relapsing with lethal therapy resistant disease acquired during
the course of intensive multimodality treatment. We obtained isogenic
neuroblastoma cell lines from the same 7 patients both at the time of
diagnosis (chemosensitive) and at the time of relapse (chemoresistant).
We evaluated mitochondrial biomass (citrate synthase activity), mtDNA
content (qPCR), and mtDNA sequence (Affymetrix MitoChip v2.0) but
identified no changes correlated with acquired resistance. Electron
microscopy image analyses of ER-mito interfaces revealed that tumors at
relapse contain up to 70% fewer ER-mito tether complexes than their
matched at-diagnosis tumors, as confirmed by IB for organelle-specific
proteins. Mitochondria isolated from all 7 post-relapse tumors show
attenuated cytochrome c release in response to tBid and Bim BH3 peptide,
terminal death effectors downstream of most therapeutic stress. This
attenuated mitochondrial response can be phenocopied by limited
protelolysis of mitochondria to reduce ER-mito tethers. Reduced
mitochondrial apoptotic signaling in post-relapse tumors correlates
directly with chemoresistance (up to 800-fold) across diverse agent
classes. To functionally validate this relationship, Cyclosporine A
(CsA), a cyclophilin D inhibitor, was used in tumors at diagnosis to
reduce ER-mito tethering. This led to attenuated apoptotic responses in
isolated mitochondria, and increased tumor cell IC50 to diverse
chemotherapeutics, partially phenocopying the therapy resistant state.
Our findings support a novel model of differential apoptotic signaling in
therapy resistant cells that relies on the altered proximity and
interactions of the mitochondria with ER that may be harnessed to design
more effective anti-cancer drug therapies.

