Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo pooled shRNA library screens identify cancer genes driving
epithelial ovarian cancer


Background & Aims: Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the 5th leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the USA. Most cases of EOC are
diagnosed at an advanced stage with peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC), which
seriously affects mortality. To identify therapeutic targets for EOC, we
performed in vivo loss of function screens using pooled shRNA libraries.
Methods: To discover tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) involved in PC
formation, the human EOC cell line, SKOV3, was transduced with a pooled
shRNA library containing 42,450 shRNAs targeting 7490 druggable genes.
Transduced cells that were highly evasive as measured in Boyden chamber
assays were then injected intraperitonealy into female nude mice.
Eighteen PC tumors that developed were then sequenced and enriched shRNAs
identified. SKOV3 cells transduced with the druggable shRNA library were
also injected into nude mice without further in vitro manipulation and 12
PC tumors sequenced in order to identify potential oncogenes as measured
by shRNA depletion. Results: Enrichment screening of invasive cells
identified 34 potential TSGs targeted by two or more shRNAs. Knockdown of
the two most highly ranked genes, RAD51C and TXN, by individual shRNAs,
was subsequently shown to accelerate PC formation following
intraperitoneal injection of transduced SKOV3 cells. Individual knockdown
of these two genes was subsequently shown to increase cell invasion in
Boyden chamber assays and adhesion to the extracellular matrix in vitro.
These results suggest that RAD51C and TXN are suppressors of human EOC
metastasis through their negative regulation of cell adhesion and cell
invasion. Finally, shRNA depletion screening identified 17 potential
oncogenes. These genes included three known oncogenes, ERBB2, RAF1 and
FOS, in addition to eight genes that showed a significant positive
correlation between their mRNA levels and poor patient survival in human
EOCs. Knockdown of the second ranked oncogene, KPNB1, significantly
decreased in vitro cell proliferation in multiple human EOC cell lines,
suggesting that KPNB1 may be a new potential therapeutic target of human
EOC. KPNB1 knockdown in SKOV3 cells downregulated AURKA, MYBL2, CCNE1 and
CDK2 mRNA levels, suggesting that KPNB1 may function by positively
regulating the cell cycle. Conclusion: In vivo pooled shRNA library
screens are a powerful tool for identifying novel cancer genes and new
potential drug targets in human epithelial ovarian cancer.

