Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-12 gene therapy in combination with bevacizumab and
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin for treatment of disseminated ovarian
cancer


Despite recent improvements in treatment options for ovarian cancer
patients, notably, the approval of using bevacizumab in combination with
chemotherapies including pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD), this
disease is still the most deadly of all gynecological malignancies
requiring new and novel therapeutics. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a highly
active cytokine that can induce a potent anti-cancer immunity mediated
through activation of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, natural killer cell
proliferation, and secretion of interferon-. We are developing an IL-12
based gene therapy for the treatment of gynecological malignancies that
have spread into the peritoneal cavity. Our approach utilizes IL-12
plasmid (pIL-12) formulated with the PPC delivery system, which is
comprised of a low molecular weight polyethylenimine covalently linked to
polyethyleneglycol and cholesterol.Previously we have shown in a mouse
model of disseminated ovarian cancer efficacy of a treatment regimen of
pIL-12/PPC used in combination with paclitaxel and carboplatin. The
combination treatment significantly improved survival compared to either
pIL-12/PPC alone or chemotherapy alone and demonstrated the feasibility
of using an IL-12 immunotherapy in combination with cytotoxic
chemotherapies to achieve additive therapeutic effects. Results from a
Phase I clinical trial in platinum resistant patients have shown that
intraperitoneal delivery of pIL-12/PPC in combination with PLD produced
an overall clinical benefit of 57.1% (PR = 21.4%; SD = 35.7%) in patients
with measurable disease. The highest percentage of PRs were found at the
highest dose level (28.6%) along with highest percentage of patients
achieving SD (57.1%).Here we describe studies evaluating the combination
of pIL-12/PPC with bevacizumab and PLD. For these studies 5,000,000 human
SKOV3 cells were implanted into the peritoneal cavity of
immunocompromised Hsd:Athymic Nude-Foxn1nu mice. Treatment with
pIL-12/PPC alone and bevacizumab alone resulted in a 50% and a 39%
reduction of animals with visible tumors at the end of the study.
Combining pIL-12/PPC + bevacizumab improved the response to 78% of
animals with no visible tumors. Further, combining pIL-12/PPC +
bevacizumab + PLD resulted in a >98% decrease in tumor burden in animals
compared to controls and 92% decrease in tumor burden compared to animals
treated only with bevacizumab + PLD. All treatments were well tolerated
and analysis of serum chemistries and hematology showed normal ranges of
all parameters examined for all groups. There were no significant
differences in animal weights between groups during the experiment.
Together these results suggest synergistic efficacies can be achieved by
combining a novel pIL-12/PPC immunotherapy with anti-angiogenesis
therapies and cytotoxic chemotherapies in disseminated ovarian cancer.

