Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen insensitivity syndrome germline loss-of-function
mutations in the androgen receptor that acquire somatic gain-of-function
in prostate cancer


Genomic alterations in the androgen receptor (AR) commonly occur in
patients with advanced prostate cancer resistant to androgen deprivation
therapies. While still retaining androgen sensitivity, recurring AR
mutations become drivers of antiandrogen resistance by causing
alterations in the ligand binding pocket that enables one specific
antiandrogen to bind that particular mutant receptor in an agonist
conformation, thereby aberrantly activating AR transcriptional activity.
We chronically treated antiandrogen-sensitive preclinical prostate cancer
models (LNCaP-AR and CWR22Pc) with antiandrogens followed by
high-throughput sequencing of the AR exons 2-8 to search for novel
mutations that may be associated with antiandrogen resistance. The
mutation A597T in the DNA binding domain was found in four LNCaP-AR
xenograft tumors from mice receiving enzalutamide or ARN-509, while the
ligand binding domain mutation P893S was uncovered in CWR22Pc cells
treated in vitro with combined androgen depletion and bicalutamide.
Recent whole exome sequencing studies of clinical prostate cancer
identified single patients with each of these mutations at high allele
frequencies and without concurrent AR amplification (www.cBioPortal.org).
A597T occurred in a Gleason 6 primary tumor, whereas P893S was found in a
patient with metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer who had
received bicalutamide during the course of treatment. Remarkably, both
A597T and P893S were earlier reported as germline loss-of-function
mutations in patients with androgen insensitivity syndrome. Using an AR
reporter assay in AR-null cells coupled with overexpression of these AR
mutants, we confirmed that P893S is not activated by the androgen
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), but nevertheless is potently stimulated by
bicalutamide. In silico modeling showed that in contrast to the wild-type
AR, cofactor-recruiting helix 12 of the ligand binding domain of P893S
substantially drifted away from an agonist conformation when bound to DHT
but was able to adopt the active conformation when simulated with
bicalutamide. Importantly, overexpression of AR-P893S in CWR22Pc cells
conferred bicalutamide resistance in vivo. These findings highlight an
unexpected contextual element to the function of AR mutants, and suggest
that rare or private AR mutations may nonetheless act as drivers of
clinical progression.

