Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of cabozantinib, a MET and VEGFR2 inhibitor, on
tumor metabolism and efficacy in a colorectal cancer patient-derived
tumor explant model


Background:Anti-angiogenic therapy is commonly used for the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). Although patients derive some
clinical benefit, treatment resistance inevitably occurs. Upregulation of
MET in response to anti-VEGF therapy may play an essential role in
treatment resistance. Based on this premise, we investigated
cabozantinib, an inhibitor of kinases including MET and VEGFR2, in mCRC
patient-derived tumor explant (PDTX) models. Based on initial
observations of anti-tumor activity, we hypothesized that cabozantinib
may alter tumor metabolism concurrent with its antitumor effects, and
compared its efficacy with regorafenib in our models.Material and
Methods:Ten CRC PDTX models were treated with cabozantinib (30 mg/kg
daily) or regorafenib (10 mg/kg daily) and treatment responses were
determined after 28 days. The tumor growth inhibition index (TGII) was
calculated to compare treatment effects on tumor growth between
cabozantinib and regorafenib. RNA Seq was used to assess gene expression
and pathways modulated by cabozantinib treatment. Proteins involved in
metabolism and autophagy were evaluated by immunoblotting at day 3, 7 and
28. The effects of cabozantinib on tumor glucose metabolism were
investigated by 18FDG-PET at baseline, 7 and 28 days following treatment.
Lastly, combination effects of cabozantinib and an ULK1 inhibitor, an
autophagy inhibitor, were evaluated on the HCT116 cell line by a
clonogenic assay.Results:Cabozantinib (average TGII: 3.202) demonstrated
antitumor effects among all 10 CRC explants that compared favorably to
regorafenib (average TGII: 48.48). In addition, cabozantinib
significantly reduced glucose uptake measured by 18FDG-PET at days 7 and
28. A comprehensive pathway analysis using RNA Seq post-cabozantinib
treatment revealed a significant reduction in pyruvate metabolism and the
TCA cycle in the most sensitive tumors. Protein analyses showed
downregulation of hexokinase 1 and pyruvate dehydrogenase and a marked
increase in many components of oxidative phosphorylation and autophagy
(LC3 and Beclin) at day 7 and 28 following cabozantinib treatment. The
combination of an ULK1 inhibitor and cabozantinib enhanced the activity
of cabozantinib in the HCT116 CRC cell line.Conclusions:Cabozantinib
showed significant antitumor activity compared to regorafenib in our CRC
PDTX models. Alterations in glucose metabolism and autophagy were
identified in cabozantinib sensitive tumors, suggesting that a shift in
cellular metabolism facilitates the survival of tumor cells following
treatment. The combination effect of cabozantinib and an ULK1 inhibitor
supports the hypothesis that induction of autophagy may be a mechanism of
cabozantinib resistance. These findings support further evaluation of
cabozantinib in patients with mCRC.Acknowledgements: Exelixis for
providing cabozantinib.

