Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoting TRAIL apoptosis signaling using
17-beta-hydroxywithanolides


We have previously reported that withanolide E (WE), a steroidal lactone
from Physalis peruviana, was highly active in sensitizing various human
carcinoma cell lines to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. Treatment of cancer
cells with WE induced a reduction in the levels of the antiapoptotic
proteins cFLIPL and cFLIPS, resulting in an increased activation of
caspase-8 on subsequent TRAIL binding to its death receptors DR4 or DR5.
The reduction in cFLIPL and cFLIPS was due to their destabilization and
increased degradation by the proteasome. Interestingly, WE (a
17-beta-hydoxywithanolide, 17-BHW) was a far superior TRAIL sensitizer
than more widely studied withaferin A (WFA) and its analogues, which lack
the 17-beta-hydroxy group and bear an opposite side chain orientation,
exhibit more promiscuous reactivity and are much more directly toxic to
cells. Therefore, over 30 natural and semi-synthetic 17-BHWs were
evaluated for their ability to promote death ligand-mediated cancer cell
death. The 17-BHWs used in this work were obtained by the application of
an efficient method of plant biomass production involving our innovative
and patented soil-less aeroponic cultivation of P. crassifolia and P.
peruviana and by chemical modification of natural withanolides produced
by these plants. Our studies identified several 17-BHWs that were 4-8
fold more potent than WE in sensitizing the renal carcinoma cells ACHN to
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. These more active 17-BHWs were also more
efficient at reducing cellular levels of cFLIPL and cFLIPS and enhancing
caspase-8 activation. Preliminary structure activity relationship (SAR)
studies suggested that the enone moiety in ring A was essential for
activity. In addition acetoxylation at C-18, an alpha orientation of the
lactone group and the double bond at C-24(25) of the lactone ring played
important roles in determining the activity of 17-BHWs as TRAIL
sensitizers. This suggests that the 17-BHW scaffold is amenable to
optimization by a medicinal chemistry approach, which could lead to the
identification of highly active natural product-based sensitizers of
cancer cells to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. The cellular molecular
target(s) of active 17-BHWs are currently under further
investigation.Funded by FNLCR Contract HHSN261200800001E

