Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting mTOR pathway in rare and recalcitrant tumors


INTRODUCTION: Genomic alterations affecting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway are
commonly seen among various cancer types [Kandoth 2013]. The objective of
this study is to determine the clinical utility of using comprehensive
genomic profiling (CGP) in the course of clinical care to identify
genomic alterations affecting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in patients with
either rare or refractory cancers.METHODS: CGP was performed by
Foundation Medicine, Inc. Genomic alterations were reviewed by members of
an institutional molecular tumor board (MTB). Consensus recommendations
on genomically targeted, clinically relevant FDA-approved, on- and
off-label therapies and clinical trials were sent to the treating
physician for their consideration as treatment alternatives. Ninety-seven
tumors with alterations in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway were
analyzed.RESULTS: Thirty-three patients with cancers that were either
rare or refractory to standard therapy received drug targeting the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Age range was 18-78 years old. Thirteen patients
were non-Hispanic White, three non-Hispanic Black, two Hispanic and one
Asian. Tumors tested included 6 gynecologic, 5 renal, 2 sarcomas and one
each of pancreatic, melanoma, T cell lymphoma, bladder, adrenal, and
skin-not melanoma. Treatment outcomes were available for 19/33 patients
(one patient died soon after presentation at the MTB and could not be
treated). Seven (37%) patients derived clinical benefit from a drug
targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway; the duration of clinical benefit
ranged from 90-245 days. The clinical benefit was not tumor type specific
and included two endometrial tumors, 2 renal tumors, one sarcoma, one
adrenal paraganglioma and one micropapillary urothelial carcinoma. Eight
patients have not been started on PI3K/AKT/mTOR targeted therapy
yet.CONCLUSION: These data suggest that tumors with alterations in the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway may respond to targeted therapy regardless of tumor
of origin.

