Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemokine CXCL12 promotes vascular compensation in antiangiogenic
resistance through CXCR7 in glioblastoma


Introduction: While antiangiogenic therapy has become an integral part of
therapy for malignancy, it has failed to result in a proven survival
benefit for glioblastoma (GBM). Recent studies have suggested a role for
the chemokine CXCL12 in both de novo and acquired antiangiogenic
resistance. To assess the impact of CXCL12 signaling on the vasculature
and its ability to recruit progenitor cells, we combined a fluorescent
chimeric mouse model and in vivo imaging to capture the chronological
interactions among tumor cells (RFP), circulating BMDCs (GFP) and the
cerebral vessels (FITC dextran) during tumor growth.Methods: For chimeric
mice, bone marrow from Tie2_GFP mice were transplanted to athymic nude
mice after 6Gy irradiation. After 6 weeks U251 glioma cells were
stereotactically injected into the brain cortex, followed by installation
of a cranial window. In vivo imaging was performed weekly (before, during
and after treatment) on a confocal microscope. 3D projected images were
processed for the determination of tumor and vasculature characteristics.
To validate the role of two CXCL12 receptors we used sunitinib (VEGFR
inhibitor), AMD3100 (CXCR4 inhibitor), CCX662 (CXCR7 inhibitor) alone or
in combination.Results: Inhibition of VEGFR by sunitinib leads not only
to a significant decrease in the number of small vessels as previously
published, but also a statistically significant increase in size of the
large vessels. Addition of CXCR7 inhibition to VEGFR inhibition prevented
this adaptive vasculomegaly, but did not impact the loss of smaller
vessels. In turn, CXCR4 inhibition had no effect on the vasculature.
Further, CXCR7 inhibition decreases the number of BMDCs within
vasculature, while CXCR4 inhibition decreased the number of cells
recruited outside the vessels and into the tumor itself. These tumoral
BMDCs are Iba1 positive and suggest a role of CXCR4 in recruitment of
microglia. 3D analysis of cranial window images showed that while VEGFR
inhibition slows tumor growth, and inhibition of CXCR4 or CXCR7 was not
additive to this effect. In fact, inhibition of CXCR4 resulted in
significant increase in tumor size perhaps through and impact on
infiltration.Conclusions: Our results suggests a compensatory response of
vasculomegaly to trimming of small vessels by sunitinib may be mediated
by CXCL12 in a CXCR7 dependent process. CXCR7's effect on the number of
BMDCs within the vessels suggests that the impact on vasculomegaly may be
due to recruitment of endothelial progenitor cells into vessels or their
survival following recruitment. In turn, VEGFR inhibition affects
recruitment of progenitor cells outside the vessels in a CXCR4 dependent
fashion. We propose that CXCL12 receptors, CXCR4 and CXCR7, have unique
roles in response to loss of VEGF signaling and subsequent hypoxia.
Further studies into the interplay between VEGFR, CXCL12, compensatory
vasculomegaly, and vascular cooption are needed.

