Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global demethylation with decitabine increases DNA repair and
sensitizes melanoma to carboplatin


Global genome repair (GGR) is critical for recognizing DNA damage by the
chemotherapy agent carboplatin, and triggering apoptotic signalling. XPC
is a critical gene in the GGR pathway but in melanoma XPC is not induced
in response to carboplatin resulting in extreme resistance. Despite low
global methylation levels across the melanoma genome, there is evidence
methylation plays a role in suppression of XPC. 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
(decitabine), is a DNA methyltransferases inhibitor used as a
chemotherapy agent that results in global loss of methylation and
re-expression of silenced genes. We hypothesised that restoring
expression of XPC in melanoma using decitabine could overcome resistance
to carboplatin. To confirm low XPC in melanoma tumour tissue, transcript
and protein expression from 196 advanced primary and metastatic melanomas
was quantified and compared to normal tissue and other cancer types.
Melanoma cell lines with low baseline XPC were treated with
pharmacological doses of decitabine or carboplatin alone, or in
sequential combination. XPC transcript, apoptosis, proliferation,
senescence, global and CpG island shore demethylation was quantified. XPC
transcript and protein was low in a proportion of melanoma tumours and
expression correlated with overall survival. Treatment of melanoma cells
with carboplatin alone did not significantly induce XPC expression or
increase apoptosis in the majority of melanoma cell lines. Decitabine
decreased global methylation (average 44.67% decrease) and increased XPC
expression (0.9-3.0 fold increase). Hotspots of demethylation after
decitabine treatment in the XPC CpG island shore were detected and could
be responsible for the increase in XPC expression. When carboplatin was
administered following decitabine, a greater XPC induction (1.5-7.6 fold
increase) occurred with significantly increased levels of apoptosis
(1.6-2.2 fold increase). This was coupled with a decreased proliferation
and the presence of markers of senescence. Knocking down XPC expression
with siRNA significantly reduced the effects of combination treatment.
The outcomes of this study are evidence that silencing of XPC by
methylation is a mechanism of carboplatin resistance in melanoma and
sequential combination of decitabine followed by carboplatin may be used
to restore GGR function and overcome resistance.

