Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long non-coding RNA CAI2 is a tumor suppressor gene


We have recently reported on the discovery of a long non-coding RNA
imbedded in intron 2 of the p16/ARF (CDKN2A) locus at 9p21. CAI2 is a
non-conserved, RNA pol II regulated gene with whose expression is highly
correlated with parent genes p16 and ARF. However, CAI2 is expressed in
cell lines deleted for p16, ARF and even p15, and is expressed cell lines
epigenetically silenced for p16 and/or ARF. Furthermore, treatment of p16
and/or ARF epigenetically silenced cell lines with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidin
allows p16 and/or ARF re-expression while having no influence on CAI2,
confirming independent regulation. Speculating, therefore, that the
regulatory region of CAI2 lies imbedded in the non-transcribed portion of
intron 2, we created expression constructs of the immediate 5 region of
CAI2. However, consistent with a bioinformatical analysis, no regulatory
activity was detected. This suggests that this non-coding RNA is
non-traditionally controlled by remote but yet to be identified
regulatory element(s) and/or mechanisms. By colony formation assay, CAI2
overexpression can inhibit cell growth in the p16 intact HEK293T and
SK-BR-3 breast cancer cell lines. RNA Immunoprecipitation has revealed
that CAI2 interacts with H3K27me3, a recruiter of Polycomb Repressive
Complex 1 (PRC1) that modulates chromatin structure and gene expression,
and BMI1, a PRC1 complex protein that is a negative regulator of p16.
Consistent with this effect, CAI2 can induce p16 expression in HEK293T
cells, and this was hypothesized to be the mechanism by which CAI2
inhibits cell growth. However, we now show that CAI2 can also inhibit
colony formation in the p16/ARF deleted MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cell lines. Interestingly however, CAI2 overexpression had little to no
effect on 2D cultures of HEK293T or MCF7 cells including DNA synthesis,
XTT metabolic activity or cell count.As CAI2 is imbedded in the p16/ARF
gene, standard siRNAs may inadvertently influence p16 and/or ARF
expression due to actions on their pre-mRNAs. Therefore, we created a
series of partial CAI2 knockouts using CRISPR technology and compared
their growth by colony formation assay. Notably, clones containing a
partial knockout of the 5 region of CAI2 proliferated faster than mock
transfected clones, consistent with the growth suppressive properties
observed with CAI2 overexpression. In 2D cultures, a small increase in
DNA synthesis was also observed in the partial deletions. The HEK293T
clones containing partial deletions of CAI2 also exhibited small
increases in expression of the remaining intact portions of the gene with
a concomitant decrease in p16 expression, all consistent with an
influence of CAI2 on p16 expression and cell growth; no influence on ARF
expression was observed.Taken together, the data demonstrate that CAI2 is
capable of influencing p16 expression, but this influence is insufficient
to fully account for the ability of CAI2 to regulate growth, and we
conclude that CAI2 is a bona fide tumor suppressor gene in its own right.

