Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoration of EGFR-TKI resistance by endocytosis inhibitor PAO in
lung cancer with wild-type EGFR


Therapeutic efficacy of epithelial growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) is currently limited in selected lung cancer
patients who have TKI sensitive EGFR mutation. However, the potential
molecular mechanism that expands the therapeutic benefit of EGFT-TKI in
patients who have wild-type EGFR non-small cell lung cancer (wtEGFR
NSCLC) remains unclear. Recently, several studies revealed EGFR
endocytosis mechanism could mediate signal transductions that influence
in cancer cell proliferation. Moreover, our previous study demonstrated
that EGFR endocytosis is related to gefitinib sensitivity in wtEGFR NSCLC
and EGFR endocytosis could be a novel therapeutic target in lung cancer
with wtEGFR (Oncotarget. 2014 15;5(5):1265-78). In this study, we
investigated whether EGFR-TKI resistance could be restored in wtEGFR
NSCLC cell lines by endocytosis inhibitor phenylarsine oxide (PAO). To
investigate effects of PAO in vitro, we analyzed EGF-induced EGFR
internalization and performed Annexin V and propodium iodide (PI)
staining by flow cytometry. As a result, EGF-induced EGFR endocytosis is
decreased and apoptotic cell death is induced accompanied by G0/G1 arrest
after PAO treatment. In addition, we observed that cell viability is
reduced significantly when PAO and EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib)
treated together. Furthermore, we verified signaling transduction that
associated with proliferation and apoptosis by western blot. To confirm
combination effects of PAO and EGFR-TKI in vivo, we established xenograft
mouse model using gefitinib-insensitive SNU1327 cell lines. After Tumor
sizes reached 100-200mm3, mice were treated with PAO or gefitinib alone,
or combined treatment for 3 weeks. We observed that tumor sizes of
combination group were more decreased than other groups.In these result,
we validate endocytosis inhibitor PAO is potential drug for overcoming
therapeutic limitation of EGFR-TKI in gefitinib-insensitive wtEGFR NSCLC
cell lines, though further experiment is needed to explain more accurate
mechanism. This study was supported by a Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (NRF-2013R1A1A2057538).

