Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allosteric AKT1/2-inhibitor BAY 1125976 as potent inhibitor in
luminal breast cancer resistant to antihormone therapy


The PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling cascade is one of the major drivers in the
development of cancer. It is constitutively activated in many types of
cancers and is one of the prominent pathways that promote tumor cell
survival and confers resistance to antihormonal therapies for patients
with breast cancer.Breast cancer has been classified into at least four
distinct subtypes, based on molecular profiling. Luminal-B breast cancer,
although still expressing the hormone receptor, has been identified as
relatively insensitive to endocrine therapy and is an entity with highest
need for novel treatments and combination approaches. Despite the notable
improvements in endocrine therapy, the invariable appearance of endocrine
resistance, either primary or secondary, remains an important issue in
this type of tumor. Main cancer signaling pathways, including
PI3K/Akt/mTOR and CCND1/CDK4-6, are thought to play an important role in
development of this resistance.Therefore AKT is considered an attractive
drug target for the treatment of breast cancer. BAY 1125976, an orally
active, potent, highly selective, allosteric AKT1/2 inhibitor is
currently in phase I clinical development (NCT01915576). BAY 1125976 is
particularly effective in preclinical models with PI3K-AKT pathway
aberrations and luminal B status as shown by profiling in a panel of
tumor cell lines as well as respective in vivo studies. The efficacy of
BAY 1125976 in inhibition of cell proliferation is correlated with
luminal status of the tumor as shown in several cell line panels. In
vitro combination with anti-hormonal therapeutics showed synergistic
anti-proliferative effects and rendered resistant cell lines sensitive
towards tamoxifen or fulvestrant treatment. In the MCF-7 cell line
tamoxifen combined with BAY 1125976 resulted in a 14 fold reduction of
the IC50 for inhibition of cell proliferation compared to monotherapy.
This translated into additive to synergistic activity in combination with
tamoxifen in a ER+ MCF7 (PIK3CAE545K) BC model and enabled the use of
alternative dosing schedules with improved efficacy versus
monotherapy.BAY 1125976 also showed potent inhibition of tumor cell
growth in a tamoxifen- and fulvestrant-resistant derivate of MCF-7
enabling a reduction of the therapeutic dose of BAY 1125976 and thereby
improving tolerability while keeping efficacy.Combination of the
allosteric AKT inhibitor BAY 1125976 therefore provides an interesting
opportunity in improving efficacy of antihormonal therapy in luminal B
type breast cancer.

