Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem cell properties of normal human keratinocytes influence
transformation responses to HPV16


Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the primary cause of cervical
cancer. While HPV infection is very common, cervical cancer is a rare
outcome. Why some women develop cervical cancer and others do not is not
well understood, but likely involves host cell-specific factors and a
woman's ability to get rid of HPV-infected cells. We have previously
reported marked variability of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
expression in normal human epidermal tissue from different individuals
and demonstrated that increased immortalization by HPV16 E6 and E7
oncogenes correlated with lower basal levels of EGFR. We now report a
significantly greater transformation response in stem cell-like
keratinocytes after transfection with the full length HPV16 genome.
Primary normal human keratinocyte strains (NHKc) from 59 individuals were
cultured in 3-D anchorage-free suspension to assess spheroid forming
ability and to determine resistance to anchorage-independent cell death.
Only about 40% of NHKc strains survived and formed spheroids in 3-D
culture and grew when plated back in monolayers as spheroid-derived NHKc
(SD-NHKc). Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis found that
SD-NHKc were enriched in cells expressing known keratinocyte stem cell
markers: low levels of EGFR and high levels of integrin 6, while
spheroid-non forming strains (SNF-NHKc) had dramatically reduced numbers
of EGFRlo/ITG6hi cells. Isolation and cultivation of EGFRlo/ITG6hi
keratinocytes isolated from primary monolayer NHKc cultures revealed this
cell population to behave like SD-NHKc with respect to
anchorage-independent survival, proliferative potential, cell morphology,
and clonogenicity. Upon transfection with HPV16 DNA, most NHKc strains
acquired anchorage-independence and exhibited increased expression of
EGFR. Importantly, EGFRlo/ITG6hi keratinocytes and SD-NHKc displayed
exuberant growth responses after transfection with HPV16 DNA and
significantly higher transformation efficiency by HPV16. In contrast,
SNF-NHKc grew more sluggishly and were relatively resistant to
HPV16-mediated immortalization. Our study indicates that stem cell-like
keratinocytes are preferentially transformed by HPV16 DNA and that
stemness is a phenotypic determinant of susceptibility to HPV16-mediated
transformation in primary human keratinocytes.

