Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD0332991-induced stromal senescence promotes melanoma growth in
vivo


Cellular senescence, a process in which cells permanently exit the cell
cycle, has pleiotropic biological effects. Several lines of evidence
suggest that senescent cells within the tumor microenvironment can elicit
a pro-inflammatory secretome that promotes cancer initiation and
progression. This proinflammatory phenotype differs amongst senescent
cells triggered by distinct stimuli; therefore, multiple forms of
senescent cells likely exist within the tumor stroma during cancer
evolution and treatment. Here, we sought to determine how stromal
senescence initiated by clinically relevant treatments would influence
melanoma growth. To generate senescent stromal populations, we treated
presenescent MEFs (p4) with ultraviolet light (UV), Mitomycin C (MMC), or
a CDK4/6 inhibitor (CDK4/6i). In contrast to p4 fibroblasts, cells
treated with UV, MMC or CDK4/6i exhibited cell cycle arrest, increased
SA--gal positivity and elevated p16INK4a expression. Pronounced 53BP1 and
H2AX foci were only observed in the UV and MMC treated cells, suggesting
the CDK4/6i treatment did not induce DNA damage. Profiling of gene
expression using a TaqMan mouse inflammation expression panel revealed
distinctions amongst the 4 fibroblast lines. Of the senescent cell
populations, CDK4/6i fibroblasts showed the highest number of elevated
pro-inflammatory transcripts. To define the in vitro paracrine growth
effects induced by stromal senescence, melanoma cell lines harboring
either Braf600E, Ras, or unknown (wild-type) driver were co-cultured with
each fibroblast population. In general, melanoma cells grew similarly on
senescent and non-senescent fibroblasts; however, tumor cell growth was
genotype-dependent. Notably, CDK4/6i fibroblasts never stimulated
additional tumor cell growth in vitro. In contrast, syngeneic
transplantations of fibroblasts and tumor cells into immune competent
mice revealed that all senescent fibroblasts stimulated tumor growth in
vivo. However, whether senescent and non-senescent fibroblasts promoted
tumor growth at the same rate was genotype-dependent. Since this is the
first study to examine the paracrine effects of senescent stromal cells
using an immune competent mouse, we performed IHC for CD45 to assess
whether immune cell recruitment differs in the presence of senescent
stromal fibroblasts. No increase in CD45 positive infiltrates was
observed in the melanoma lines co-injected with CDK4/6i fibroblasts.
Together, this work reveals that melanoma growth in response to senescent
stromal fibroblasts is genotype dependent, and that this stromal
promotion of cancer growth can be accurately assessed only in the context
of an immune competent, syngeneic host. Moreover, these data suggest that
stromal senescence induced by emerging CDK4/6 inhibitor therapies and/or
regimens combining chemotherapy/radiation with immune checkpoint blockade
may also promote tumor growth through the paracrine effects of senescent
bystanders.

