Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear localized AR-V7 protein as a predictive biomarker for
treatment selection in metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC)


Background: A critical decision in the management of patients (pts) with
mCRPC is when to administer an androgen receptor signaling (ARS) directed
or a taxane therapy. The detection of AR-V7 mRNA in CTCs has been shown
to predict for resistance to ARS,but not to taxane chemotherapy. We
evaluated the relationship between AR-V7 protein expression and
localization on CTCs to treatment outcomes in a separate, larger cohort
as a predictive biomarker for clinical decision making.Methods: 193
prospectively collected blood samples from 161 unique pts with
progressive mCRPC about to start an ARS or taxane therapy were evaluated
with an Epic Sciences CTC immunoflorescent assay that assesses CTC AR-V7
protein expression and localization in individualcells. Associations
between the presence AR-V7(+) CTCs pre-therapy and anti-tumor effects
post-therapy included prostate-specific antigen (PSA) changes,
radiographic progression free survival (rPFS), time on therapy, and
overall survival (OS).Results: 130 pre-ARS inhibitor and 63 pre-taxane
samples were assessed of which 191 (99%) were evaluable. AR-V7(+) CTCs
were found in 34 (18%) samples including 3% of the 1st, 18% of the 2nd
and 31% of the 3rd+ line baseline pre-therapy samples. Patients with
AR-V7 positive CTCs in a pre-ARS sample showed no PSA response and had
shorter rPFS, time on therapy, and OS than those without AR-V7(+) CTCs.
PSA resistance to ARS was also seen in 65 of 112 (58%) of the AR-V7(-)
samples. There was no association between PSA response, rPFS, and time on
therapy between AR-V7(+) and AR-V7(-) pts treated with taxane therapy. In
a multivariate model adjusting for age, type of therapy, line of therapy,
and pre-therapy LDH, Hgb, and presence of visceral metastasis, AR-V7(+)
pts had a superior OS on taxane therapy relative to ARS (HR: 0.242, CI:
0.103 to 0.569, p = 0.0350). Conclusions: The results validate the
expression of the AR-V7 protein in the nucleus of CTCs in men with mCRPC
as a treatment specific biomarker that predicts resistance to ARS
inhibitor therapy and separately, clinical benefit with taxane therapy
over ARS-directed therapy in a clinical practice setting. Continued
examination of this biomarker in prospective studies will further
determine its clinical utility.

