Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting reactive oxygen species in human cancer cell growth and
metastasis in nude mouse


[Purposes of the study] Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are associated with
clinical condition, and closely involved in cancer growth and metastasis.
Twendee X is a composition consisting of Vitamin C, Glutamine, Cystine,
Riboflavin, Succinic acid, Fumaric acid, Coenzyme Q10, and Niacin.
Twendee X strongly reduces oxygen radicals or ROS in vitro and in vivo
(World Intellectual Property Organization WO/2013/072441 COMPOSITION FOR
PROTECTION AGAINST CELL-DAMAGING EFFECTS). Effects of Twendee X on human
colon cancer cell lines growth and metastasis in nude mouse was
examined.[Experimental procedures] Human colon cancer cell line RPMI4788
human gastric cancer cell line MKN45 was used in this study. Ten nude
mice (BALB/C nu-nu, 4wks, Male) per each group of experiments were used,
and repeated twice. Two cell lines were inoculated in subcutaneous of
nude mouse, and tumor growth monitored for days. Lung metastasis was
counted weeks after injection RPMI4788 cells into the tale vein of nude
mouse. Twendee X was added to the free drink water around 37mg/kg/day by
calculation. Serum of tumor bearing nude mouse was sampled just before
sacrifice. Free Calpe Diem (Diacron International, Italy) was used to
measure ROS related marker d-ROMs test (detect hydrogen peroxide).
Natural Killer cell (NK) activity also measured in tumor bearing nude
mouse.[Data] Tumor growth of RPMI4788 and MKN45 was reduced 25% and 40%
respectively by Twendee X administration. Metastatic nodule of RPMI4788
was reduced to 1/7 by Twendee X administration. Increase value of d-ROMs
test reduced to 60% compare to the control by Twendee X administration.
NK activity of RPMI4788 tumor bearing nude mouse was reduced to 28%
compare to the normal mouse, and increased to 56% by Twendee X
administration.[Conclusion] Twendee X has significant effects of reducing
tumor growth and inhibition metastasis. Hydrogen peroxide level (d-ROMs
test) of tumor bearing nude mouse in serum was significantly reduced. ROS
effects on immune cell activity, and Twendee X recovered suppressed NK
activity. Thus, Twendee X effects on ROS inhibition and suppressed RPMI
4788 tumor growth and metastasis to the lung of nude mouse. Metastatic
nodules receiving larger blood flow compare to the tumor in the back of
mouse, thus means anti-tumor immune cells in blood may easier attack
cancer cells.

