Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myo-inositol modulates the tumor microenvironment in a mouse model
of lung cancer chemoprevention


Background: Myo-inositol is a nutritional supplement that has been
investigated as a chemopreventive agent for lung cancer. We have
investigated the effect of myo-inositol in a CC-LR
(CCSPCre/LSL-K-rasG12D) mouse lung cancer model. Blood, broncho-alveolar
lavage fluid (BALF), and lungs were collected from CC-LR and LR
littermate control mice at 14 weeks of age, when mice had a large number
of premalignant lesions with only small foci of adenocarcinoma.Methods:
Lesion burden and stage was quantified using macroscopically evident lung
surface tumor counts as well as histology from paraffin sections. Serial
paraffin sections were also used for immunohistochemistry. Plasma was
analyzed using high-sensitivity liquid-chromatography coupled tandem mass
spectrometry. Cytokine and chemokine concentrations in BALF were
quantitated using multiplex immunobead assays.Results: Myo-inositol
treated mice (n = 20) had fewer tumors (p Background: Myo-inositol is a
nutritional supplement that has been investigated as a chemopreventive
agent for lung cancer. We have investigated the effect of myo-inositol in
a CC-LR (CCSPCre/LSL-K-rasG12D) mouse lung cancer model. Blood,
broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF), and lungs were collected from CC-LR
and LR littermate control mice at 14 weeks of age, when mice had a large
number of premalignant lesions with only small foci of
adenocarcinoma.Methods: Lesion burden and stage was quantified using
macroscopically evident lung surface tumor counts as well as histology
from paraffin sections. Serial paraffin sections were also used for
immunohistochemistry. Plasma was analyzed using high-sensitivity
liquid-chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry. Cytokine and
chemokine concentrations in BALF were quantitated using multiplex
immunobead assays.Results: Myo-inositol treated mice (n = 20) had fewer
tumors (p < 0.0001) than mice raised on control diet (n = 23).
Additionally, lesions were shifted towards lower grade, from adenomas and
adenomatous alveolar hyperplasia to bronchial hyperplasia. Several host
factors including cytokines and proteins produced by myeloid derived
suppressor cells and macrophages were significantly impacted by
myo-inositol treatment. In addition to changes in metabolic inflammation
derived factors, proteins which are associated with both chronic
inflammation and lung tumorigenesis were altered as well.Conclusions:
Myo-inositol treatment both reduced tumor burden and lesion grade in a
KRAS model of lung cancer. Our findings of a substantial impact of
myo-inositol treatment on the host response suggests novel mechanisms for
its chemopreventive activitiy.

