Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of metastatic osteosarcoma with F8-TNF-alpha in an
orthotopic mouse model


Osteosarcoma (OS) is a malignancy of bone and five-year survival rates
are still at a low 20% if metastatic disease is present. Metastatic OSs
most frequently metastasize to the lung. TNF- is a powerful cytokine
already shown to be active against many cancers. Nevertheless, TNF- is
highly toxic at clinically relevant concentrations. To overcome this
limitation, targeted forms of TNF- can be used. In this study, targeting
is achieved through linking TNF- to the antibody fragment F8, targeting
the EDA-domain of fibronectin. To test the efficacy of F8-TNF- against
OS, we sought to investigate the effects of F8-TNF- in an orthotopic
syngeneic OS model. In addition to evaluating compound efficacy, we also
tested whether the route of administration (systemic versus local
application) can even further increase treatment efficacy. Ultimately, we
aimed at measuring treatment success by assessing different stages of OS
progression, especially metastatic disease.To show clinical relevance, we
performed immunofluorescence (IF) of EDA on primary human OS samples. In
a second step, we evaluated drug efficacy in a syngeneic OS mouse model.
K7M2L2 OS cells, stably infected to express the marker proteins lacZ and
mCherry, were orthotopically injected into the tibia of mice. Once
primary tumors were detectable, the mice were treated with either PBS or
F8-TNF-. The compound was given either systemically (intravenously
(i.v.), tail vein) or locally (intraarterial (i.a.), femoral artery).
Four days after the last treatment, all mice were sacrificed, terminal
blood sampling was performed and blood samples were analyzed for the
presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) via FACS/mCherry fluorescence.
Following X-gal staining, metastases on the surface of lungs were
counted. EDA and infiltration of immune cells (CD4+, CD8+, natural killer
(NK) cells, CD19+) were assessed histologically.Using IF, we detected
strong expression of EDA in primary tumors as well as bone and lung
metastases from human OS patients. Preliminary results from our treatment
study showed a significant decrease in the number of lung metastases as
well as the number of CTCs in mice treated with i.a. F8-TNF- while the
treatment was well tolerated by the mice. The reduction of lung
metastases could, at least in part, be explained by a strong expression
of EDA in the lung metastases. In addition, significant increases in
lung-infiltrating immune cells were observed after administration of
F8-TNF- (i.v. F8- TNF-: increased CD4+ T-cells; i.a. F8-TNF-: increased
NK cells). Although significant reductions in numbers of metastases and
CTCs were detected, F8-TNF- did not significantly impair the growth of
the primary tumors.In conclusion, our study demonstrates a reduction of
CTCs as well as lung metastases after administration of F8-TNF- and thus,
provides a rationale for further studying the anti-metastatic effects of
this compound in a clinically relevant model of OS.

