Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating chemoresistance in small cell lung cancer through
the molecular profiling of single circulating tumour cells


BackgroundChemoresistance, both intrinsic and acquired, represents one of
the greatest challenges in the management of Small Cell Lung Cancer
(SCLC), contributing to the very poor survival seen in this disease. The
investigation of SCLC, and particularly serially monitoring the
development of changes associated with resistance, is hampered by the
limited availability of tumour tissue for research. Circulating tumour
cells (CTCs) in contrast, are abundant in this disease and represent a
potential minimally invasive liquid biopsy to study the molecular
landscape of SCLC.MethodsTo investigate tumour genetics in SCLC CTCs were
isolated from chemorefractory patients and chemoresponsive patients blood
samples using the DEPArray. Blood samples were collected prior to
chemotherapy and again at progression with relapsed disease. Following
single-cell whole genome amplification low coverage whole genome
sequencing and whole exome sequencing (WES) of CTCs were used to
investigate mutations and to generate genome-wide patterns of copy number
alterations (CNA).ResultsHallmark SCLC molecular abnormalities such as
TP53 mutations and copy number loss in tumour suppressor genes such as
RB1 (previously identified in bulk tumour profiling), were noted in the
isolated SCLC CTCs. Distinct CNA profiles were found in the CTCs isolated
from patients with chemorefractory disease compared to those isolated
from patients with chemoresponsive disease. A potential signature based
on differential copy number changes in 2183 loci between the two groups
of patients CTCs was identified. When tested in an independent set of
CTC-derived explants this signature achieved 100% accuracy in classifying
patients with chemoresponsive disease. There were no profound differences
in CNA pattern in the CTCs isolated from initially chemoresponsive
patients when they had relapsed post chemotherapy when compared to the
baseline samples. However, changes in the proportion of C>A transversions
were identified by WES between baseline and relapse CTCs.ConclusionsOur
study highlights the utility of molecular profiling CTCs in the research
of SCLC. The data presented confirm CTCs represent a novel medium for the
investigation of chemoresistance.

