Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol programs the pituitary to produce aggressive
prolactin-producing tumors


Chronic alcohol consumption is known to increase prolactin levels in
blood and cell proliferation in pituitary prolactin-producing cells known
as lactotropes, resulting in hyperprolactinemia in human and animals. We
have recently shown that alcohol abuse during pregnancy result in fetal
programming that alters lactotropic cell production of prolactin in the
offspring during the adulthood. We determined whether fetal alcohol
exposure increases the susceptibility to estrogen-induced pituitary
prolactin-secreting tumors (prolactinomas). Pregnant Fischer 344 rats
were fed between gestational days 7 and 21 with a liquid diet containing
alcohol (AF), pair-fed with isocaloric liquid diet (PF), or fed ad
libitum with rat chow (AD). At 90 days of age, female offspring rats were
ovariectomized and received a subcutaneous estradiol implant. These rats
were sacrificed at 3 moths after the estradiol implants. At the time of
sacrifice, pituitaries of these animals were inspected for tumor and
whole body were inspected for any tumor metastasis. Estradiol treatment
increased pituitary weight about 5-folds in AD and PF treated groups and
increased about 30-folds in the AF treated group. Most tumors in the AF
group were hemorrhagic. About 30% AF rats had some tumors in the
non-pituitary sites. AD and PF rats did not show any non-pituitary site
tumor. Histopathological evaluation revealed that tumors in AF group were
more densely packed cells as compare to the PF and AD groups who showed
uniform cells with abundant cytoplasm. Pituitary tumor from AF animals
showed strong nuclear p53, Ki67 and prolactin immunoreactivity. When AF
rat pituitaries were grown in cultures, cells rapidly grew and formed
colonies. Colony formation and rapid growth rate were not observed in
cells of the pituitary from PF and AD rats. When pituitary tumor cells of
AF-treated pituitary, but not AD- or PF-treated pituitaries were grown in
ultra-low attachment plate, spheres developed. These spheres expressed
genes and proteins related to multipotency (OCT4, NANOG, KLF4, SOX2,
Nestin, CD34 and CD133). Differentiated cells from pituitary tumorspheres
of AF animals successfully induce tumor in scid mice after three weeks
from cells transplantation. In addition, pituitary tumor from AF animals
showed strong immunoreactivity for N-cadherin and Snail, two
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) factors. Furthermore, RNA-seq of
genes in tumor pituitaries of AF and AD rats revealed 8782 genes are
significantly changed in AF compared to AD PChronic alcohol consumption
is known to increase prolactin levels in blood and cell proliferation in
pituitary prolactin-producing cells known as lactotropes, resulting in
hyperprolactinemia in human and animals. We have recently shown that
alcohol abuse during pregnancy result in fetal programming that alters
lactotropic cell production of prolactin in the offspring during the
adulthood. We determined whether fetal alcohol exposure increases the
susceptibility to estrogen-induced pituitary prolactin-secreting tumors
(prolactinomas). Pregnant Fischer 344 rats were fed between gestational
days 7 and 21 with a liquid diet containing alcohol (AF), pair-fed with
isocaloric liquid diet (PF), or fed ad libitum with rat chow (AD). At 90
days of age, female offspring rats were ovariectomized and received a
subcutaneous estradiol implant. These rats were sacrificed at 3 moths
after the estradiol implants. At the time of sacrifice, pituitaries of
these animals were inspected for tumor and whole body were inspected for
any tumor metastasis. Estradiol treatment increased pituitary weight
about 5-folds in AD and PF treated groups and increased about 30-folds in
the AF treated group. Most tumors in the AF group were hemorrhagic. About
30% AF rats had some tumors in the non-pituitary sites. AD and PF rats
did not show any non-pituitary site tumor. Histopathological evaluation
revealed that tumors in AF group were more densely packed cells as
compare to the PF and AD groups who showed uniform cells with abundant
cytoplasm. Pituitary tumor from AF animals showed strong nuclear p53,
Ki67 and prolactin immunoreactivity. When AF rat pituitaries were grown
in cultures, cells rapidly grew and formed colonies. Colony formation and
rapid growth rate were not observed in cells of the pituitary from PF and
AD rats. When pituitary tumor cells of AF-treated pituitary, but not AD-
or PF-treated pituitaries were grown in ultra-low attachment plate,
spheres developed. These spheres expressed genes and proteins related to
multipotency (OCT4, NANOG, KLF4, SOX2, Nestin, CD34 and CD133).
Differentiated cells from pituitary tumorspheres of AF animals
successfully induce tumor in scid mice after three weeks from cells
transplantation. In addition, pituitary tumor from AF animals showed
strong immunoreactivity for N-cadherin and Snail, two
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) factors. Furthermore, RNA-seq of
genes in tumor pituitaries of AF and AD rats revealed 8782 genes are
significantly changed in AF compared to AD P<0.01. Many of these genes
were involved in the cell migration, actin cytoskeletal regulation and
cell-cell junction formations which are the most important phenotypes
occur during EMT. These data provide evidence for the possible
development of aggressive prolactinoma development in the pituitary after
estrogen treatment in fetal alcohol exposed female rats. (This work is
supported by a National Institute of Health grant R01 AA11591).

