Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) by
nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) controls estrogen-induced malignant
transformation of breast epithelial cells to breast cancer stem cells


Chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) is involved in the maintenance normal stem
cells and metastasis of cancer stem cells. NRF1 is one of the major
transcription factor that controls transcription of CXCR4. The functional
regulation of transcription of NRF1 target genes has not been explored in
breast cancer. In this study, we have investigated whether
transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 by NRF1 regulates estrogen-induced
malignant transformation of breast epithelial cells to breast cancer stem
cells (CSCs). We have previously shown that NRF1 may be involved in 17
-estradiol (E2) induced malignant transformation of breast epithelial
cells, however, the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of the NRF1
target genes remains unknown. In this study we showed that NRF1 and E2
jointly contributed in reprogramming of breast epithelial cells to CSCs.
Levels of breast cancer stem cell markers (CD44+CD24+ALDH1+CD133+) were
significantly increased by E2 treatment in NRF1 overexpressing cells
compared to cells transfected with vector receiving E2. E2-induced
increases of spheroid formation, cell survival and growth of cancer stem
cells were modulated by functional gain or loss of NRF1. For
morphological details we used a holographic microscope (HoloMonitor M4),
we observed that E2 generated breast cancer stem cells with
CD44+CD24+ALDH1+CD133+ markers produced large live spheroids in NRF1
overexpressing cells compared to cells transfected with vector receiving
E2. Overexpression of NRF1 promoted the transition of E2-treated breast
epithelial MCF-10A cells to mesenchymal stem cell-like phenotype. The
ChIP qPCR, RT-qPCR, Western blotting and immunofluorescence microscopic
assays showed that NRF1 mediated transcriptional changes of its target
genes CXCR4, BNIP3, and DJ-1 correlated with malignant phenotypic
changes. The suppression of NRF-1 activity induced growth arrest and
apoptosis, and reduced stemness, growth and tumorigenic property of
cancer stem cells. In summary, our findings for the first time showed
that transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 by NRF1 may contribute in the
induction of a pre-malignant phenotype by estrogen presumably by
promoting generation of breast cancer stem cells. These data suggest NRF1
as an emerging potential target for therapeutic intervention against
breast cancer.

