Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating progranulin (GP88/PGRN) level correlates with survival
in metastatic breast cancer patients


Current monitoring of therapy response in metastatic breast cancer (MBC)
patients is dependent on expensive and time consuming imaging methods
that have limited sensitivity to detect disease response in a timely
manner. Understanding of real-time biological processes through
measurement of circulating disease associated biomarkers may provide a
clearer understanding of the disease state and thus aid real-time
clinical management of MBC patients. Current biomarkers used in MBC
include CA15-3, CA27.29 and CEA. While useful, they have limitations in
providing clinicians with a reliable insight into real-time monitoring of
disease processes. Thus, addition of new circulating biomarkers may
improve the management of MBC patients. We characterized a target
biomarker, the 88kDa glycoprotein Progranulin (GP88) expressed in tumor
tissue and secreted in the circulation of BC patients. Biological studies
have established GP88 as one of the critical drivers for tumor cell
proliferation, survival, invasiveness and drug resistance. Clinical
studies have demonstrated that elevated GP88 tissue levels are prognostic
for poor outcome and that breast cancer patients have a statistically
elevated GP88 serum level than healthy individuals. Using tissue and
serum tests to detect and quantify GP88 could provide an ideal target for
monitoring disease progression in BC patients undergoing therapy. In the
present study, we examined whether GP88 serum levels were elevated in MBC
patients and whether GP88 serum levels were correlated to patient
survival.Under an IRB approved protocol, 92 MBC patients that met the
inclusion criteria and were undergoing therapy at the UMGCC Breast Clinic
were consented. Clinical and disease characteristics along with serum
CA15-3 values were collected as part of the study. Serum samples were
collected from each patient during therapy and subsequently the patients
were monitored. The serum was stored at -80C until tested for GP88. The
validated GP88 assay (A&G Pharmaceutical) is sensitive and linear over 0
to 10ng/ml range.Statistical analysis using Kaplan-Meier functions
examined if there is a correlation between GP88 serum level and overall
survival. By analyzing the KM plots at different GP88 cut points we
identified two populations with distinct survival characteristics. When
examined more thoroughly the difference in survival of patients with
60ng/ml was statistically significant (P = 0.0002). Correlation analysis
of serum GP88 and CA15-3 were performed and will be presented.We conclude
that circulating levels of GP88 in MBC patients are correlated with
survival. It would appear that patients that can be managed to have a
GP88 below 60ng/ml will survive longer. Thus measuring circulating GP88
levels would provide additional information to that available in today's
SOC for monitoring. This valuable insight into real-time disease status
will assist clinicians in patient management.

