Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular detection of ALL in the peripheral blood is more
sensitive than flow cytometric analysis of the bone marrow in patients
with treatment-related hypocellularity


Measurable residual disease detection (MRD) is an important tool for
early detection and monitoring relapse. Traditionally, bone marrow is
collected and analyzed by flow cytometry (FC) to evaluate MRD status in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients (ALL). More recently, highly
sensitive molecular methods such as deep sequencing allow for higher
sensitivity detection of MRD. Although the bone marrow is considered to
be more representative of tumor burden than sampling the blood, bone
marrow collection is more invasive, disruptive, and resource intensive
than peripheral blood draws. ALL patients enrolled in the Seattle
Children's Pediatric Leukemia Adoptive Therapy (PLAT-02) trial undergo
MRD assessment pre and post CD19 CAR T cell infusion using FC analysis of
a bone marrow sample. We have used high throughput sequencing (HTS) in
paired blood and bone marrow samples from these patients to evaluate the
complete B cell repertoire and assess MRD up to 63 days post-infusion.
To-date, we have obtained 38 paired samples. Using HTS alone we have
observed a significant correlation in both the frequency of total reads
and the number of malignant cells per million in paired peripheral blood
and bone marrow samples. 26/38 of the bone marrow samples were determined
either aparticulate or hypocellular. Importantly, 8/14 of patients that
were MRD negative in the bone marrow by FC were MRD positive in the blood
by HTS. These data suggest, that, in cases where the bone marrow is
hypocellular or aparticulate, peripheral blood samples evaluated by HTS
are more sensitive than traditional flow cytometric analysis in the bone
marrow for detection of MRD. The impact of B cell aplasia may be
important in increasing the sensitivity of HTS in the detection of MRD.
The ability to detect an ALL B cell clone in the blood through HTS has
many clinical implications; blood can be sampled more often, is less of a
burden to patients, and can provide earlier prediction of relapse.

