Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosomal damage as markers of genotoxicity and carcinogenesis


Human cancers arise from cells unable to maintain genomic and chromosomal
stability, mainly as a sequential consequence of altered DNA repair
mechanisms (base and nucleotide excision, mismatch and double-strand
breaks). Chromosomal aberrations (CAs) are a marker of cancer risk and
many specific CAs represent causative events in malignant transformation.
Non-specific CAs arise as a result of direct DNA damage by ionizing
radiation (chromosome-breaks; CSA) or replication on a damaged DNA
template (CSA and chromatide-breaks; CTA). Frequencies of CAs in blood
lymphocytes (PBL) are predictive for cancer risk in prospective
epidemiological studies and patients with many types of cancer show
elevated CAs at diagnosis.We have recently disclosed associations of CAs
with variants in genes encoding DNA repair and xenobiotic metabolizing
enzymes on 1800 healthy subjects exposed and unexposed to potentially
carcinogenic compounds. Notably, lower frequencies of CAs and CTA are
associated with high activity EPHX1 and XPD Lys751Gln homozygous variant
genotypes and several pair-wise interactions significantly modulated CA,
CTA and CSA frequencies. On the contrary, increased CAs and CSA
frequencies were observed in subjects bearing splicing A variant in CCND1
G870A. Current investigations aim at understanding the genetics
underlying CAs as intermediary cancer biomarkers, such as variants in
genes encoding kinetochores, mitotic apparatus regulating enzymes,
variants in genes encoding polymerases in DNA repair synthesis and the
CAs dynamics in subjects repeatedly analysed over time. We have also
explored miRNA binding sites in 3UTR of DNA repair genes (BER, NER and
DSB) both in colorectal cancer patients and in healthy subjects with
CAs.Since shortening of telomeres in each cell division may lead to
telomere crisis and complex CAs, relative telomere length (RTL) was
determined in 187 individuals and compared to their CA count in PBL.
Further analyses investigated RTL in incident cancer patients (breast,
colorectum and lungs) and in patients (breast and colorectum) with the
estimated double-strand breaks repair capacity. CAs detected in patients
with above solid cancers were associated with clinicopathological
characteristics and analysed as a potential prognostic factors.Our
studies suggest that CAs in PBL may represent perspective transient
marker in carcinogenesis and we hereby provide a biological basis for the
link between CAs and cancer risk along with the genetic control of the
overall CA frequency.Grant support: GA CR 15-14789S, AZV 15-27580A and
COST LD14050.

