Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual tumor suppressors miR-139-5p/-3p derived from pre-miR-139 via
targeting matrix metalloprotease 11 (MMP11) in bladder cancer


Introduction & Objective: The molecular mechanisms of recurrence and
muscle invasion process of bladder cancer (BC) are not well understood.
Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms of metastatic pathways
underlying advanced BC using currently available genomic approaches might
improve therapies for and prevention of the disease. Our recent study of
microRNA (miRNA) expression signature of BC by deep-sequencing revealed
that miR-139-5p (guide strand) and miR-139-3p (passenger strand) were
significantly downregulated in BC tissues. In miRNA biogenesis, the
passenger strand of miRNA duplex is discarded, while the guide strand is
retained to direct recruitment of the RISC to target mRNAs. We hypothesis
that these miRNAs act as tumor suppressors in BC. The aim of the present
study was to investigate the functional roles of these miRNAs and their
modulation of cancer networks in BC cells.Material & Methods: Expression
levels of miR-139-5p/-3p and its candidate target genes were validated in
two BC cell lines (T24 and BOY) and BC clinical specimens (62 BCs and 23
normal bladder epitheliums: NBEs) by real-time PCR methods.
Gain-of-function study, cell proliferation, migration, and invasion
analyses were performed by using miR-139-5p/-3p transfected BC cell
lines. In silico database and genome-wide gene expression analyses were
applied for identification of miR-139-5p/-3p targets. Loss-of-function
study for its target gene was performed by using siRNAs. Luciferase
reporter analyses were employed to validate direct binding between the
target gene and miR-139-5p/-3p. Overall patient survival between high and
low expression of the target gene was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier
method.Results: The expression levels of miR-139-5p and miR-139-3p were
significantly reduced in tumor tissues and BC cell lines compared with
NBEs (PIntroduction & Objective: The molecular mechanisms of recurrence
and muscle invasion process of bladder cancer (BC) are not well
understood. Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms of
metastatic pathways underlying advanced BC using currently available
genomic approaches might improve therapies for and prevention of the
disease. Our recent study of microRNA (miRNA) expression signature of BC
by deep-sequencing revealed that miR-139-5p (guide strand) and miR-139-3p
(passenger strand) were significantly downregulated in BC tissues. In
miRNA biogenesis, the passenger strand of miRNA duplex is discarded,
while the guide strand is retained to direct recruitment of the RISC to
target mRNAs. We hypothesis that these miRNAs act as tumor suppressors in
BC. The aim of the present study was to investigate the functional roles
of these miRNAs and their modulation of cancer networks in BC
cells.Material & Methods: Expression levels of miR-139-5p/-3p and its
candidate target genes were validated in two BC cell lines (T24 and BOY)
and BC clinical specimens (62 BCs and 23 normal bladder epitheliums:
NBEs) by real-time PCR methods. Gain-of-function study, cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion analyses were performed by using
miR-139-5p/-3p transfected BC cell lines. In silico database and
genome-wide gene expression analyses were applied for identification of
miR-139-5p/-3p targets. Loss-of-function study for its target gene was
performed by using siRNAs. Luciferase reporter analyses were employed to
validate direct binding between the target gene and miR-139-5p/-3p.
Overall patient survival between high and low expression of the target
gene was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method.Results: The expression
levels of miR-139-5p and miR-139-3p were significantly reduced in tumor
tissues and BC cell lines compared with NBEs (P< 0.0001). Restoration of
miR-139-5p or miR-139-3p in cancer cells revealed that both miRNAs
inhibited cancer cell migration and invasion. Our data demonstrated that
the gene coding for matrix metalloprotease 11 (MMP11) was a direct target
of miR-139-5p/-3p regulation. Silencing of MMP11 inhibited cell migration
and invasion in BC cells. Moreover, Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that
the patients with high MMP11 expression had lower overall survival
probabilities than those with low expression (P = 0.043).Conclusions:
Aberrant expressed novel miRNAs were identified by deep sequencing of BC
miRNA signature. Two mature miRNAs, miR-139-5p and miR-139-3p derived
from pre-miR-139 act as tumor-suppressors in BC cells. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating that dual
tumor-suppressive miR-139-5p/-3p directly regulate MMP11 in BC cells. The
identification of novel target gene regulated by the dual
tumor-suppressors may lead to a better understanding of BC and the
development of new therapeutic strategies to treat this disease.

