Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell-mediated signaling of TLR 2, 4, and 9 causes
activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and induces tumor cell proliferation
in pancreatic cancer


Background: Toll like receptor (TLR) ligands are in clinical use for the
immunotherapy of different cancers. They are supposed to induce an
inflammatory immune response against the tumor. Interestingly, several
studies showed that TLRs were expressed by cancer cells in different
tumor entities and that their activation can contribute to an
inflammatory microenvironment. Yet, for pancreatic cancer, TLR expression
and its impact in tumor cells is only poorly understood. Therefore this
study analyzed the influence of TLR2, 4, and 9 expression and activation
on tumor cell signaling and proliferation in pancreatic cancer.Methods:
The expression of TLR 2, 4, and 9 was analyzed in vitro in several
established as well as primary human pancreatic cancer cell lines by
qRT-PCR and Western Blot. TLR stimulation was then performed in BxPC-3,
MIA Paca2, and PacaDD135 cells using the TLR ligands
oligodeoxyribonucleotide2006 (ODN2006), lipoteichonic acid of
Staphylococcus aureus (LTA-SA) and High-Mobility Group Box 1 (HMGB1).
Expression of MyD88 and pAkt was then analyzed by Western Blot.
Functional analysis on proliferation (ATP assay) and cytokine expression
(Luminex) was additionally performed.Results: Expression of TLR2, 4
and/or 9 was demonstrated in all investigated human pancreatic cancer
cell lines. Receptor activation by single or combined use of TLR ligands
resulted in increased MyD88 and pAkt (Ser473) expression. Additionally,
up-regulated anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 expression was found in
stimulated cells, but not in the unstimulated cells. Furthermore, TLR
activation resulted in the production of the interleukin(IL)-6, IL-8 and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF-). Interestingly, tumor cell proliferation was
increased within 24 and 48 hours of stimulation.Conclusion: Our results
demonstrate TLR2, 4 and/or 9 expression in all human pancreatic cancer
cell lines. Additionally, our findings on TLR activation suggest chronic
inflammation-mediated TLR signaling to negatively influence tumor cell
apoptosis and to shift the cytokine release in pancreatic cancer towards
an inflammatory microenvironment. These findings emphasize the particular
role of TLR2, 4 and 9 and their activation in pancreatic cancer,
outlining their relevance as potential targets for cancer therapy.

