Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the eicosanoid 20-HETE suppresses pancreatic cancer
growth and metastasis through regulation of inflammation


Pancreatic cancer incidence and death rates are on the rise. Most
available therapies fail partly due to the uniquely inflammatory
pancreatic tumor stromal compartment. Prolonged and unresolved
inflammation is implicated in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer, yet
the critical inflammatory mediators remain largely unknown. The role of
lipid autacoids in pancreatic cancer, which are metabolites of
arachidonic acid and other related fatty acids, has not been thoroughly
studied. Among these, metabolites of the cytochrome P450 (CYP)
epoxygenases and -hydroxylases, including EETs and 20-HETE, respectively,
have been mostly neglected in cancer. We previously showed that
epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) stimulate multi-organ metastasis and
tumor dormancy escape. Here we show that elevated levels of
20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE), a product of -hydroxylases of
the CYP4A/F subfamilies, stimulated pancreatic primary tumor growth and
metastasis. We measured 20-HETE and other lipid autacoids via LC/MS/MS in
multiple cell lines and found that 20-HETE was produced primarily by
pancreatic cancer cells, which express the 20-HETE generating enzyme,
CYP4F2. Overexpression of CYP4F2 and exogenous 20-HETE induced Ras
activity in HEK293 cells or pancreatic cancer and macrophage cell lines,
respectively. 20-HETE attracted human macrophages in vitro, while
macrophage migration was reduced towards pancreatic cancer cells treated
with an inhibitor of 20-HETE synthesis, HET0016. Inhibition of 20-HETE
synthesis in human macrophages and pancreatic cancer cells decreased
HB-EGF and M-CSF production. Systemic administration of 20-HETE promoted
primary human and murine pancreatic tumor growth in subcutaneous and
orthotopic murine models. Transgenic mice overexpressing 20-HETE
(Tie2-CYP4F2 Tr) exhibited spontaneous liver and mediastinal lymph node
metastasis following resection of subcutaneous primary pancreatic tumors,
in contrast to wild type control mice. Targeting 20-HETE by HET0016 or
siRNA towards CYP4F2 suppressed primary pancreatic tumor growth. Systemic
treatment of orthotopic pancreatic tumors with HET0016, 14,15-EEZE, and
gemcitabine regressed established pancreatic tumors and prolonged
survival without overt toxicity. Thus, 20-HETE critically regulates Ras
activation, inflammation, and pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis. Our
studies offer a mechanistic rationale for pharmacologically targeting
20-HETE as a novel approach to treat pancreatic cancer.

