Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNAs as metastasis biomarkers in oral cavity and
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas


MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNA molecules with roles in gene
expression regulation and implications in cancer initiation and
progression. Cell-free microRNAs detected in body fluids, and in
particular in plasma, are of clinical interest due to their possible use
as biomarkers. Despite the fact that their reliable quantification
depends on several technical parameters, there is great clinical interest
in this approach due to its simplicity and low risk to the patient.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck is one of the most common
cancer types worldwide, with survival rates of about 50% in 5 years.
Tobacco and alcohol consumption are the most important risk factors and,
currently, the presence of cervical lymph node metastases remain the
strongest prognostic factor for this cancer type. In this study we
identified plasma microRNAs associated with squamous cell carcinomas of
the oral cavity and oropharynx as well as with the presence of cervical
lymph node metastases. We evaluated the expression of 179 microRNAs in
plasma from 45 patients (28 presenting cervical lymph node metastases at
diagnosis and 17 with no lymph node metastasis) and 15 healthy controls.
Samples were matched according to age, sex, drinking and smoking habits.
Among microRNAs mostly expressed in tumor samples, some had been already
detected in oral squamous cell carcinoma tissues, such as miR-210, while
others, such as miR-573, are still poorly studied. Comparisons between
oral and oropharyngeal carcinomas yielded several differences, in
accordance with molecular distinctions between these cancer types.
MicroRNAs possibly involved in the metastatic process were identified
when comparing plasma samples from individuals presenting lymph node
metastasis at diagnosis and plasma from patients who were
metastasis-free. Among these molecules, miR-192 and miR-574 were
identified as more expressed in plasma from individuals with metastatic
oropharyngeal cancer. We conclude that plasma microRNAs associated with
specific clinical conditions or cancer sub-sites may help in the
diagnosis and prognosis assessment of head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas.

