Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC13 interaction with receptor tyrosine kinase HER2 drives
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma progression


Background: Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading
cause of cancer related death in the United States and has a very poor
survival rate due to late diagnosis. MUC13 is a recently identified high
molecular weight glycoprotein that is upregulated in PDAC and its
progression is allowed via alterations of multiple signaling pathways.
MUC13 is aberrantly expressed in PDAC and generally correlates with
increased expression of HER2, however, the underlying mechanism remains
poorly understood. MUC13 consists of three EGF-like domains that may
serve as a ligand for EGF receptors, such as HER2, and modulate EGFR
signaling pathways. We sought to better characterize the interaction of
MUC13 with HER2 in PDAC.Methods: MUC13 and HER2 interaction was studied
using reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence, proximity
ligation, Western blotting, co-capping assays in human PDAC cell lines
and immunohistofluorescence techniques in human tissues. Tissue
microarrays prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens of
PDAC were assessed for expression of MUC13 and HER2 using our own
laboratory generated anti-MUC13 mouse monoclonal antibody (MAb) through
confocal immunofluorescence. The association of MUC13 and HER2
co-localization with nuclear chromatin organization was analyzed to study
the stage or degree of aggressiveness of the pancreatic cancer using Dapi
stained confocal images of tissues.Results: MUC13 co-localizes and
interacts with HER2 in PDAC cell lines. The results from this study
demonstrate that MUC13 functionally interacts and activates HER2 at
Tyrp1248 in PDAC cells, leading to stimulation of HER2 signaling cascade
including, ERK1/2, FAK, AKT and PAK1 as well as regulation of the growth,
cytoskeleton remodeling, motility and invasion of PDAC cells - all
collectively contributing to PDAC progression. The interaction between
MUC13-HER2 binding resulting in their tumorigenic characteristics likely
occurs at the 1st and 2nd but not the 3rd domains of MUC13 as the EGF 1
and 2 deletion mutant constructs of MUC13 failed to promote proliferation
and invasion of cells. These phenotypic effects of MUC13-HER2
co-localization could be effectively compromised by depleting MUC13.
MUC13-HER2 co-localization also held true in PDAC human tissues with a
strong functional correlation that contributed to an increased degree of
disorder and cancer aggressiveness.Conclusions: 1) MUC13 can be detected
in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues using our anti-MUC13 MAb. 2)
MUC13 co-localizes and activates HER2 and its downstream signaling
cascade promoting PDAC progression in both cell lines and human tissue.
3) This process is reversed by depletion of MUC13. 4) This MUC13-HER2
interaction may potentially be manipulated for targeted therapeutics in
patients harboring PDAC.

