Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of Kras mutant lung adenocarcinoma in tobacco
carcinogen exposed mice with knockout of the airway lineage-specific
G-protein coupled receptor Gprc5a


Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) represents the most common lung cancer subtype
in smokers. Despite the urgency for prevention in high-risk smokers, we
still do not know the earliest changes that drive LUAD development and
would thus be ideal targets for chemoprevention. Earlier work revealed
that the retinoic acid-inducible G-protein coupled receptor, Gprc5a, is
abundantly expressed in mouse normal lung relative to other normal
tissues. Moreover, mice with knockout of Gprc5a develop spontaneous late
onset lung tumors, including LUADs, suggesting a tumor suppressor role
for this gene. In the present study, we sought to better understand the
impact of Gprc5a expression on LUAD pathogenesis. We first examined the
expression of human GPRC5A in publicly available datasets and found that
GPRC5A was highest in human normal lung relative to other normal samples
and was down-regulated in human LUADs. We then assessed expression
patterns of Gprc5a within different mouse airway compartments and found
that the gene was predominantly expressed in alveolar type I (AT1) cells
pointing to potential airway lineage-specific functions for Gprc5a. Next
we sought to analyze tobacco carcinogen-mediated lung oncogenesis as an
attempt to emulate smoking-induced lung cancer in humans. In contrast to
wild type littermates, Gprc5a-/- mice treated with the nicotine-specific
carcinogen NNK developed LUADs by six months after carcinogen exposure.
Following immunofluorescence analysis, these LUADs were found to express
surfactant protein C (Sftpc) and lack the clara cell marker Ccsp
suggesting that the cells of origin for these LUADs are alveolar type II
(AT2) cells. We were then prompted to understand genomic alterations in
the pathogenesis of the Gprc5a-/- LUADs. Using the Illumina HiSeq 2500
platform, we performed whole exome sequencing (WES) of five
carcinogen-induced LUADs as well as two Gprc5a-/- tail veins and normal
lung tissues to infer somatic variants. Of note, all LUADs exhibited
somatic activating Kras mutations (p.G12D or p.Q61R), the same variants
purported to act as drivers of human LUAD in smokers. The Kras mutations
were also observed in premalignant lesions that developed prior to LUAD
onset. Moreover, WES analysis revealed additional driver genes that were
mutated (Apc, Atm, Kmt2d, Nf1, Trp53) or exhibited copy number
alterations (CNAs) (gain of Kras, Met, Braf, Ezh2) in multiple Gprc5a-/-
LUADs. Our data suggest that Gprc5a loss coupled with NNK exposure leads
to AT2-derived Kras mutant LUADs with co-occurring mutations and CNAs in
other driver oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Our findings also imply
that the tobacco carcinogen exposed Gprc5a-/- model emulates the
molecular pathology of human LUAD and offers unique opportunities to map
the temporal evolution of Kras mutant LUAD and identify targets for
chemoprevention of this fatal malignancy.

