Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnetoelectric particles cross blood brain barrier to deliver
anti-tumor peptide to glioblastoma cells with on-demand release


Background: Despite significant progress in targeted drug delivery,
glioblastoma is one of the least treatable tumors today. Delivering
therapy across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and overcoming resistance of
tumor cells to current treatments remains a formidable task. The
objective of the current in vitro and in vivo study was to show how a new
class of multifunctional nanoparticles termed magnetoelectric
nanoparticles (MENs) are used to achieve high-efficacy delivery of a
therapeutic load across BBB, then release the load on demand, without
affecting normal cells, via application of a specially tailored command
sequence of D.C. and A.C. magnetic fields.Methods: Growth hormone
(GH)-releasing hormone (GHRH) antagonists, a class of anti-tumor
peptides, block the release of tumorigenic insulin-like growth factors.
Glioblastoma cell line U87 MG were treated with 1 M of GHRH antagonist
MIA-690 bound to GMO-MENs in MEM media supplemented with 5% FBS and 1%
penstrep. In parallel, an in vitro BBB experiment, designed using
transwells, applied a D.C. magnetic field gradient to determine optimal
field and exposure time for MENs to penetrate the BBB. Next, experimental
cells were placed on a D.C. magnetic field (100 Oe) for 12 h to induce
nanoelectroporation, then an A.C. field (50 Hz) for 2 h to release the
peptide intracellularly. Control cells were treated with MIA-690 peptide
only, GMO-MENs only, and MIA-690 bound to GMO-MENs at varying magnetic
fields and exposure times. Cells were incubated at 37C with 5% CO2 in a
humidified atmosphere. At 24 h and 48 h post-treatment, trypan-blue vital
stain assessed cell growth inhibition. Cells were then washed and lysed
to measure the concentration of MENs, and MIA-690 using ICP-MS and
spectrophotometry, respectively. AFM and SEM-EDS imaged MENs in cell
lysate and brain tissue from mice IV injected with MENs, to find
signature peaks of Ba and Ti representing the outer core of MENs, to
ascertain if particles cross the BBB in vivo.Summary of data:
Glioblastoma cells treated with MIA-690 bound to GMO-MENs on a D.C.
magnetic field for 12 h, then an A.C. field for 2 h exhibited the
greatest penetration of MENs and inhibition of tumor growth. AFM and
SEM-EDS imaging showed MENs in cell lysate treated with D.C. for 12 h,
but not 2 h or with no magnetic field, confirming application of a low
D.C. field for 12 h triggers MENs penetration. On-demand MIA-690
intracellular release was highest after exposure to 12 h of D.C. field,
then A.C. field at 50 Hz. Confocal microscopy confirmed a transfer of at
least 50% of drug-loaded MENs across in vitro BBB, requiring 200 Oe/cm
for 5 h. SEM-EDS images of brain slices taken from mice treated with MENs
confirmed the presence of Ba and Ti, indicating MENs are able to cross
BBB in vivo.Conclusion: Functionalized MENs are effective in treating
glioblastomas using targeted, on-demand release of anti-tumor drug with
the ability to cross the BBB.

