Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of chd5-mediated gene repression synergizes with MYCN to
accelerate neuroblastoma tumorigenesis in zebrafish


Neuroblastoma is a malignancy of the peripheral sympathetic nervous
system (PSNS) and accounts for 10-15% of cancer deaths among children.
For the 40% of patients presenting with high-risk disease, current
therapeutic approaches are insufficient and long-term survival is less
than 50%. Along with genomic amplification of the MYCN oncogene,
hemizygous loss of the 1p36 chromosomal region is a major risk factor in
neuroblastoma. The human CHD5 gene is a neuronal specific chromatin
remodeling helicase that maps to 1p36, and is thus frequently lost in
high-risk neuroblastoma. Our laboratory has previously generated a
faithful model of pediatric neuroblastoma in the zebrafish driven by
overexpression of the MYCN oncogene in the PSNS (dbh:MYCN). Additionally,
zebrafish chd5 mutant alleles were created using the newly developed gene
editing technologies TALEN and CRISPR-Cas9. The resulting chd5 mutant
fish exhibit abnormal development of the PSNS in the form of expansion of
the superior cervical ganglia and enlargement of the interrenal gland
(adrenal medulla). Haploinsufficiency for Chd5 combined with dbh:MYCN
expression accelerates the onset and increases the penetrance of
neuroblastoma tumorigenesis in zebrafish, indicating a tumor suppressive
function. Elevated p-ERK and PCNA+ cells in tumor tissue indicates that
loss of Chd5, cooperates with MYCN overexpression to accelerate
neuroblast proliferation in vivo. Chd5 (in addition to Chd3 and Chd4) is
a core member of the epigenetic regulatory NuRD complex, which also
contains HDAC1-2, MTA1-3, MBD2-3, GATAD2A/B and RBBP4/7. The conserved
biological function of Chd5 is to silence gene expression through the
maintenance of a repressed chromatin state. Tumors deficient for Chd5
expression exhibit reduced levels of the H3K27me3 histone modification, a
marker of facultatively repressed genes. Future studies will further
explore the mechanism and function of Chd5 so that the pathways mediating
tumor suppression can be elucidated and that essential proteins in these
pathways can be targeted in ways that exploit the synthetic lethal
relationships that are established.

