Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KPT-9274 inhibits cellular NAD and synergizes with NAD depleting
enzymes to induce cancer cell death


Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is an essential metabolite and
important cofactor of several biological processes (i.e. metabolism and
genomic stability) that undergo significant alterations during malignant
transformation. In cancer cells, NAD undergoes quick turnover through the
high metabolic demands of rapidly proliferating cells and increased
activity of NAD consuming enzymes, such as sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and poly ADP
ribose polymerase 1 (PARP1). NAD can be generated de novo from tryptophan
or regenerated by nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT) or
nicotinate phosphoribosyl transferase 1 (NAPRT1) in NAD salvage pathways.
However, cancer cells do not utilize the de novo or NAPRT1 pathways
effectively and instead rely on the NAMPT-dependent salvage pathway to
generate NAD, making NAD depletion a promising anti-cancer therapy. We
have previously described the PAK4 allosteric modulator, KPT-9274, which
can also inhibit the enzymatic activity of NAMPT. KPT-9274 and other
NAMPT inhibitors rapidly deplete cellular NAD levels, ultimately leading
to ATP depletion and cell death. Similarly, several studies have shown
that hyper activation of NAD consuming enzymes can lead to apoptosis. The
purpose of this study is to determine whether NAD inhibition by KPT-9274
can synergize with NAD depleting enzymes to enhance the cytotoxic effects
of KPT-9274 in cancer cells.Methods: Celltiter-Glo was used to measure
ATP levels and viability of cells. NAD/NADH-Glo was used to measure total
NAD levels in cells. Gene and protein expression was measured using
quantitative PCR and western blot analysis, respectively. Protein
knockdown was accomplished using RNAi.Results: We have identified an
orally bioavailable dual inhibitor of PAK4 and NAMPT, which demonstrated
potent anti-cancer activity in a variety of cell lines both in vitro and
in vivo. We have identified a mechanistic combination that increase the
antitumor activity of KPT-9274, through the activation of NAD consuming
enzymes such as SIRT1 and PARP1. Specifically, we found that SRT1720 (an
activator of SIRT1) synergizes with KPT-9274 to increase cancer cell
death while RNAi of SIRT1 diminishes the efficacy of KPT-9274. In
addition, activation of PARP1 by DNA damaging agents (e.g. gemcitabine)
significantly enhances the effectiveness of KPT-9274 mediated cell death.
Finally, we show that PARP activation through DNA-damaging agents
enhances the cytotoxicity and anti-tumor properties of KPT-9274 in
xenograft models.Conclusions: Here we report that KPT-9274 synergizes
with NAD depleting enzymes to induce cancer cell death in vitro and in
vivo. This noteworthy enhancement to the anticancer activity of KPT-9274,
together with its previously described PAK4 inhibition, support the
continued development of this orally bioavailable small molecule in
combination with current therapies.

