Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of a breast cancer risk prediction
model for black women: findings from the Nigerian breast cancer study


Background: Breast cancer (BC) risk prediction models, such as the Gail
model, have been developed and widely used to identify women at higher
risk of having breast cancer in developed countries. However, no model
exists for Black women of sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Because African women
have different risk profiles, it is of public health importance to
develop a Black women-specific model.Methods: A total of 1,880
hospital-based cases and 2,166 population-based controls from the
Nigerian Breast Cancer Study (NBCS, 19982015) were included in the
analysis. Subjects were randomly divided into the training (2/3 of the
data) and validation sets (1/3 of the data), and multivariate logistic
regressions were used to derive the model. Risk factors were selected
based on previous NBCS findings and literature review. Calibration and
discrimination performances were assessed using the observed/expected
ratio (O/E) and concordance statistic (C-index), respectively.Results:
The final model included age, age at menarche, parity, duration of breast
feeding, family history of BC in first degree relatives, height, body
mass index, benign breast diseases, oral contraceptive use, and alcohol
drinking. The model performed well in the validation set with an O/E of
1.01 (95% CI: 0.931.09) and C-index of 0.694 (95% CI: 0.6660.722). The
odds ratios for developing BC by percentiles of the predicted chance of
cases, relative to women in the middle quintile, showed a monotonic
increasing trend.Conclusion: In Nigeria, the most populous country in SSA
with 175 million people, this study developed and validated a risk
prediction model for BC that is specific to Black women. It can be used
to identify individuals at high risk of BC for cancer prevention. Using
the population incidence rates in Nigeria, an absolute risk prediction
model will be further developed.
Validation analyses in both training set and validation set

