Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer-derived exosomes alter the metabolic
microenvironment of bone marrow pre-metastatic niche through PKM2 to
promote bone metastasis


Tumor-derived exosomes are emerging mediators of tumor progression. We
explored the role of prostate cancer (PCa)-derived exosomes (Ex) in PCa
bone metastasis. Systemic pre-treatment of mice with PCa-Ex increased PCa
tumor growth in bone, this was associated with increased early PCa cell
seeding into the bone marrow. PCa-Ex had no direct impact on PCa growth
or invasive ability in vitro; whereas, conditioned-media (CM) from
PCa-Ex-treated stromal cells increased PCa cell growth, invasion and
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). PCa-Ex preferentially targeted
bone marrow versus lung or liver stroma when injected IV. Proteomic
analysis of PCa-Ex-treated cells revealed that PCa-Ex increased pyruvate
kinase M2 (PKM2) protein expression in both ST2 stromal cells and primary
bone marrow stromal cells, although PKM2 mRNA expression was not altered.
PKM2 protein expression correlated with aggressiveness of PCa cell lines
and was highest in serum of PCa patients with metastases compared to
those with primary tumors. PCa-Ex induced both autophagy and
-hydroxybutarate (BHB) production from stromal cells. Knockdown of PKM2
in PCa cells resulted in production of PCa-Ex with low PKM2. The low PKM2
PCa-Ex had diminished ability to induce PCa cell growth, autophagy and
BHB production. IV PCa-Ex and orthotopic tumors increased bone marrow BHB
levels. PCa-Ex treatment of stromal cells induced the CM to (1) increase
in oxygen consumption rate (OCR) by 80%; (2) extracellular acidification
rate (ECAR) by 25%; and (3) increase ATP production in PCa cells. BHB
induced OCR, but not ECAR in a dose responsive fashion. BHB
administration induced a dose-responsive increase in intratibial tumor
growth in mice. Our experiments indicate that primary tumor PCa-Ex can
target the bone marrow microenvironment and educate stromal cells to
promote PCa progression through increasing PKM2 expression in stromal
cells resulting in ketone production that supports metastatic growth.
Overall this demonstrates that primary tumor exosomes modulate the
metabolic status of the distant pre-metastatic niche to promote
metastasis.

