Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of genomic heterogeneity in colorectal carcinoma on
therapy response - a study on monoclonal primary colon cultures


Introduction: Individual response to chemotherapy in colorectal cancer
patients is highly variable and the underlying mechanisms of treatment
resistance of colorectal cancer cells are poorly understood. Recent
studies revealed a considerable degree of genomic and genetic tumor
heterogeneity. We hypothesize that the intra-tumoral heterogeneity has a
direct impact on treatment response as sub-populations of cancer cells
are resistant to currently used chemotherapeutics and facilitate tumor
growth under treatment.Experimental procedures: Patient-derived primary
colorectal cell lines were established employing three different
methodological approaches: (i) mouse xenografts and reintroduction of the
graft to culture, (ii) conditional reprogramming by Rho kinase inhibition
in combination with irradiated feeder cells and (iii) organoid growth in
Matrigel with Wnt-, R-spondin and Noggin conditioned medium. Established
primary cultures were characterized genomically by array CGH and spectral
karyotyping (SKY).Results: To date, we successfully established eight
patient-derived primary colorectal cell lines. Culture conditions were
optimized for long-term in vitro growth of colorectal primary tissue.
Array CGH has identified patterns of chromosomal imbalances in these cell
lines, i.e. gains of chromosomes 7, 13 and 20 as well as a loss of
chromosome 18. Additionally, gene amplifications of MYC and EGFR were
identified. As these aberrations are typically found in colorectal
cancer, the established primary tissue derived cell lines closely reflect
the nature of the tumor in vivo in terms of genomic instability. Array
CGH findings were confirmed using SKY. Sub-cultivation of single cell
derived monoclonal cell lines will facilitate addressing the tumor
heterogeneity in terms of their genomic and genetic background using
genome and transcriptome analyses. Single-cell derived lines will then be
exposed to chemotherapeutic drugs currently used in clinical routine such
as 5-FU and Oxaliplatin. The respective sensitivity will be correlated to
the aberration profiles.Conclusion: Exploration of tumor heterogeneity in
terms of their genomic and genetic background in the context of treatment
response might facilitate understanding of therapy resistance. Moreover,
reliable prediction of the patient's response to the employed
chemotherapeutic drug is a necessary step towards individualized
treatment in colorectal cancer.

