Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis to identify functional basis of prostate
cancer risk SNPs


Introduction:Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified
numerous common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with
the risk of developing prostate cancer. Many of these prostate cancer
GWAS hits occur in intergenic regions, distant from any annotated gene.
Little is yet known about how these SNPs function to alter an
individual's risk of prostate cancer. Here we test the hypothesis that
many of these SNPs, or SNPs with which they are correlated, alter
regulatory regions and thus gene expression in the prostate.Materials and
Methods:To test if prostate cancer risk SNPs are correlated with gene
expression changes, we conducted expression quantitative trait locus
(eQTL) association analysis. Using genome-wide high-density genotypes and
gene expression data from 56 tumor and 58 adjacent normal prostate
tissues we asked if any of the prostate cancer risk SNPs correlate with
expression changes in nearby genes using linear regression, adjusting
gene expression levels for principal components of ancestry and different
batches. We also asked if individuals who have a higher genetic risk of
prostate cancer based on the genotype of all of their risk SNPs show
different gene expression patterns in the prostate than those at lower
risk of prostate cancer.Results:We have identified several novel
cis-eQTLs in prostate tissue for prostate cancer risk SNPs including
rs1933488 with RGS17. We have also replicated several previously known
cis-eQTLs, including those for IRX4, PPP1R14A, and FOXP4. Individuals at
higher genetic risk of developing prostate cancer have altered expression
of 37 genes (pIntroduction:Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
identified numerous common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with the risk of developing prostate cancer. Many of these
prostate cancer GWAS hits occur in intergenic regions, distant from any
annotated gene. Little is yet known about how these SNPs function to
alter an individual's risk of prostate cancer. Here we test the
hypothesis that many of these SNPs, or SNPs with which they are
correlated, alter regulatory regions and thus gene expression in the
prostate.Materials and Methods:To test if prostate cancer risk SNPs are
correlated with gene expression changes, we conducted expression
quantitative trait locus (eQTL) association analysis. Using genome-wide
high-density genotypes and gene expression data from 56 tumor and 58
adjacent normal prostate tissues we asked if any of the prostate cancer
risk SNPs correlate with expression changes in nearby genes using linear
regression, adjusting gene expression levels for principal components of
ancestry and different batches. We also asked if individuals who have a
higher genetic risk of prostate cancer based on the genotype of all of
their risk SNPs show different gene expression patterns in the prostate
than those at lower risk of prostate cancer.Results:We have identified
several novel cis-eQTLs in prostate tissue for prostate cancer risk SNPs
including rs1933488 with RGS17. We have also replicated several
previously known cis-eQTLs, including those for IRX4, PPP1R14A, and
FOXP4. Individuals at higher genetic risk of developing prostate cancer
have altered expression of 37 genes (p<0.001) in their tumor tissue
compared to individuals at lower genetic risk.Conclusions:These data
demonstrate that several prostate cancer risk SNPs are associated with
expression changes in nearby genes in both pathologically malignant and
pathologically benign prostate tissue from patients who underwent radical
prostatectomy. Additional genes, including HMOX1, CSGALNACT1, and WDR36
show altered expression in patients with different levels of genetic risk
of prostate cancer.

