Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translating EPHARNA (DOPC nanoliposomal EphA2-targeted siRNA) to
the clinic


Introduction: To address the need for efficient and biocompatible
delivery systems for systemic siRNA delivery, we have developed a
1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphatidylcholine (DOPC) nanoliposomal
EphA2-targeted therapeutic (EPHARNA). We have previously demonstrated the
efficacy of EPHARNA in multiple tumor models. Here, following FDA
guidance, we performed safety studies of EPHARNA in murine and primate
models.Methods: Single dosing of EPHARNA was tested at 5 concentrations
in mice (N = 15 per group) and groups of animals were sacrificed on days
1, 14, and 28 for evaluation of clinical pathology and organ toxicity.
Multiple dosing of EPHARNA was tested in mice twice weekly for 1 month (N
= 10 per group) and in Rhesus macaques weekly (N = 4 per group) at two
dose levels in each model. Possible effects on hematologic parameters,
serum chemistry, coagulation, and organ toxicity were assessed in all
animals.Results: Following single dose EPHARNA administration to mice, no
gross pathological or dose-related microscopic findings were observed in
either the acute (24 hrs) or recovery (14 and 28 days) phases of this
study. The no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) for EPHARNA is
considered > 225 g/kg when administered as a single injection
intravenously in CD-1 male and female mice. With twice weekly injection,
EPHARNA appeared to stimulate a mild to moderate inflammatory response in
a dose-related fashion. In addition, there appeared to be a mild
hemolytic reaction in the female mice. Systemic toxicity related to both
the DOPC formulation as well as EphA2 silencing was assessed in Rhesus
macaques due to the near 100% homology between Rhesus and human EphA2.
One animal developed signs consistent with an infusion reaction on its
first administration, and was dosed with a slow infusion over 15-30
minutes with subsequent infusions. Minimal to moderate infiltration of
mononuclear cells was found in some organs including the GI tract, heart,
and kidney in all Rhesus macaques in all groups. The significance of
these infiltrates to the general health of the animals is unknown. One
female in the control group and one in the high dose group had ovarian
mineralization, which was considered incidental in this study. No
differences attributed to EPHARNA were observed in the hematologic or
anatomic parameters assessed.Conclusion: These results demonstrate that
EPHARNA is well tolerated at all doses tested without significant
complications. These data, combined with previously published validation
studies demonstrating siRNA as an effective therapeutic in vivo, led to
the development of a first in human Phase I clinical trial that is
currently underway (NCT01591356).

