Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of therapeutic EGFR inhibition on immune checkpoint
blockade in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Patients with advanced recurrent and/or metastatic head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have few effective treatment options and a poor
median survival of 6-8 months. Limited improvement in overall survival
has been observed in HNSCC patients treated with EGFR inhibitors despite
high expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in these
tumors. Remarkable clinical results are emerging from immunotherapy
targeting programmed death-1 (PD1) and its ligand programmed death
ligand-1 (PDL1). Blockade of the PD1/PDL1 interaction is believed to
enhance endogenous anti-tumor immunity by restoring T cell cytotoxic
action. PDL1 is highly expressed in primary, recurrent, and metastatic
HNSCC and phase 1 clinical trials are ongoing for monoclonal antibodies
targeting the PD1/PDL1 axis in HNSCC.We found that activation of EGFR in
HNSCC cells by epidermal growth factor (EGF) significantly increases PDL1
expression in a dose dependent manner. EGFR inhibition using tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI) or cetuximab suppresses this EGF-induced PDL1
expression in cells with both wild type and constitutively active EGFR.
This is consistent with published data that constitutively active EGFR in
lung cancer cells correlates with higher PDL1 expression, and this can be
reversed by EGFR inhibition. These results suggest there may be
interactions between EGFR-targeted therapy and immunotherapy involving
the PD1/PDL1 axis.To evaluate potential therapeutic interactions, we used
an immunocompetent, syngeneic mouse model of human EGFR-expressing TUBO
cancer cells on a BALB/c background. The murine TUBO-EGFR cells are
sensitive to human EGFR inhibitors both in vitro and in vivo. Initial
studies show that treatment of tumors with EGFR inhibitor (erlotinib)
results in increased intratumoral CD8+ T cell infiltration and tumor
regression, suggesting that EGFR inhibition can impact the anti-tumor T
cell response. We are currently evaluating the effects of EGFR inhibition
on PDL1 expression and tumor response to PD1/PDL1 blockade using this
model. Further, a clinical trial investigating the impact of cetuximab
treatment on intratumoral expression of PDL1 in HNSCC patients is planned
to open shortly. We conclude that signaling mediated by EGFR can impact
expression of PDL1 by HNSCC. Understanding the interactions between EGFR
inhibitors and immune checkpoint blockade could lead to new approaches to
combining TKI and cancer immunotherapy.

