Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uptake of antibody-drug conjugates by cultured Kupffer cells can
predict pharmacokinetics


Interest in antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) has increased rapidly in the
oncology field over the past several years. Recent advances in the ADC
field have been achieved in part by an improved understanding of how
conjugation with drug-linkers impacts the biophysical, pharmacokinetic
(PK), and biodistribution properties of a monoclonal antibody. Most of
these advances have been driven by in vivo preclinical observations, an
inevitably low throughput endeavor. A higher throughput in vitro method
that would allow some level of predictive power for ADC disposition in
vivo would be highly advantageous, requiring less test article and
allowing for much faster turnaround. Thus far no such methods for ADCs
have been reported, in contrast to the situation for the prediction of
the metabolic clearance of small molecule therapeutics, for which
cultured hepatocytes are widely used as an in vitro tool. It has been
generally assumed that clearance of ADCs is driven by cells of the
monocyte phagocytic system, and we recently published
immunohistochemistry (IHC) data implicating hepatic sinusoidal
endothelium and the resident liver macrophages, Kupffer cells (KCs), in
the accelerated clearance of highly-loaded ADCs. We sought to use this
observation to develop a convenient assay that might correlate ADC uptake
in vitro with in vivo PK. Initial fluorescent microscopy experiments
revealed that cultured rat KCs stain intensely when incubated with
fluorescently labeled ADCs, but much less so with unconjugated antibody,
similar to the observed IHC results. In an effort to further improve the
throughput of this method to allow the rapid comparison of many ADCs, we
moved to a FACS-based platform to quantify the amount of KC-associated
fluorescent conjugate. To quantify the effect of different drug-linkers,
we prepared homogeneous ADCs with 8 drugs per antibody and observed that
the KC staining intensity varied widely depending upon the
characteristics of the drug-linker that was conjugated. KCs incubated
with ADCs loaded with vc-PAB-MMAE had a mean fluorescent intensity (MFI)
>20 fold higher than unconjugated Antibody. Additionally, ADCs loaded
with MMAE that contain a polyethylene glycol (PEG) masking moiety in the
linker had a much lower MFI than those without PEG. This FACS method
allowed us to compare fluorescent uptake by KCs with ADC clearance
determined in vivo. We have observed that ADC uptake by cultured KCs in
vitro correlates well with ADC PK, allowing for more rapid assessment of
the PK impact of new drug classes, drug-linker designs, and conjugation
methodologies.

