Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biobank collaboration enables cancer modeling with high quality
biospecimens and data


According to the National Cancer Institute, the lack of standardized,
high-quality biospecimens is one of the most significant roadblocks to
progress in cancer research. This shortage especially affects the
generation of murine xenograft models of human cancers. Maine, with the
third largest age-adjusted cancer incidence rate in the nation, has
abundant cancer specimens potentially available for research. To meet the
need for quality biospecimens, the biobanks at Eastern Maine Medical
Center and Maine Medical Center have established a collaboration to
jointly procure cancer specimens from Maine patients. Through this
collaboration, the cooperating biobanks provide researchers with tissue,
blood, bone marrow and other body fluid specimens from a broad spectrum
of solid and hematologic cancers. The specimens from hematologic cancer
patients have > 90% viability and demonstrate anticipated biomarker
composition by flow cytometry. The comparatively high frequency of
engraftment of solid tumors in immunodeficient mice is also indicative of
the quality of the samples procured by both repositories. Currently, the
biobanks are providing fresh ovarian tumors to develop new xenograft
models for poorly engrafting tumors in collaboration with the Jackson
Laboratory's Patient Derived Xenograft Program. Both biobanks are
integrated with clinical and pathology practices and, therefore, the
specimens are annotated with in-depth, de-identified patient datasets.
With support from the Maine Cancer Foundation, the biobanks have created
the Maine Cancer Biospecimen Portal (MBCP), a website that provides
one-stop access to annotated cancer biospecimens and to consultation
services for translational research study design. The collaboration of
the EMMC and MMC biobanks provides a resource of high quality
biospecimens for advancement of both in vivo and in vitro translational
research such as mouse models of human cancers.

