Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microbiome profiling and immunological characterization on
gastrointestinal tract tumors


Motivation: Conservative estimates are that around 20% of all
malignancies may be attributed to microbiota. Especially in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, infection can cause chronic inflammation and
further influence immune response to create a proinflammatory
microenvironment for cancer development. This can account in part for the
reason that the immunotherapy in colon cancer is less efficacious than in
non-GI tract cancers. We proposed a systematic computational study to
profile the microbiome from next generation sequencing of gastric biopsy
samples, and evaluate the relationships among microbiome composition,
host immune response and genomic characterization.Method: Patients
undergoing upper endoscopy without chronic inflammatory disease or
chronic NSAID use were eligible for participation, including
cancer/non-cancer, Helicobacter pylori positive and negative patients. In
total, 62 endoscopic biopsies from 3 locations in the gastric antrum/body
were freshly frozen for whole genome sequencing and transcriptome
analysis. In addition, TCGA whole genome sequencing (WGS) data from 37
gastric cancer, 102 colon cancer, and 46 rectal cancer samples were
analyzed for microbiome composition.Results: H. pylori was detected in
all positive infection gastric biopsy samples by our pipeline, and the
results were successfully validated by qPCR. Comparing to other
traditional bacterial identification methods, our pipeline shows a strong
capacity for profiling microbiome from low bacterial content biopsy
samples. We observed a high positive correlation between the H. pylori
content and total non-H. pylori bacteria content. And we also identified
significantly differentially expressed immune-related genes between
active H. pylori infection and negative samples. Finally, we analyzed
collected TCGA WGS data, and identified the dominant species from the
different cancer studies, such as Bacteroides fragilis in rectum
adenocarcinoma, and Fusobacterium nucleatum in colon adenocarcinoma. The
correlation among microbiome composition, the expression of
immune-related genes and cancer genomic characterization were also
demonstrated in this study.

