Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of the prostate cancer microenvironment on the
expression and regulation of aldehyde dehydrogenases


Introduction:Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) enzymes are involved in the
detoxification of specific endogenous and exogenous aldehyde substrates.
High ALDH activity is used to identify stem cells and has also been
associated with poor prognosis in cancer. In prostate cancer (PCa) high
ALDH activity has been associated with elevated clonogenicity, migratory
behaviour, tumor progression and metastasis. Despite these observations
there exists a poor understanding of the role of selected ALDH isoforms
in PCa. In an attempt to understand if the tumor microenvironment impacts
on ALDH function, we investigated their expression under
hypoxia.Methods:Gene and protein expression analysis of ALDH isoforms
-1A1, -1A2, -1A3, -1B1, -2, -3A1 and -7A1 in normal prostate cell line
PNT2C2, and a panel of PCa cell lines with different stages of cancer was
carried out by quantitative PCR and western blot under normoxic and
hypoxic conditions at 24 and 48 hours. Gene expression of the ALDHs in
primary prostate cultures was assessed following retinoic acid treatment.
siRNA knockdown technology was used to study functional roles of selected
ALDH isoforms.Results:Gene expression of ALDH1A3 was increased in Bob
cells at 24h under hypoxia, at 48h this was less apparent but the
expression of most ALDHs in Bob cells including ALDH1A2, -2, -3A1 and
-7A1 was reduced at 48h. In SerBob cells, the gene expression of ALDH1A1
and -1B1 was reduced at both time points, whereas the expression of
ALDH1A2, -2, and -7A1 was increased under hypoxia. At protein level, the
expression of ALDH1A3 appeared low under hypoxia at both time points in
SerBob cells while the expression of ALDH3A1 also appeared low after 24h
exposure to hypoxia. In DU145 cells, there was an increase in ALDH1A1,
-1A2, 1A3, -2, and -3A1 gene expression under hypoxia at 48h. In LNCAP
cells, the gene expression of ALDH2 was increased at 48h under hypoxia
whereas the expression of ALDH7A1 was reduced at 48h. The protein
expression of ALDH7A1 was higher in PC3 cells under hypoxia at 24h. A
significant increase was observed in ALDH1A3 and ALDH3A1 expression in
response to retinoic acid. ALDH1A3 knockdown showed a significant
reduction of cell viability in PC3 cells. Other investigations underway
that will be reported at the conference are focused on how prostate
cancer stem-like cells expressing ALDHs are responding to
hypoxia.Conclusion:Our data suggests that the expression of certain ALDHs
is affected by hypoxia and ALDH1A3 potentially is involved in cell
survival in PCa. Future work will investigate if any of these isoforms
can be used as biomarkers to distinguish indolent from malignant PCa.

