Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel recurrent mutations reveals candidate actionable
mutations


Mutational hotspots indicate selective pressure across a population of
tumor samples and drive the dysregulation of proliferation, invasion, and
apoptosis in many human tumors. We recently performed a comprehensive
analysis of hotspot mutations in 11,000 retrospectively characterized
primary untreated cancers, revealing widespread lineage diversity and
mutational specificity. Yet, as broad-based clinical sequencing has begun
to guide the routine care of patients, most clinically sequenced cancer
patients present with recurrent or metastatic solid tumors. Furthermore,
such tumors likely possess distinct mutational patterns driven by prior
treatment exposure or treatment-associated evolution after diagnosis that
are undetectable in primary untreated samples. We therefore sought to
expand our analysis to incorporate such prospectively characterized
active cancer patients as part of an ongoing initiative at Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center. With nearly 10,000 patients profiled thus far,
this growing prospective dataset with extensive clinical and treatment
history is a transformative resource and the largest of its kind. Here,
we combined these prospective data with retrospective studies to analyze
the somatic mutational landscape of 21,000 cancer patients across 74
cancer types representing the broadest range of human malignancies
characterized to date. We developed and applied a biologically and
statistically principled computational model to identify hotspots mutated
more frequently than would be expected in the absence of selection. This
analysis uncovered hundreds of new biologically and therapeutically
relevant candidate driver mutations for which targeted agents are
currently being investigated in early phase trials. Indeed, we identify
several hotspots in key effectors of PI3K and MAPK signaling with
differential response in vitro to current investigational therapies
suggesting mutant allele-specific therapeutic decisions may be warranted.
In total, over half of all hotspot mutations identified were novel,
including several novel hotspots in small GTPase RAC1 that are lineage
specific and functionally distinct. Understanding the distinct molecular
function of these mutations, and the specific mutant alleles at
individual codons, is a necessary translational prerequisite for enabling
precision oncology through clinical decision support for patients
sequenced at the point of care.

