Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuroblastoma is bi-phasic and includes classical neuro-epithelial
cells and chemo-resistant mesenchymal cells


IntroductionMost high stage neuroblastoma initially respond to
chemotherapy, but ultimately relapse as therapy-resistant tumor. The
mechanisms driving relapse and resistance remain elusive. We investigated
whether neuroblastoma tumors include divergent cell types that may
underlie this plasticity.Experimental proceduresFresh tumor cells
cultured in neural stem cell medium were analyzed by FACS, whole genome
sequencing, Chip-seq, mRNA profiling, and motility and chemo-sensitivity
assays. Inducible transgenes were used to test state-transitions. Tumors
were analyzed by immunohistochemistry.ResultsNew neuroblastoma cell lines
always included two cell types, which share the same genetic defects but
have highly divergent phenotypes. One type has a neuro-epithelial (NE)
phenotype and expresses all classical neuroblastoma markers. The other
type has a mesenchymal (MES) character, is motile and lacks all
neuroblastoma markers. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) detected a small
fraction of MES cells in most primary neuroblastoma.In four isogenic cell
line pairs, we found that MES cells were more chemo-resistant than their
NE-type counterparts. Indeed, comparison of primary neuroblastoma lesions
before and after chemotherapy showed an accumulation of viable MES-type
cells in post treatment samples. Moreover, comparison of primary,
pre-treatment tumors with relapses emerging 4-5 years later in the same
patients showed a strong enrichment for MES cells in the latter.As these
data suggest a role for MES-type cells in relapse development, we
analyzed their key regulatory pathways. The isogenic MES-NE cell line
pairs showed consistent mRNA expression differences between both
phenotypes, activating major signaling routes and transcription factors.
Chip-seq identified divergent histone modifications. MES cells had high
NOTCH pathway activity and PRRX1 expression. Induced expression of NOTCH
or PRRX1 converted multiple NE-type cell lines into MES-type cells,
including chemo-resistance. Further analysis of these routes
reconstructed molecular wiring of MES-type cells. This identified
key-players like MEK and PDGFR, which were successfully targeted by small
molecules to specifically kill MES cells in vitro.ConclusionsOur data
suggest that neuroblastoma is a bi-phasic tumor. MES and NE cells differ
in many characteristics, but can transdifferentiate into each other. MES
and NE cells may correspond to developmental stages, i.e. mesenchymal
migratory cells delaminated from the neural crest and more differentiated
cells of the adrenergic lineage. MES cells accumulate after chemo-therapy
and in relapses. They may survive classical therapy and over time seed
relapses, that ultimately become heterogeneous again. Elimination of MES
cells with small molecule inhibitors shows how cells with a potential key
role in relapse development are amenable to therapy.

