Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leveraging transcriptomic and genomic data to better select models
for preclinical oncology therapeutic development to identify cell lines
most similar to patient tumors


Cancer cell lines represent the front line of new compound testing, and
results from these experiments often decide which compounds go on for
further testing. Genomic context plays a critical role in drug response
and now genomic data for tumors and cell lines are widely available.
However, cell lines are often chosen based on ease of access, literature
prevalence, and ease of culture. We combined gene expression and
CNV/mutation profiling from four pancreatic cancer tumor datasets
(GSE21501, GSE28735, ICGC, TCGA,) and three pancreatic cancer cell line
datasets (Klijn et al, Collisson et al, and CCLE) to identify which cell
lines best match patient tumors.CNV comparison revealed that popular cell
lines do not always have the best CNV correlation with tumors: when
comparing pancreatic cancer tumors to cell lines, the citations of the
top five cell lines by CNV correlation were less than 10% of the
pancreatic cancer cell line total. Next we filtered for driver mutations
including SMAD4 and CDKN2A using mutation scoring algorithms and
clustered tumors and cell lines. We found that many cell lines with few
citation counts clustered readily amongst tumors (such as L33).
Leveraging the hypothesis that different hits in the same pathway can
have a similar downstream effect, we combined CNV, expression and
mutation data and clustered cell lines together with tumors based on
overall aberrations in MSigDB cancer pathways. L33 and YAPC clustered
near tumors while the majority of other cell lines clustered together.To
identify coexpressed gene clusters, we ran WGCNA individually in all
seven datasets and discovered modules consistent in cell line and tumor
datasets using iGraph. One of the most interesting modules (interferon
regulated genes) is expressed highly in the majority of tumors profiled.
About half of cell lines also express this module highly, suggesting that
they may be more ideal models for high interferon expression tumors than
other cell lines.Here we present evidence demonstrating that certain cell
lines mimic pancreatic tumor genomes more closely while others represent
patterns of genomic features not commonly observed in vivo. We also show
that certain biologically relevant tumor subtypes may be better
represented by some cell lines than others. Our analysis highlights the
emerging role of genomics in advancing the clinical success of
therapeutic trials.

