Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosyltransferase ST6Gal-I enables cancer cells to survive upon
growth factor deprivation


Tumor growth often outpaces the tumor's ability to form new
vascularization leading to a tumor microenvironment containing areas with
limited access to serum-derived growth factors (GFs). How tumor cells are
able to proliferate and survive in the absence of GFs is not completely
understood. Recent work from our group has uncovered a novel mechanism by
which ST6Gal-I, a glycosyltransferase upregulated in many cancers,
enables cells to evade GF deprivation-mediated apoptosis. ST6Gal-I is a
trans-Golgi sialyltransferase that catalyzes the addition of a bulky,
negatively charged sialic acid in an 2-6 manner to the termini of
N-linked glycans on glycoproteins bound for the plasma membrane. This
sialic acid addition can modulate protein conformation and function,
similar to phosphorylation. Prior studies from our group show that
ST6Gal-I activity confers a cancer stem cell phenotype as well as
enhances chemoresistance, leading us to hypothesize that ST6Gal-I
promotes tumor cell survival, invasion and metastasis. To better
understand the role ST6Gal-I plays in tumor cell survival upon GF
deprivation, we monitored the response of ovarian and pancreatic cancer
cells with either ST6Gal-I overexpression or knockdown to serum
starvation. Upon serum starvation, cells overexpressing ST6Gal-I
preferentially survived and continued to proliferate whereas cells with
ST6Gal-I knockdown underwent cell death more readily, as evidenced by
live-dead cell staining and cell proliferation assays. Furthermore, in
the absence of serum, ST6Gal-I activity promotes the activation and/or
expression of multiple pro-survival proteins, such as Akt, p70-S6K, NFB,
and cIAP2, as well as cell cycle regulators including CyclinD2.
Interestingly, upon long-term GF deprivation, immunoblotting analysis
reveals a selective enrichment for ST6Gal-I in the remaining live cells
providing evidence that cells with high ST6Gal-I expression selectively
survive GF deficiency. Collectively these data suggest that upregulation
of ST6Gal-I in tumor cells may promote cell survival in areas of the
tumor microenvironment that have decreased access to a blood supply.

