Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of somatic mutations associated with pulmonary
metastasis of osteosarcoma by whole exome sequencing


Objective: Pulmonary metastasis is a main cause of death for the patients
with osteosarcoma (OS), although no specific genetic alteration
associated with pulmonary metastasis has been reported. The objective of
this study was to identify candidate somatic genetic alteration
contributed to pulmonary metastasis in pediatric OS.Methods: Five sample
sets including the tissues taken from primary tumor (P), resected
pulmonary metastatic tumor (M), and normal tissue (N) of the same
pediatric OS patients were analyzed by whole exome sequencing with Ion
Torrent Proton sequencer. 40ng of genomic DNAs extracted from each tissue
were used for multiplex PCR amplification with Ion Ampliseq Exome Kit.
Data analysis including alignment to the hg19 human reference genome and
variant calling was done using the Torrent Suite Software. Obtained
genomic data was validated by visualizing in Integrative Genomics Viewer
or capillary sequencing. Candidate somatic genetic alterations were
annotated by wANNOVAR database. Pathway analysis was performed using
GeneMANIA.Results: Mean read depths on the P, M, and N were 219, 212, and
109, respectively. We identified 1364 and 1311 candidate non-synonymous
somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) among the P and M,
respectively. After the validation and filtering, we detected 135
non-synonymous SNVs within the exon region in M. Among these, 32 SNVs
were overlapped with those in P. Only 2 recurrent SNVs were identified
within the whole SNVs. C:G>T:A transition mutations were frequently
observed in both P and M, and the frequency were higher in M comparing to
P. Pathway analysis showed a significant enrichment of the candidate SNVs
in genes involved in extracellular matrix regulation
(FDR;2.37E-03).Conclusion: We have identified 137 SNVs associated with
pulmonary metastasis from pediatric OS. Extracellular matrix-relating
signature might contribute to the genesis of pulmonary metastasis.

