Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin modulation of PCSC, HDAC, and microRNA in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma


Background: Obesity is an important risk factor of Pancreatic
Adenocarcinoma (PA) and it is characterized by the accumulation of
excessive body fat and a Body Mass Index (BMI) value greater than 30.
Obesity is also characterized by high levels of leptin, which has been
consistently associated with the development of many different cancer
including PA. Leptin can induce the proliferation of Pancreatic Cancer
Stem Cells (PCSC), which are responsible for chemoresistance,
invasiveness and reoccurrence of PA. PCSC express specific cell markers
and can form tumorspheres in vitro. Obesity can alter the DNA acetylation
and microRNA activity which are also linked to PA progression. We
hypothesized that high level of leptin could modulate Histone Deacetylase
(HDAC) and microRNA activity in PA cells, which induce PCSC changes and
tumor progression.Methods: The PA cell lines were cultured in mammocult
media that contained heparin and hydrocortisone, which will allow the
proliferation of tumorspheres enriched with PCSCs. The cells were
cultured with leptin, chemotherapeutic drug, and leptin signaling
inhibitor IONP-LPrA2. Tumorspheres formation (number and size) was
determined after 1 week of treatment. Additionally, the levels of PCSC
markers, HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8 in tumorspheres were determined
using flow cytometry, western blot, and RT-PCR. In addition, the effects
of treatments on miR21 and miR200a/c levels were determined using
RT-PCR.Results: Leptin induced PA tumorspheres formation and size, which
was accompanied by higher level of PCSC markers (CD24, CD44, ESA, and
ALDH1). Moreover, leptin affected the level of HDACs, miR21 and miR200a/c
in PA tumorspheres. IONP-LPrA2 abrogated leptin effects and decreased
PCSC which were spared by chemotherapeutics.Conclusion: Obesity signals
via leptin could be involved in the increase PA aggressiveness and
chemoresistance, which may be linked to the increase of PCSC. Leptin
could induce PA progression and chemoresistance via modulation of HDAC
and miRNA.Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the DOD
W81XWH-13-1-0382; NIH/SBIR1R41CA183399-01A1; Pilot Project Award from
MSM/Tuskegee University/UAB Cancer Center Partnership grant 5U54CA118638;
PC SPORE Grant from UAB to RRGP; Calvin Johnson Jr. Foundation Pancreatic
Cancer Research Scholarship to CITM, and facility and support services at
Morehouse School of Medicine (1G12RR026250-03; NIH RR03034 and 1C06
RR18386).

