Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GNA13 induction of stemness and resistance to chemotherapy in
breast and head and neck cancers


Despite advancement in cancer therapy, the ability of cancer cells to
evade therapy often leads to tumor recurrence and distant metastasis, and
ultimately to the death of the patient. Increasing evidence shows that
these properties of recurrence can be attributed to a small population of
cells within the tumor termed cancer stem cells (CSCs). Understanding the
mechanisms that support the growth of CSCs could provide new tools to
target these cells and improve therapeutic outcomes. G12 proteins,
comprised of G12 (GNA12) and G13 (GNA13) are mediators of G protein
coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. These proteins are highly expressed in
several cancers, and blocking their signaling can significantly inhibit
cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Recently, we have shown that loss of
GNA13 alone can suppress invasion of breast and prostate cancer cells.
Moreover, we have recently obtained evidence that enhanced expression of
GNA13 is capable of inducing a stem cell phenotype in cancer cells.
Specifically, enforced expression of GNA13 in cancer cells containing low
levels of GNA13 protein significantly induced CSC population as shown by
increased aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH1) activity, increased CD44+/CD24
cells, and enhancement of tumor sphere formation. In contrast, in cancer
cells that express high levels of GNA13, knockdown of GNA13 suppressed
ALDH1 activity, the CD44+/CD24 cell population, and the formation of
spheres. Using reporter assays we have identified that GNA13 induced CSC
phenotype most probably via activating Jun Kinase - AP1 signaling pathway
and blocking this pathway could significantly inhibit CSC phenotype
induced by GNA13. Most importantly we have identified that GNA13
expressing cells are resistant to most commonly used chemotherapeutic
agents and ionizing radiations. Blocking GNA13 using shRNAs sensitized
these cells to both chemo- and radiotherapy significantly. We therefore
hypothesize that GNA13 plays a pivotal role in the induction of CSCs and
drug resistance, and the suppression of GNA13 activity may provide
therapeutic advantage to cancer therapy.

