Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple biomarker combination increased both versatility and
recurrence-predictive accuracy of molecular deep surgical margin in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Oncologic evaluation of surgical margins has long depended on visible
histologic diagnosis. Although intraoperative cytology or frozen section
diagnosis directs surgery to be performed in a more adequate way, some
histologic negative surgical margins still have genetic or epigenetic
alterations associated with disease recurrence in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC). This phenomenon may be partly explained by field
cancerization or tumor budding. In order to further evaluate the
locoregional recurrences from histologically negative deep surgical
margins, we conducted molecular deep surgical margin analysis using
prospectively collected HNSCC surgical samples.Surgical specimens were
collected from consecutive patients with head and neck cancer from whom
written informed consent was obtained at Johns Hopkins Hospital
(Baltimore, MD) between May 2009 and December 2013. Surgical margins of
all cases were histologically negative. Deep surgical margin tissues (n =
70) were collected, and DNA extraction, bisulfite treatment and
quantitative MSP (QMSP) assay were performed for three candidate genes
(PAX5, VGF and ZNF420).First, methylation status of all 70 main tumors
were examined. PAX5 methylation was detected in 50 cases (71%), VGF
methylation in 34 cases (49%) and ZNF420 methylation in 25 cases (36%).
Among the cases with PAX5 methylation positive tumors, PAX5 methylation
of deep surgical margin tissue was positive in 10 cases and negative in
40 cases. The locoregional recurrence free survival (LRFS) of the cases
with methylation-positive margin was worse than those with negative
margin (P = 0.059, log-rank test), but not significant. Similarly, LRFS
difference between the cases with VGF methylated margin (14 cases) and
those with unmethylated margin (20 cases), and the cases with ZNF420
methylated margin (5 cases) and those with unmethylated margin (20 cases)
were not significant (P = 0.606, P = 0.059, log-rank test). Then, we
combined these three gene markers and defined the case with at least one
marker-positive surgical margin as margin positive. As a result, among
total 62 cases (89%), margin positive 22 cases showed significantly worse
LRFS than margin negative 40 cases (P = 0.021, log-rank test).Although
the case coverage rate of each individual marker was relatively low,
marker combination improved it up to 89% of all cases. Optimized gene
marker combination would help us not only to detect histologically
undetected cancerous cells but also to predict locoregional tumor
recurrences.

