Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasound-mediated neuropilin-1 shRNA minicircle delivery
inhibits tumour growth in an orthotopic human pancreatic adenocarcinoma
model


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by
an intense fibrotic reaction termed tumour desmoplasia/fibrosis, which is
partially responsible for its aggressive nature. The pro-fibrotic
cytokine TGF1 promotes fibroblast accumulation in several pathological
disorders, including cancer via endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EndMT), thereby implicating EndMT as a potential therapeutic target.
Previous studies have demonstrated angiogenic co-receptor, neuropilin-1
(NRP-1) as a co-receptor for TGF1 in mediating several oncogenic
processes. NRP-1 expression and TGF1 signaling have been shown to be
up-regulated in PDAC. However, the therapeutic benefits of targeting
NRP-1 in PDAC remain unexplored. We therefore hypothesized that targeting
NRP-1 in PDAC may inhibit TGF1-mediated EndMT, tumour perfusion and
tumour growth.Methods: Orthotopic tumours were generated in RNU athymic
rats from BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer cells using the implantation
technique. Animals were delivered at day 28 post surgery with either
empty minicircle-DNA (150 g) or shNRP-1 minicircle-DNA (200 g) using
ultrasound targeted microbubble destruction (UTMD). For UTMD, ultrasound
was transmitted using a phased array transducer (S3, Sonos 5500) at 1.3
MHz and a transmit power of 0.9 W (120 V, 9 mA), and at a pulsing
interval of 5 s. Contrast enhanced ultrasound perfusion imaging was
performed on day 28 (gene delivery) and day 56 (end-point) with
standardized analyses. Tumour tissues and remote organs were collected
for evaluation of tumour volume and other downstream analyses like
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), immunoblotting,
immunohistochemistry and Masson's trichrome staining (for
fibrosis).Results: RT-PCR and immunoblotting demonstrated successful
silencing of NRP-1 in shNRP-1 minicircle group. Immunohistochemistry
demonstrated a typical ductal morphology and substantial collagen content
within the tumours. Histological assessments further revealed reduced
NRP-1 expression and reduced fibrosis in shNRP-1 minicircle group.
Significant changes were observed in EndMT markers at transcript level
and protein level in shNRP-1 minicircle delivered animals compared to
empty minicircle. At day 56, profound reductions were observed in tumour
volumes in shNRP-1 minicircle delivered animals. Tumour area and
perfusion were found to be greater and more complete throughout the
tumour in empty minicircle group, while reduced area and perfusion was
observed in shNRP-1 minicircle group. At day 56, tumour microvascular
blood flow and blood volume were markedly reduced in the shNRP-1
minicircle group.Conclusions: Overall, these in vivo results suggest that
loss of NRP-1 leads to reduced fibrosis and tumour growth in PDAC
possibly through limiting EndMT and NRP-1 mediated angiogenesis, making
NRP-1 as a potential therapeutic target against PDAC.

