Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular cancer therapy targeting RNA-binding protein Musashi-1


Musashi-1 (MSI1) is an evolutionarily conserved RNA-binding protein best
studied for its role in post-transcriptional regulation of target mRNAs.
Elevated MSI1 levels in a variety of human cancers including colon cancer
are associated with up-regulation of Notch/Wnt signaling. MSI1 binds to
and negatively regulates translation of Numb and APC (adenomatous
polyposis coli), negative regulators of Notch and Wnt signaling
respectively. Our hypothesis is that, small molecules disrupting MSI1-RNA
binding will remove translational control of MSI1 over Numb/APC, which
will in turn inhibit Notch/Wnt signaling. Previously we have shown
natural product (-)-gossypol as the first small molecule inhibitor of
MSI1 that down-regulates Notch/Wnt signaling and inhibits tumor xenograft
growth in vivo. Here we identified gossypolone (Gn), a major metabolite
of gossypol, as a more potent MSI1inhibitor with more than 20-fold
increase in Ki value in our fluorescence polarization binding assay.
Further validation of Gn-MSI1 binding was carried out by surface plasmon
resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance. In colon cancer cells, Gn
reduced Notch/Wnt signaling and induced apoptosis. However, the same
concentration of Gn is less active than that of (-)-gossypol in all of
the cell assays tested. In order to increase Gn bioavailability, we used
the PEGylated liposome in our in vivo studies. Properties of
gossypolone-liposome (Gn-lip) were evaluated by transmission electron
microscopy and a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 instrument; cytotoxicity of free
liposomes as compared to Gn-lip and Gn was also evaluated. To further
characterize the in vivo tumor-specific accumulation of liposomes, a
near-infrared (NIR) fluorescent dye DiR was used. NIR imaging
demonstrated tumor-targeted delivery of DiR-loaded liposomes in DLD-1
xenografts in SCID mice. Gn-lip via tail vein injection twice weekly
inhibited the growth of human colon cancer DLD-1 xenografts in nude mice,
as compared to the untreated control (P Musashi-1 (MSI1) is an
evolutionarily conserved RNA-binding protein best studied for its role in
post-transcriptional regulation of target mRNAs. Elevated MSI1 levels in
a variety of human cancers including colon cancer are associated with
up-regulation of Notch/Wnt signaling. MSI1 binds to and negatively
regulates translation of Numb and APC (adenomatous polyposis coli),
negative regulators of Notch and Wnt signaling respectively. Our
hypothesis is that, small molecules disrupting MSI1-RNA binding will
remove translational control of MSI1 over Numb/APC, which will in turn
inhibit Notch/Wnt signaling. Previously we have shown natural product
(-)-gossypol as the first small molecule inhibitor of MSI1 that
down-regulates Notch/Wnt signaling and inhibits tumor xenograft growth in
vivo. Here we identified gossypolone (Gn), a major metabolite of
gossypol, as a more potent MSI1inhibitor with more than 20-fold increase
in Ki value in our fluorescence polarization binding assay. Further
validation of Gn-MSI1 binding was carried out by surface plasmon
resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance. In colon cancer cells, Gn
reduced Notch/Wnt signaling and induced apoptosis. However, the same
concentration of Gn is less active than that of (-)-gossypol in all of
the cell assays tested. In order to increase Gn bioavailability, we used
the PEGylated liposome in our in vivo studies. Properties of
gossypolone-liposome (Gn-lip) were evaluated by transmission electron
microscopy and a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 instrument; cytotoxicity of free
liposomes as compared to Gn-lip and Gn was also evaluated. To further
characterize the in vivo tumor-specific accumulation of liposomes, a
near-infrared (NIR) fluorescent dye DiR was used. NIR imaging
demonstrated tumor-targeted delivery of DiR-loaded liposomes in DLD-1
xenografts in SCID mice. Gn-lip via tail vein injection twice weekly
inhibited the growth of human colon cancer DLD-1 xenografts in nude mice,
as compared to the untreated control (P < 0.01, n = 10). Our data suggest
that Gn-lip improved the bioavailability of Gn as well as achieved
tumor-targeted delivery and controlled release of Gn, which enhances its
overall biocompatibility and drug efficacy in vivo. Our study provides a
proof-of-concept to develop the Gn-lip as a novel molecular therapy for
colon cancer with MSI1 overexpression.

