Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene knockout of NANOG and NANOGP8 mediated by CRISPR/Cas9 system
decreases the malignant potential of prostate cancer cells


Introduction & objectives :NANOG is an essential transcription factor for
self-renewal and pluripotency of embryonal stem cells. Recently, it has
been reported that NANOG is expressed in various somatic cancers,
including prostate cancer, and drive tumor development, and that
increased NANOG expression in human prostate cancer tissues is correlated
with an increased Gleason score. NANOG (hereinafter NANOG1) has many
pseudogenes, and only the NANOGP8 pseudogene encodes the full-length
NANOG1 protein with high sequence similarity. NANOGP8 is reported to be
expressed in most types of cancer as a primary contributor of NANOG mRNA
expression and to increase the malignant potential. However, the
proportion of NANOG protein expression that comes from NANOG1 and NANOG8
in cancer cells is not known because of the high similarity between them.
Therefore, a causal role of NANOG1 and NANOGP8 in prostate cancer cells
is not clear.Materials & methods :We established NANOG1-/- and NANOGP8-/-
prostate cancer cell lines from DU145 cells using CRISPR/Cas9, and also
we established NANOG1-rescued cells and NANOGP8-rescued cells from each
NANOG knockout cells for rescue experiments. We examined cancer
properties associated with malignant potential in these cells and DU145
cells, including self-renewal, sphere-formation, migration, drug
resistance and tumorigenic potential.Results :Colony formation assays
were performed to examine the role of NANOG1 and NANOGP8 in self-renewal.
The colony-forming capacity of NANOG1-/- and NANOGP8-/- cells was
decreased compared to parental cells. Similary, the sphere-forming
capacity of NANOG1-/- and NANOGP8-/- cells decreased to approximately 50%
compared to the parental cells. Wound-healing assays were performed to
examine the migration capacity, and migration was decreased in NANOG1-/-
and NANOGP8-/- cells by 40-60%. MTS assays 48 hours after docetaxel
administration were performed to evaluate the effect of NANOG1 and
NANOGP8 on drug sensitivity. NANOG1-/- and NANOP8-/- cells showed
increased sensitivity to docetaxel. NANOG1 and NANOGP8 knockout did not
inhibit in vitro cell proliferation, but in vivo tumorigenic potential
decreased significantly. These phenotypes were recovered in NANOG1- and
NANOGP8-rescued cell lines.Conclusion :These results indicate that both
NANOG1 and NANOGP8 proteins are expressed in prostate cancer cell lines,
and both genes equally contribute to the high malignant potential of
prostate cancer cells.

