Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunoproteomic profiling in African American men with prostate
cancer: Evidence for an autoimmune response to glycolytic enzymes


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer-related male deaths in the U.S. This
cancer is more aggressive in African American (AA) men, who are twice as
likely to die from the disease when compared to other racial groups.
Despite these racial disparities in PCa mortality, studies on PCa biology
and biomarker discovery include mostly patients from European American
(EA) backgrounds. There is a critical need to find minimally invasive PCa
biomarkers that could aid in diagnosis and prognosis, especially in high
risk populations like AA men. Immunoproteomics offers a minimally
invasive approach to detect early malignant processes that trigger
production of autoantibodies to tumor-associated antigens (TAA). We used
serum samples from AA (n = 59) and EA (n = 50) men with PCa to probe one-
and two-dimensional Western blots of protein lysates from aggressive PCa
cell lines. AA PCa patient sera showed stronger immunoreactivity to
proteins in PC3 cell lysates compared to the EA sera, with a 50 kD
protein band frequently targeted by autoantibodies in several AA PCa
sera. Serological proteomic analysis with mass spectrometry showed that
these AA PCa autoantibodies recognized alpha-enolase (ENO1), a protein
important in tumor formation, expansion, and glucose metabolism. In
addition, several other glycolytic enzymes important for tumor
proliferation were also identified as candidate prostate TAA, including
GAPDH, bisphosphate aldolase, phosphoglycerate kinase, and lactate
dehydrogenase. The ENO1 autoantibody frequency, measured by ELISA in sera
from 400 racially diverse men with and without PCa, was four-fold higher
in PCa compared to non-PCa patients. Interestingly, although sera from AA
men with PCa had stronger WB reactivity to ENO1 present in PC3 lysates
compared to EA men, and the ENO1 autoantibodies were initially discovered
in eight AA PCa sera but only in two EA sera, the anti-ENO1 autoantibody
frequency measured by ELISA, which used yeast-purified recombinant human
ENO1 as a substrate, was higher in the EA PCa cohort. In addition,
several anti-ENO1 positive sera from AA men with PCa showed increased
immunoreactivity to this protein in the PCa cell lines LNCaP, MDA-PC2b,
PC3, and DU145, but not against the purified ENO1 used in ELISA. The
opposite was true in the EA PCa cohort, where strong reactivity against
the purified ENO1 did not correlate with an equally strong
immunoreactivity against the cellular ENO1. The EA PCa sera did not
recognize the pattern of ENO1 expression observed with the AA sera in the
same panel of prostate cell lines. These differences of immunoreactivity
between AA and EA sera against PC3-ENO1 vs recombinant human ENO1 suggest
that select AA sera may predominantly recognize ENO1 epitopes not
displayed in the purified protein. These discrepancies point to racial
differences in the immune response to prostate tumors.

