Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The synergistic efficacy of Chk1/Chk2 inhibitors and doxorubicin
in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Different Checkpoint kinase inhibitors (Chk-i) have been developed to
increase the cytotoxic effect of genotoxic agents inhibiting the key
elements of the DNA damage response (DDR) pathways. Our group has already
showed the efficacy of this class of compounds in single agent in
different in vitro/ex vivo/in vivo studies for the treatment of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The aim of the study was to evaluate the
efficacy of a Chk1/Chk2 inhibitor in combination with the topoisomerase
II inhibitor doxorubicin for the treatment of ALL. Firstly we evaluate
the efficacy of doxorubicin on human B (NALM-6, NALM-19 and REH) and T
(MOLT-4, RPMI-8402 and CEM) ALL cell lines in term of reduction of the
cell viability, modification of cell cycle profile and activation of the
DDR pathways. Cells were treated with doxorubicin (0.25-2.5 uM) for 24
and 48 hours and the reduction of the cell viability was quantified using
WST-1 reagents. In all the cell lines treated the cytotoxic effect of
doxorubicin was time and dose dependent. The induction of the apoptosis
(Pi/Annexin V) and the effect on cell cycle profile (Pi staining) was
also evaluated in all the cell lines. Due to the inhibitory effect of the
compound on the topoisomerase II enzyme and due to the activation of the
cell cycle checkpoint, cells were arrested in G2/M phase. Then the
effectiveness of the Chk-i as a chemo-sensitizer agent was evaluated.
Different cell lines were treated with doxorubicin (5, 10, 25 and 50 nM
for the more sensitive cell lines; 50, 100, 250 and 500 nM for the less
sensitive cell lines) in combination with the Chk-i (2, 5 and 10 nM) for
24 and 48 hours. The combination showed a synergistic effect in term of
reduction of the cell viability and induction of apoptosis. The effect of
the combination was also analyzed using western blot looking for specific
marker of activation of the DDR pathway showing the same synergistic
effect. Moreover the effect of the combination on cell cycle profile was
evaluated using a double staining Pi/Anti-phospho-Histone H3 ser10
(marker of mitosis). Cell lines were pre-treated for 18 hours with
doxorubicin and then with the Chk-i for different time points (1, 2, 3, 6
and 9 hours). The treatment with Chk-i removed the G2/M arrest induced by
the pre-treatment with doxorubicin, progressively reducing the number of
cells in G2/M phase, increasing the percentage of cells positive for the
mitotic marker p-HH3 (ser10) and increasing the percentage of cells in
sub-G1 phase. In our opinion the combination between the Chk1
inhibitor,LY2606368, and the topoisomerase II inhibitor, doxorubicin,
could be a promising strategy for the treatment of B/T-ALL.Supported by
ELN, AIL, AIRC, progetto Regione-Universit 2010-12 (L. Bolondi), FP7
NGS-PTL project.

