Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serine/arginine rich proteins show different distribution patterns
in stratum of oral epidermoid carcinoma


Serine/arginine proteins increased their activity during the alternative
splicing in cell nucleus. The nuclear speckles, also known as
interchromatin granule clusters, are enriched with SR splicing factors
and are implicated in gene expression. Nuclear speckle formation is
developmentally regulated; in certain cases phosphorylated SR proteins
are absent from the nucleus and are instead localized at granular
structures in the cytoplasm. SR proteins are related with splicing during
different types of cancers and metstasis. We search for phosphorylated SR
proteins and the nuclear pattern and speckle formation in human oral
carcinomas.Methods: To address nuclear pattern and speckle formation, we
performed a series of immunostaining experiments, with SC35 antibody for
phosphorylated srsf2 on sections derived from oral epidermoid tumor from
33 patients. The images were obtained with a microscope (Leica TCS
SPE/CTR 4000). For imaging cytometry analyses, a Leica LAS AF Lite
software (Leica Microsystems) was used to capture images automatically;
images and recognition of nuclear speckles were quantitatively analyzed
using analysis software (ImageJ). ANOVA analysis was performed for the
cellular and staining correlation.Results: There are significant
differences in morphology and distribution of intranuclear mottled
pattern of SR proteins in each tissue layer between oral epithelial
without neoplasia and oral squamous cell carcinoma (P Serine/arginine
proteins increased their activity during the alternative splicing in cell
nucleus. The nuclear speckles, also known as interchromatin granule
clusters, are enriched with SR splicing factors and are implicated in
gene expression. Nuclear speckle formation is developmentally regulated;
in certain cases phosphorylated SR proteins are absent from the nucleus
and are instead localized at granular structures in the cytoplasm. SR
proteins are related with splicing during different types of cancers and
metstasis. We search for phosphorylated SR proteins and the nuclear
pattern and speckle formation in human oral carcinomas.Methods: To
address nuclear pattern and speckle formation, we performed a series of
immunostaining experiments, with SC35 antibody for phosphorylated srsf2
on sections derived from oral epidermoid tumor from 33 patients. The
images were obtained with a microscope (Leica TCS SPE/CTR 4000). For
imaging cytometry analyses, a Leica LAS AF Lite software (Leica
Microsystems) was used to capture images automatically; images and
recognition of nuclear speckles were quantitatively analyzed using
analysis software (ImageJ). ANOVA analysis was performed for the cellular
and staining correlation.Results: There are significant differences in
morphology and distribution of intranuclear mottled pattern of SR
proteins in each tissue layer between oral epithelial without neoplasia
and oral squamous cell carcinoma (P < 0.0001). We also found that number,
size and pattern (p Serine/arginine proteins increased their activity
during the alternative splicing in cell nucleus. The nuclear speckles,
also known as interchromatin granule clusters, are enriched with SR
splicing factors and are implicated in gene expression. Nuclear speckle
formation is developmentally regulated; in certain cases phosphorylated
SR proteins are absent from the nucleus and are instead localized at
granular structures in the cytoplasm. SR proteins are related with
splicing during different types of cancers and metstasis. We search for
phosphorylated SR proteins and the nuclear pattern and speckle formation
in human oral carcinomas.Methods: To address nuclear pattern and speckle
formation, we performed a series of immunostaining experiments, with SC35
antibody for phosphorylated srsf2 on sections derived from oral
epidermoid tumor from 33 patients. The images were obtained with a
microscope (Leica TCS SPE/CTR 4000). For imaging cytometry analyses, a
Leica LAS AF Lite software (Leica Microsystems) was used to capture
images automatically; images and recognition of nuclear speckles were
quantitatively analyzed using analysis software (ImageJ). ANOVA analysis
was performed for the cellular and staining correlation.Results: There
are significant differences in morphology and distribution of
intranuclear mottled pattern of SR proteins in each tissue layer between
oral epithelial without neoplasia and oral squamous cell carcinoma (P <
0.0001). We also found that number, size and pattern (p <0.05) is
different between the stratum layers of the oral squamous cells, showing
more transcriptional activity in the granulosum stratum related with a
decreased in nucleus numbers. In oral squamous cells the pattern changes
become homogeneous and similar to the basal layer of normal tissue.We
found that is in the granulosum stratum of oral squamous carcinomas where
the SR proteins shows more transcriptional activity. This finding could
be related with the increased metabolism of this layer.

