Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trabectedin activity in patient-derived mesothelioma xenografts


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) incidence is increased over the past
two decades and it is predicted to increase further in the next 20 years
especially in developing countries where asbestos has not yet been
banned. Surgery is not an option for the majority of patients due to the
diffuse growth of MPM, making chemotherapy the treatment of choice, but
prognosis remains very poor with a median survival time of 10-17 months.
Trabectedin (ET-743, Yondelis) is a marine alkaloid used for the 2nd line
therapy of ovarian cancer (combined with pegylated doxorubicin) and soft
tissue sarcomas. It binds the DNA minor groove modulating transcription
of cancer cells and has an anti-inflammatory effect modifying tumor
microenvironment and reducing tumor associated macrophages.The aim was to
test antitumor activity of trabectedin in newly established patient
derived xenografts of MPM.MPM473, MPM484 and MPM487 xenografts were
obtained in athymic nude mice by s.c. injection of 107 cells isolated
from the pleural effusion of MPM patients and maintained by serial
passages in mice. H&E staining and immunohistochemistry were performed.
Mice were randomized when tumor reached about 200 mg to receive
trabectedin, cisplatin, pemetrexed, gemcitabine, and imatinib. Antitumor
activity was expressed as T/C% were T and C are the mean tumor weight of
treated and control mice, respectively.The three xenografts reproduced
the morphology and the histochemical profile of the human tumors. As
reported in the table trabectedin was able to induce a 50% reduction in
tumor growth in MPM473 and MPM 487 xenografts and only a marginal effect
in MPM484 xenograft.
In conclusion we report three new MPM xenografts able to mimic the
pathological features of human MPM. Although trabectedin showed only a
moderate antitumor activity in our experimental models, its efficacy is
comparable or better than that of the other drugs currently used for this
disease. Studies are in progress in syngenic models that are more
appropriate to test also the ability of trabectedin to modulate the
immune system.

