Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative genomic analyses of synchronous colorectal cancers by
exome sequencing


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer type and the
second leading cause for cancer deaths in the Western world. Around 3.5%
of CRC patients have more than one primary colorectal carcinoma at the
time of diagnosis. These so-called synchronous colorectal cancers (SCRC)
are more common in men and have been associated with predisposing
conditions, such as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC),
familial adenomatosis polyposis (FAP) and inflammatory bowel disease.
Such conditions account for slightly more than 10% of SCRC cases. The
pathological and clinical features of the tumors have been widely
studied. The underlying molecular mechanisms in SCRC have not been well
described, though. The research has mainly focused on single factors such
as microsatellite instability (MSI) status or APC-, KRAS-, and
p53-mutations.By exome sequencing a tumor pair and corresponding normal
sample from 23 patients, we aim to study the extent of genetic overlap
between the synchronous tumors to assess if they derive from a common
progenitor. The tumor data will be filtered against the normal tissue
data to verify the somatic origin of the observed mutations. The
comparison of the mutation profiles in each tumor pair will take into
account the number of shared variants that occur in the exact same
positions in the coding region. If the tumors share a high number of
changes in exactly the same base it would suggest they have a common
origin. Different mutation patterns, with possibly a few coincidental
shared mutations, may support a stochastic process in the genesis of the
two tumors. We will also identify commonly mutated genes - those that are
mutated in both tumors of a synchronous pair or among synchronous pairs
of different patients.The patient material derives mainly from a
consecutive, population-based colorectal cancer collection Suolisyp
Keski-Suomi 2000-2010 from Jyvskyl, Finland. In addition three SCRC-cases
were included from our in-house collections. Knowledge on the molecular
basis of SCRC, which haven't been studied to this extent before, provides
insight on how these tumors arise and allows for development of more
personalized treatments.

