Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preservation of cells in blood and culture


Introduction: Liquid biopsies and cell-based therapies are emerging
approaches for the treatment of cancer. Accuracy of diagnosis using
liquid biopsies and effectiveness of treatment using cell-based therapies
will rely upon the preservation cells for both viability and the
information contained in them.Experimental procedures: Biomatrica's
proprietary chemical library was used to develop formulations that could
preserve cells in multiple formats. Cell preservation was assessed by a
variety of cell-based and molecular techniques such as microscopy, flow
cytometry and real-time PCR.Results: Blood samples spiked with
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) were preserved for several days at room
temperature to allow for downstream morphological and transcriptomic
analyses. CTC recoveries in preserved samples were as much as 4 times
those in non-protected samples over 4 days. Changes in RNA expression of
CTC-specific genes in preserved samples ranged from 0 to +/- 2 delta Ct
values, while in non-protected samples, changes ranged from 0 to +/-5
delta Ct values over 4 days. In some formulations, CTC viabilities were
as much as twice the viabilities of CTCs in non-protected samples.
Supporting these viability results was a demonstrated culturability of
isolated CTCs. Furthermore, cell-free DNA in plasma of preserved blood
samples changed by less than 2 Ct values over 4 days, whereas in control
samples, plasma DNA changed by as much as 10 Ct values. Hemolysis in
preserved blood samples was also lower by as much as 69% compared to
non-protected samples.In a separate set of experiments, activated T-cells
were stored in the presence of common buffers (RPMI, PBS) or formulations
at room temperature. T-cells cultured with formulations displayed greater
40 to 60% greater cell viability after 3 days compared to those stored in
common buffers.Conclusions: Biomatrica has developed a library of cell
preservatives that can be used to preserve cells in blood samples and in
cell culture. The ability to recover cells in blood samples and determine
their genetic information would enable monitoring of a patient's cancer
status and personalizing drug treatments. In addition, cell preservation
may allow further advances in cell-based therapies as cells could be more
reliably recovered from patients, modified (e.g. CAR-T, stem cells), and
administered to patients.

