Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor expression is associated with DNA repair
capacity in breast cancer


Estrogen receptor (ER) status is an established therapeutic and
prognostic biomarker for breast cancer (BC). ER signaling has a
propensity to increase proliferation, which can lead to mutations when
DNA repair is dysregulated. Deficiencies in DNA repair capacity (DRC) is
a hallmark of BC. Recent studies have documented interactions between ER
and DNA damage response/repair. Moreover, our previous work showed that
DRC in BC patients is approximately 50% less than in women without the
disease (pEstrogen receptor (ER) status is an established therapeutic and
prognostic biomarker for breast cancer (BC). ER signaling has a
propensity to increase proliferation, which can lead to mutations when
DNA repair is dysregulated. Deficiencies in DNA repair capacity (DRC) is
a hallmark of BC. Recent studies have documented interactions between ER
and DNA damage response/repair. Moreover, our previous work showed that
DRC in BC patients is approximately 50% less than in women without the
disease (p<0.001), and a deficiency in the Nucleotide excision repair
(NER) pathway figures prominently in the pathobiology of sporadic BC.
Estrogen-receptor-positive (ER+) tumors employ complex signaling that
engages in crosstalk with multiple pathways through genomic and
non-genomic regulation. A greater understanding of these pathways is
important for developing improved biomarkers that can better determine
treatment choices, risk of recurrence, and cancer progression. In this
study, we aimed to determine whether ER signaling influences DRC. DRC, in
terms of the NER pathway, was measured in lymphocytes by means of a host
cell reactivation assay with a luciferase reporter gene. A multivariate
linear regression model (MLRM) was used to estimate the mean of the DRC
and analyze the association between ER positivity (% receptor activation)
obtained from pathological reports and DRC in 270 BC patients. These were
further stratified by HER2 receptor status. An ordinal logistic
regression model (OLRM) was used to confirm the relationship between DRC
and ER status using the maximum likelihood method for parameters
estimation. Our results show an association between ER status and mean
DRC values in BC patients who have HER2-negative (HER-) tumors: that is,
the mean DRC value in ER-/HER2- tumors was significantly lower as
compared with ER-/HER2+ tumors (p0.05). The data followed similar
patterns when DRC was categorized in tertiles. In conclusion, there is an
association between DRC levels and ER status, and this association is
modified by HER2 receptor status. Supported by grants from the NCI Center
to Reduce Health Disparities and NIH-NIGMS MBRS SCORE and RISE Programs
grants # S06 GM008239-20, 9SC1CA182846-04 GM082406 and PSM-MCC
Partnership grant # 5U54CA163071-04.

