Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers for early detection of radiation nephropathy


Purpose/Background: Chronic kidney disease is among the common late
effects detected in patients receiving chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy.
Currently, there are no biomarkers that allow detection of normal tissue
toxicity in late responding organs such as kidney. Developing predictive
biomarkers could help identify individuals that are at high risk for
close follow-up and prophylactic treatments. Our studies show that miRNAs
detectable in cell-free body fluids can be developed as biomarkers of
acute radiation syndromes. In the present study, we sought to investigate
the potential of serum and urine miRNAs as indicators of radiation
induced kidney damage in rodent models.Methods and Results: An
amplification-free hybridization based nCounter assay was optimized for
evaluating the changes of miRNAs in body fluids. Comparison of cell-free
miRNAs in urine as well as serum, collected from control versus
irradiated mice, enabled us to identify candidate biomarkers that are
potential indicators of radiation response. Over 40 miRNAs were
detectable in urine samples collected from mice and over 80 miRNAs were
detectable in serum. Molecules such as miR-1224, miR-804, miR-714 and
miR-709 showed significant increase in their urine level after radiation,
which peaked 6-8 hours after exposure to acute doses. On the other hand,
markers such as miR-378 that are also abundant in urine did not show
significant change after radiation, hence serving as an internal control.
Comparison of urinary response in mice exposed to 2, 4, 6 and 8 Gy TBI
revealed good dose response. Furthermore, the same markers exhibited a
dose and time dependent changes following exposure to fractionated
myeloablative regimen (6 2 Gy, bid) that is commonly used in leukaemia
patients, prior to stem cell transplantation. Specifically, two of these
biomarkers, miR-714 and miR-1224 exhibited a dose dependent increase in
their serum level after fractionated or acute single dose exposure.
In-situ hybridization displayed an overall increase in signals of
miR-1224 and miR-714 at outer medulla after radiation. Increased signals
detected in tubular epithelial cells indicate the possible tubular origin
of the urinary miRNAs that are responsive to radiation.Conclusion: We
have developed a panel of miRNAs for non-/minimally invasive detection of
radiation response in kidney. Several of the urinary miRNA biomarkers
exhibited a dose and time dependent changes, suggesting their potential
as biomarkers for non-invasive evaluation of radiation response in organs
such as kidney for which early detection of damage is a major challenge.

