Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophil elastase regulates PD-L1 expression in breast cancer


Introduction:We have previously reported that breast cancer cells take up
the inflammatory mediator neutrophil elastase (NE) from tumor-associated
neutrophils (TANs). NE uptake leads to: 1) increased cleavage of cyclin E
(CCNE) to its low molecular weight isoforms and generation of the
CCNE-derived immunogenic epitope CCNE144-152, 2) cross-presentation of
the NE-derived epitope PR1, and 3) increased human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) class I expression. NE is therefore a link between innate and
adaptive immune responses in breast cancer. The current study was
undertaken to investigate the effects of NE uptake on PD-L1 expression as
another mechanism impacting adaptive immune responses in breast
cancer.Methods:The breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 was maintained in
standard media or media supplemented with NE. The effect of NE on cell
surface expression of PD-L1 was determined using flow cytometry. Total
PD-L1 protein expression was determined using western blot analysis
performed on whole cell lysates. NE was inhibited with either elafin or
alpha-1-antitrypsin to assess the requirement of enzymatic activity for
the observed effects. Transcriptional regulation of PD-L1 expression by
NE was assessed by qPCR. To evaluate specific transcription factors (TFs)
involved in PD-L1 regulation, nuclear protein was isolated and analyzed
for the activity of 16 TFs using a commercial plate array. The impact of
NE uptake on TFs identified on the array was confirmed by western blot
analysis. The functional effects of changes in PD-L1 expression were
evaluated using an annexin V assay to assess T-cell
apoptosis.Results:Addition of NE to breast cancer cells resulted in a
reduction in PD-L1 surface expression as determined by flow cytometry and
in total PD-L1 expression as shown by western blot analysis. The effect
was reversed after removal of the cells from NE-supplemented media. The
addition of elafin to inhibit NE enzymatic activity led to increased NE
uptake by MDA-MB-231 cells with no change in PD-L1 cell surface
expression. Treatment with alpha-1-antitrypsin prevented NE uptake and
also abrogated its effect on PD-L1 expression. Together, these results
suggest that uptake of enzymatically active NE is required to decrease
PD-L1 expression. qPCR showed a decrease in the PD-L1 transcript
suggesting that the effect of NE on PD-L1 is transcriptionally regulated.
NE treatment resulted in decreased expression of TFs known to be involved
in PD-L1 regulation, including STAT1, STAT3, and JUN. NE-treated breast
cancer cells induced less apoptosis of T-cells compared with untreated
breast cancer cells.Conclusions:Uptake of enzymatically active NE by
breast cancer results in decreased cell surface and total PD-L1
expression, an effect that is in part transcriptionally regulated. These
findings suggest another mechanism whereby the innate inflammatory
mediator NE may impact adaptive immune responses in breast cancer.

