Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive study of TGF- pathway-driven functional molecular
characterization of human hepatocellular cancer


Background: TGF- plays a complex role in cancer- from tumor suppression
to immune modulation to tumor promotion that are unclearly defined to
date. Recent clinical studies show that targeting TGF- improves survival
up to 21 months, yet prognostic significances are undefined. Moreover,
the relationships between patterns of mutations and transcriptomic
phenotypes for the TGF- pathway are unclear. Methods: 1. We analyzed the
transcriptome of 488 hepatocellular cancers and screened for mutations in
the TGF-b pathway in 202 HCCs from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). 2.
Next we correlated mouse models of HCC with a functional analysis of
drivers. Results: 1. Transcriptomic analyses revealed aberrant TGF-
superfamily profiles in 72% of hepatocellular cancers, with mutations in
38% of patients. 2. Significantly, HCCs characterized by the inactivated
TGF- signature were associated with a significantly poorer survival
particularly in early stage HCCs, compared to HCCs with the activated
TGF- signature (p = 0.0027). 3. We observed the greatest number of
functional mutations in the SPTBN1 gene (6%), which encodes a tumor
suppressor TGF-/Smad3 adaptor protein. 4. We found a strong association
between DNA damage response genes and the TGF- pathway at both
transcriptomic and genomic levels. 5. We also observed a strong
correlation between VD related genes and TGF- pathway genes in the TCGA
genomic analysis. 6. subsequent VD deprivation synergistically with TGF-
inactivation promotes liver tumor development. 7. Through a
transcriptomic and functional analysis we observed that TLR7 mRNA levels
are increased 4-fold in liver tissues from Smad3+/- mice, and TLR7 is a
direct target of Smad3. Conclusions: The TGF- pathway plays a pivotal
role in liver tumorigenesis and the molecular signatures we characterize
here have prognostic significance. In specific populations, VD deficiency
and TGF- disruption synergistically promote liver tumor growth, possibly
through regulating TLR7 expression. The additional association with the
DNA repair pathway supports new approaches to biomarker driven targeting
of TGF-, improving survival of liver cancer.

