Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro functional study of novel oncogene serine protease 33
(PRSS33) and the clinical significance of PRSS33 expression in colorectal
cancer patients


Background: PRSS33, one of serine protease multigene family, has central
roles in the regulation of a wide variety of physiological processes,
including inflammation, development and malignancy. However, the function
of this gene in colorectal cancer has not been elucidated. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the oncogenic functions of PRSS33 in the
colorectal cancer cell line and to evaluate the clinical significance of
PRSS33 expression in colorectal cancer patients.Method: PRSS33 was highly
expressed in colorectal cancer cell lines, HCT116, SW480 and SW620. The
oncogenic functions were evaluated in the cell lines by knocking down
PRSS33 with siRNA transfection and compared them with PRSS33 highly
expressing control cell lines. The functional studies included cell
proliferation assay, invasion assay, migration assay and
anchorage-independent semisolid agar colony forming assay. The clinical
significance of PRSS33 expression was evaluated in 92 cases of colorectal
cancer tissue by immunohistochemistry.Results: The PRSS33 knockdowned
cell lines by siRNA transfection showed significant decreases of
proliferation, invasion, migration compared to those of control
(pBackground: PRSS33, one of serine protease multigene family, has
central roles in the regulation of a wide variety of physiological
processes, including inflammation, development and malignancy. However,
the function of this gene in colorectal cancer has not been elucidated.
The goal of this study was to evaluate the oncogenic functions of PRSS33
in the colorectal cancer cell line and to evaluate the clinical
significance of PRSS33 expression in colorectal cancer patients.Method:
PRSS33 was highly expressed in colorectal cancer cell lines, HCT116,
SW480 and SW620. The oncogenic functions were evaluated in the cell lines
by knocking down PRSS33 with siRNA transfection and compared them with
PRSS33 highly expressing control cell lines. The functional studies
included cell proliferation assay, invasion assay, migration assay and
anchorage-independent semisolid agar colony forming assay. The clinical
significance of PRSS33 expression was evaluated in 92 cases of colorectal
cancer tissue by immunohistochemistry.Results: The PRSS33 knockdowned
cell lines by siRNA transfection showed significant decreases of
proliferation, invasion, migration compared to those of control (p<0.05)
respectively. The oncogenic function of PRSS33 was confirmed by
anchorage-independent semi-solid agar colony forming assay. The PRSS33
knockdowned cell lines revealed lower colony formation on semisolid agar
compared to the PRSS33 highly expressing control cell lines. The
disease-free survival rate was decreased in patients of PRSS33 high
expression (p = 0.001). The overexpression of PRSS33 was associated with
survival and death by chi-square test (p = 0.002). Multivariate
Cox-regression analysis showed an association between PRSS33 expression
and prognosis (HR = 2.71, 95% CI = 1.39-5.27: p = 0.003).Conclusion: This
study indicates that PRSS33 is a novel pro-oncogene and the expression is
an independent prognostic factor in colorectal cancer patients. In the
future, research on the oncogenic signal pathway of PRSS33 in colorectal
cancer is necessary.

