Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing a novel luciferase labeling technique to establish and
validate preclinical models of pancreatic cancer


Bioluminescent-labeling imaging (BLI) allows sensitive non-invasive
sequential imaging of tumor development and early metastasis. Current
methods for the genetic modification of cells typically use integrating
genotoxic viruses that can disrupt the molecular behavior of cancer cell
lines due to their random nature of integration. A primary aim of the
study was to utilize a non-integrating DNA vector that comprises an S/MAR
(Scaffold/Matrix Attachment Region) element to stably genetically modify
pancreatic cancer cells to persistently express the reporter gene
luciferase without altering the molecular behavior of the cell or
altering its sensitivity to therapeutic drug treatments. Once a novel
isogenic cell line is generated the cells can subsequently be used in
xenograft studies. A second aim was to validate these established models
with gemcitabine and test the efficacy of VAL401, formulation of
risperidone in rumenic acid. Human BxPC3, Capan-1, MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1
pancreatic cancer cells were stably transfected with a pSMARt-UBC-Luc DNA
vector and cultured for 4 weeks under selection. Colonies that formed
after this period were isolated and expanded in normal medium and
evaluated for luciferase expression and the molecular integrity of the
DNA vector. Efficacy of gemcitabine was tested in these new luciferase
expressing cell lines and VAL401 was tested in Capan-1-luc cells. For in
vivo studies, BxPC3-luc cells were inoculated orthotopically into the
pancreas of athymic nude mice and stratified into groups: control,
gemcitabine, VAL401 (1mg/kg, p.o. daily) and VAL401 (2mg/kg, p.o. daily).
In vitro validation results indicated that the luciferase transfected
cells maintained their original properties with stable expression.
Gemcitabine inhibited cell proliferation in all established cell lines.
VAL401 inhibited cell proliferation of Capan-1-luc cells at 50 M
concentration. BxPC3-luc cells inoculated orthotopically into the
pancreas were followed for 5 weeks with BLI by IVIS, and the results
demonstrated high-quality follow-up of tumor growth. BxPC3-luc cells
induced growth of pancreatic tumors with high take rate in all groups.
Gemcitabine and both studied doses of VAL401 decreased tumor volume, and
the same trend was seen in tumor weight and the BLI during the study. In
conclusion, both gemcitabine and VAL401 decreased tumor volume and the
same trend was observed using BLI. Our results demonstrated that S/MAR
DNA vectors are able to produce genetically modified cells without the
limitations of random genomic integration, whilst providing
extra-chromosomal mitotic stability and high levels of sustained
transgene expression. When utilized in orthotopic xenograft studies,
these luciferase expressing cells formed a reliable and essentially
non-invasive imaging platform that substantially improves the efficacy of
testing anticancer drug candidates.

