Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting subcellular localization of Kaiso to limit dissemination
through MAPK signaling


Breast cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer among American
women. The American Cancer Society has estimated over 230,000 new cases
of breast cancer, and over 40,000 deaths for the year 2015.
Unfortunately, metastasis is the major contributor for the significant
number of these deaths. The Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is
promoted by the Master Regulator known as Kaiso, a transcriptional
repressor that is a member of the BTB/POZ family of zinc finger
transcription factors. We have previously demonstrated that Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) signaling shuttles Kaiso into the nucleus,
although, its mechanism is still not understood. EGFR signaling activates
multiple downstream signaling cascades including the MAP Kinase cascade,
which has a significant influence on proliferation, cell adhesion, gene
expression, and cell survival. Mesenchymal cells demonstrate high levels
of MAPK activity and disruption or inhibition of the cascade has proven
to be a method for decreasing tumor growth. Therefore we hypothesize that
subcellular localization and expression of Kaiso is modulated by EGFR
induced MAPK activity. Using the TCGA Breast cancer dataset, we observed
that Kaiso was altered in about 11% of patients, compared to 15% of E-cad
expression and 13% of MAPK3 of 959 patients/cases of Breast cancers.
MAPK3 (eRK1); MAPK6, MAPK7, MAPK9 AND MAPK14 (p38) seems to have trends
in mutual exclusivity or co-occurrence with Kaiso (ZBTB33). To determine
if MAPK3 is responsible for increased Kaiso expression, MCF-7 cells,
which express low levels of Kaiso in the cytoplasm, were treated with
10ng/ml of EGF in the presence or absence of MAPK inhibitor, 20M PD98093.
EGF stimulation caused robust increase in Kaiso protein expression, while
PD98093 inhibited EGF induced expression. Similarly, in Kaiso
overexpressing, MDA-MB-231, blocking EGFR kinase activity with 500nM
PD153035 resulted in an opposite effect as EGF stimulation in MCF-7
cells. Furthermore, we observed a significant decrease in p-ERK
expression, re-expression of E-cadherin, and low EGFR expression levels
in sh-Kaiso MDA-MB-231 cells compared to sh-Scr cells. The decreased
p-ERK expression in sh-Kaiso MDA-MB-231 cells was also associated with
decreased expression of mesenchymal markers ZEB1, ZEB2, Twist and SNAIL
at both the mRNA and protein levels compared to the scrambled control.
Similarly, we observed significant decrease in the somatic cell
reprogramming factors Klf4, Oct4, Nanog expression in sh-Kaiso MDA-MB-231
as well, which coincide with a reversal of EMT. To our knowledge, this is
the first study to investigate the molecular mechanism and/or functional
consequences of increased Kaiso expression in breast cancer, and
highlights the multiple roles that Kaiso plays in promoting aggressive
disease.

