Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of cancer vulnerabilities to metabolic perturbation
using genome wide CRISPR screens


The CRISPR-Cas9 system provides an effective way to introduce targeted
loss-of-function mutations in mammalian cells. The advance that the
CRISPR-Cas9 technology brings to human genetics sets the stage for
identifying cellular fitness genes that operate either globally (core
fitness genes) or specifically within a particular genetic background or
environmental context (context-specific fitness genes). In tumors, this
is the foundation for the concept of synthetic lethality as genes
required in tumor cells but not in adjacent normal tissues should make
ideal therapeutic targets with high effectiveness and minimal side
effects. Towards this goal, we have developed a second-generation CRISPR
gRNA library of 176,500 guides targeting 17,661 human protein-coding
genes. We used the library to screen five human cell lines, representing
a cross-section of wild type and cancer tissues, to identify genes whose
knockouts induce significant fitness defects. Our screens accurately
recapitulate pathway-specific genetic vulnerabilities induced by known
oncogenes and identify novel context-specific vulnerabilities.
Interestingly, we identified a specific dependency on mitochondrial
activity and we validated this using various complex I inhibitors. This
strongly supports the idea that oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
dependency - a clear exception to the Warburg effect - is a targetable
weakness of some tumors. In order to further understand this metabolic
vulnerability, we performed a synthetic lethal screen to identify
sensitizers of OXPHOS inhibition. Our screen revealed that inhibition of
mitochondrial OXPHOS sensitizes the cells to loss of other metabolic
pathways such as glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway and lipid
biosynthesis. Furthermore, loss of the cytosolic aspartate
aminotransferase GOT1 was found to be synthetic lethal with perturbation
of OXPHOS. This is consistent with the essential role of the electron
transport chain in cell proliferation, which is to enable aspartate
synthesis. Additionally, we also find novel genes, whose loss of function
might alleviate the affect of OXPHOS perturbation. Our findings
demonstrate that CRISPR-Cas9 screens enable a high-resolution view of the
genetic vulnerabilities of a cell that may represent therapeutic
opportunities in cancer. Further, synthetic lethal chemical-genetic
screens can reveal novel functional drug combinations, which will enhance
the efficacy of targeted therapies.

