Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gremlin 2 is repressed in invasive endometrial cancer and inhibits
cell growth in vitro


Background: There are limited therapeutic opportunities for the treatment
of advanced or metastatic endometrial cancer (EC), and limited diagnostic
tools of myometrial invasion for fertility sparing management of early
stage EC. Novel approach based on molecular profiling of EC cells are
required. Patients and Methods: We used microarray analysis of EC tumour
samples in order to identify tumour-specific changes in gene expression.
Identified the most frequently and lowest repressed gene was subjected to
immunohistochemistry of tissues of EC. MTT assay and migration assay
using EC cells were also conducted to evaluate the antitumor activity of
the identified gene. Results: The most significantly suppressed gene in
EC compared with the control was Gremlin 2 with an 8.5-fold reduction
(pBackground: There are limited therapeutic opportunities for the
treatment of advanced or metastatic endometrial cancer (EC), and limited
diagnostic tools of myometrial invasion for fertility sparing management
of early stage EC. Novel approach based on molecular profiling of EC
cells are required. Patients and Methods: We used microarray analysis of
EC tumour samples in order to identify tumour-specific changes in gene
expression. Identified the most frequently and lowest repressed gene was
subjected to immunohistochemistry of tissues of EC. MTT assay and
migration assay using EC cells were also conducted to evaluate the
antitumor activity of the identified gene. Results: The most
significantly suppressed gene in EC compared with the control was Gremlin
2 with an 8.5-fold reduction (p<0.001). Immunohistochemistry revealed
that Gremlin 2 was expressed in 4 of 4 tissues of normal endometrium, in
4 of 4 tissues of atypical endometrial hyperplasia and 5 of 5 tissues of
low grade EC with FIGO stage IA without myometrial invasion. Among 13
patients with low-grade FIGO stage I with myometrial invasion, Gremlin 2
was partially expressed in the myometrial invasion front in 11 (85%)
patients. The MTT assay revealed the proliferation of Ishikawa cells
incubated with 1.0 g/ml and 5.0 g/ml of Gremlin 2 and HEC-1A cells
incubated with 5.0 g/ml of Gremlin 2 were significantly reduced (P =
0.029, P = 0.025, and P = 0.048, respectively). The proliferation of
Ishikawa cells was significantly attenuated after incubation with Gremlin
2 for 72 h (P = 0.024). On the other hand, the migration assay did not
show influence of Gremlin 2 on Ishikawa or HEC-1A cells. Conclusion:
Gremlin 2, formerly known as protein related to Dan and cerberus (PRDC),
has been implicated in development of the embryo and the ovarian follicle
in animals, however, there is no report of Gremlin 2 in association with
neoplasm or cancer. Gremlin 2 downregulation may lead to carcinogenesis
and progression of EC. We suggest that re-activation of Gremlin
2-associated pathways could suppress EC progression, and should thus be
explored as a potential novel therapeutic approach as well as diagnostic
tool of myometrial invasion.

