Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultra-deep sequencing detects ovarian cancer cells in peritoneal
fluid and reveals somatic TP53 mutations in noncancerous tissues


The detection of subclonal tumor-specific somatic mutations in clinical
samples could revolutionize cancer diagnostics, but is limited by
insufficiently sensitive sequencing methods. Duplex Sequencing is a novel
next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology that implements
single-molecule barcoding of both strands of DNA to allow internal error
correction. This modification reduces the error rate of NGS from 1 in
1000 to less than 1 in 10 million nucleotides, an unprecedented
sensitivity that enables accurate ultra-deep sequencing for clinical
applications. In this study we sought to determine whether Duplex
Sequencing could detect extremely rare TP53 mutated cancer cells
disseminated into the peritoneal cavity of women with high-grade serous
ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC). HGSOC is the most common and most aggressive
type of ovarian cancer, shows early transperitoneal dissemination, and is
characterized by near-universal prevalence of driver TP53 mutations. We
analyzed 17 peritoneal fluid samples from women with HGSOC and known TP53
tumor mutation (cases) and 20 peritoneal fluid samples from women without
cancer (controls). The tumor-specific TP53 mutation was detected in
matched peritoneal fluid from 94% of cases (16/17), including 2 patients
with occult tubal intraepithelial neoplasia, 7 patients with early stage
HGSOC, and 8 with negative peritoneal fluid cytopathology. Tumor-specific
alleles were detected as low as The detection of subclonal tumor-specific
somatic mutations in clinical samples could revolutionize cancer
diagnostics, but is limited by insufficiently sensitive sequencing
methods. Duplex Sequencing is a novel next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technology that implements single-molecule barcoding of both strands of
DNA to allow internal error correction. This modification reduces the
error rate of NGS from 1 in 1000 to less than 1 in 10 million
nucleotides, an unprecedented sensitivity that enables accurate
ultra-deep sequencing for clinical applications. In this study we sought
to determine whether Duplex Sequencing could detect extremely rare TP53
mutated cancer cells disseminated into the peritoneal cavity of women
with high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC). HGSOC is the most
common and most aggressive type of ovarian cancer, shows early
transperitoneal dissemination, and is characterized by near-universal
prevalence of driver TP53 mutations. We analyzed 17 peritoneal fluid
samples from women with HGSOC and known TP53 tumor mutation (cases) and
20 peritoneal fluid samples from women without cancer (controls). The
tumor-specific TP53 mutation was detected in matched peritoneal fluid
from 94% of cases (16/17), including 2 patients with occult tubal
intraepithelial neoplasia, 7 patients with early stage HGSOC, and 8 with
negative peritoneal fluid cytopathology. Tumor-specific alleles were
detected as low as <1/25,000. Surprisingly, we also detected additional
extremely low-frequency somatic TP53 mutations in peritoneal fluid from
nearly all (35/37) cases and controls. These mutations were more abundant
in cases than in controls, and in the latter correlated with age. The
total burden of somatic TP53 mutations (tumor specific and non-specific)
in a peritoneal fluid sample could distinguish cases from controls with
82% sensitivity (14/17) and 90% specificity (18/20). Duplex Sequencing
also revealed low-frequency, age-associated somatic TP53 mutations in
100% (15/15) of matched peripheral blood samples. Our results demonstrate
the ability of Duplex Sequencing to detect very rare cancer cells, but
also provide evidence of widespread, low frequency somatic TP53 mutation
in non-cancerous tissue. This compromises the specificity of TP53
mutation tests for cancer detection in liquid biopsies.

