Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of polo-like kinase 1 inhibition and erlotinib
overcomes T790M-mediated drug resistance in vitro and in vivo in
non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction: Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) leads
to the development and progression of human epithelial cancers, including
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKI) are effective therapy for NSCLC with activating EGFR
mutations. However, acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs is unavoidable and
occurs through various molecular mechanisms including the development of
T790M secondary EGFR mutations, MET amplification, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and other mechanisms. One of potential strategy to
overcome EGFR-TKIs is through inhibition of polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1).
PLK1 is one of the key regulators of mitotic progression and a DNA damage
recovery checkpoint. PLK1 inhibitors are at various stages of clinical
development. Our previous studies showed that mesenchymal NSCLC cell
lines are more sensitive to PLK1 inhibitor than epithelial ones. This
study examines the efficacy of PLK1 inhibition in NSCLC cell lines with
acquired resistance to the EGFR-TKI erlotinib.Methods: Erlotinib
resistant cell lines were developed in EGFR mutant, erlotinib sensitive
cell lines PC9, HCC4006 and HCC827 by chronic exposure to stepwise
increased concentrations of erlotinib. The effects of the PLK1 inhibitor
volasertib alone or combined with erlotinib on proliferation, apoptosis,
cell cycle, EGFR-dependent signaling, DNA damage and DNA damage response
signaling were evaluated using CellTiter-Glo assay, TUNEL assay, BrDU
incorporation assay, comet assay, western blot and immunofluorescence.
Sensitivity of volasertib alone or in combination with erlotinib was also
detected in the human tumor xenograft model. The combination index (CI)
was calculated by Calcusyn software.Results: Acquired erlotinib resistant
NSCLC cell lines with endogenous EGFR mutations (PC9, HCC4006 and HCC827)
showed diverse resistance mechanisms: T790M EGFR mutation, MET
amplification and EMT. Four of the 6 ER clones that underwent EMT became
more sensitive to volasertib. Volasertib and erlotinib demonstrated
synergistic effects only in cells bearing T790M EGFR mutations where we
observed more pronounced G2M arrest and increased apoptosis. Volasertib
alone or in combination showed enhanced DNA damage, activation of
CHK1/ATR and CHK2/ATM pathways and an increase in H2AX foci but only a
modest effect on canonical signaling downstream of EGFR. The combination
treatment exhibited a pronounced reduction in the size of tumor compared
to single agent treatment in subcutaneous xenograft model generated with
T790M mutant EGFR TKI-resistant PC9 cell line.Conclusions: These data
demonstrate that PLK1 inhibition alone induces apoptosis and DNA damage
in EGFR-TKI resistant cell lines with EMT. The combination of volasertib
and erlotinib overcomes T790M-mediated drug resistance in vitro and in
vivo.

