Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cloud-based informatics enables the design and analysis of
massively multiplex custom gene fusion panels for next-generation
sequencing on FFPE RNA samples


Gene fusions, a combination of two genes, comprising their coding and/or
regulatory sequences, are caused by structural rearrangements in DNA or
in RNA transcripts. Many gene fusions are strong driver mutations in
neoplasia, and are important in understanding basic biology, interaction
with targeted therapy, and research into risk stratification and
outcomes.Next-generation sequencing enables sensitive, specific and
precise detection of particular fusion isoforms for defined gene pairs.
Massively multiplex Ampliseq gene fusion assays enable enrichment of
fusion transcripts using as little as 10 ng of RNA extracted from FFPE
samples. Sequencing on Ion Torrent instruments reveals the full sequence
of the gene fusion, for precise definition of the breakpoint and the
expressed exons or promoter regions of both genes.We developed
cloud-based software to support the design of a custom Ampliseq gene
fusion panel, comprising 1 to 1,000 fusion isoform assays and any gene
expression assays for normalization.We extensively mined the scientific
literature on fusions and the COSMIC database to identify over 1000
fusion isoforms. We rigorously curated this data using automated and
manual methods, including mapping, confirmation and correction of
reported sequence to obtain genomic coordinates, identification of
breakpoints, annotation of exon junctions, and selected wet lab testing.
We created a database containing over 1000 high quality curated and
annotated fusion isoforms, including 70 ALK, 60 RET, 26 ROS1, and 21
NTRK1 fusions. We designed Ampliseq primer pairs for each of these
fusions using advanced assay design and pooling algorithms, such that all
fusion and gene expression assays can be multiplexed into 1 or 2
compatible pools.Assays can be selected by gene or gene pair; detailed
information about each assay selected includes isoform, genes, exon
numbers, and links to COSMIC and to relevant publications.We developed
cloud-based analysis software to analyze the BAM file resulting from
amplification and sequencing of custom Ampliseq fusion panels on an Ion
Torrent sequencer. This analysis leverages the rich annotation
information from the assay design. The reads are mapped to a custom
reference sequence tailored to the custom Ampliseq fusion assay, and
applying an optimized algorithm to select confidently mapped reads based
on read length and overlap with each gene of the gene pair based on the
reference and annotated breakpoint. Gene fusions are detected based on
the total number of fusion reads and optionally frequency, and on the
properties of those reads. Software QC steps for total number of mapped
reads, number of reads for gene expression controls, and elimination of
cross-talk artifacts result in a highly sensitive and specific detection
of fusions, with LOD below 1%. Fusion results for any or all samples can
be viewed, annotated, filtered, and visualized, and exported.

