Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel mTOR inhibitor MLN0128 inhibits imatinib-resistant GIST more
potently than rapalogues by abrogating AKT and 4EBP1 activation


Introduction:Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are characterized by
activating mutations of the KIT or PDGFRA receptor tyrosine kinases. Most
patients respond to the KIT/PDGFRA inhibitor imatinib (IM) but eventually
progress due to secondary resistance mutations in KIT. Development of
salvage treatments is hampered by the genomic heterogeneity of resistance
mutations as single KIT-inhibitory drugs do not inhibit all mutants. The
PI3K pathway is strongly activated in GIST regardless of secondary KIT
mutations and thus provides a rational target for therapeutic
combinations. Rapamycin-analogues have yet shown limited clinical benefit
in GIST but next-generation mTOR inhibitors have not been tested in GIST.
Here we evaluated the effects of the novel mTOR inhibitor MLN0128 alone
and in combination with other kinase inhibitors in GIST.Methods:Three
IM-sensitive (IM-S; GIST-T1, GIST882, GIST430) and 2 IM-resistant (IM-R;
GIST430/654, GIST48B) cell lines were studied. Cells were treated with
MLN0128 alone and in combinations with KIT inhibitors (IM, sunitinib,
regorafenib), MEK1/2 inhibitor trametinib, and everolimus. Cell viability
was evaluated by Sulforhodamin B (SRB) assay after 3 or 6 days of
treatment. Biological consequences of on KIT, KIT-dependent signaling
intermediates and apoptosis were evaluated by immunoblotting.Results:In
cell viability assays MLN0128 displayed IC50 values between 15nM
(GIST-T1) and 30nM (GIST48B). Immunoblots revealed inhibition of
phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 (as marker for mTOR activation)
at 1nM with complete inhibition at 50-100nM in all cell lines. In
contrast to everolimus, MLN0128 did also abrogate phosphorylation of
4E-BP1 at 50-100nM. At these concentrations we also observed strong
inhibition of AKT phosphorylation (except in GIST48B), upstream of mTOR,
while phosphorylation of KIT remained unchanged. A notable induction of
ERK1/2 phosphorylation in response to MLN0128 treatment suggested a
feedback loop activating the MEK/ERK signaling. Combinations of MLN0128
with the clinical MEK1/2 inhibitor trametinib as well as with different
KIT inhibitors exhibited additive effects.Conclusions:MLN0128 has strong
antiproliferative effects in IM-sensitive and IM-resistant cell lines in
the low nanomolar range, including KIT-negative GIST. The distinct
inhibitory profile, inhibition of AKT as well as 4E-BP1, suggests
superior clinical efficacy compared to first- and second-generation
rapalogues. Combinations with approved KIT and MEK inhibitors display
additive effects and may represent a feasible clinical strategy, which
warrants further investigation.

