Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages increase the expression of RhoC in inflammatory breast
cancer leading to increased migration


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is considered the most lethal form of
breast cancer due to its ability to progress quickly and the frequent
presence of metastasis at diagnosis. African Americas are
disproportionally diagnosed with IBC and often have worse outcomes than
Caucasians. By investigating IBC in both African American and Caucasian
cell lines we seek to understand the differences in IBC progression and
help address disparities by providing new anti-IBC strategies. RhoC
GTPase is overexpressed in 90% of IBC tumors and is known to increase
cell motility. Sites of inflammation, as seen in IBC, attract tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs), which have been found to facilitate the
movement and invasion of many breast cancers. We hypothesize that TAMs
play a role in increasing RhoC expression in IBC cell lines, consequently
leading to IBC's severe migratory and metastatic potential.A novel
microfluidic device created by our team was used to measure the migratory
phenotype of IBC cell lines in response to macrophage conditioned media
(CM) and cytokine stimulation. IBC cell lines were treated with CM,
cytokines, or pathway inhibitors then Western blotting was used to
determine protein expression and phosphorylation to identify important
signaling pathways.We found the expression of RhoC significantly
increased in two different IBC cell lines, SUM149 (African American) and
SUM190 (Caucasian), after culturing with conditioned media from the
macrophage-differentiated U937 monocytic cell line. This increase was not
detected in either the normal-like MCF-10A breast epithelial cell line or
the non-IBC MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer cell line. CM caused
a significant increase in the migration distance and frequency of both
SUM149 and SUM190 cell lines. Analysis of the CM determined CCL2, CCL5,
and IL-8 to be the key mediators in the macrophage CM. Western blotting
proposes that CCL2, CCL5, and IL-8 stimulation causes twice as much RhoC
expression compared to the control. Further analysis suggests a role for
the MAPK pathway in controlling RhoC expression and migration.Macrophage
conditioned media causes an increase in RhoC expression in IBC cell lines
and stimulates migration. Individual cytokines can lead to an increase in
RhoC possibly through the MAPK pathway. Studies involving RhoC inhibitors
are ongoing and could yield promising therapies for the prevention of
metastasis in IBC. By understanding the specific mechanism of TAMs
effects on IBC, we hope to learn how to control the lethal metastatic
nature of IBC and improve outcomes for patients of all ethnicities.

