Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage-induced bystander effect activates Wnt/-catenin
signaling and induces cellular dedifferentiation


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) in colorectal cancer (CRC) help maintain tumor
heterogeneity, promote tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis, and
produce resistance to therapeutic agents. The origin of colorectal CSCs,
however, is unclear. Our recent studies showed that a macrophage-induced
bystander effect (MIBE) induced gene expression of stem/progenitor cell
markers including Ly6A/E and Dclk1 in murine colonic epithelial cells,
implying that MIBE helps induce colorectal CSCs.In current studies we
show that commensal-triggered MIBE activates Wnt/-catenin signaling and
induces dedifferentiation of colonic epithelial cells during colorectal
carcinogenesis, thus contributing to the origin of colorectal CSCs.
Exposure of murine primary epithelial cells (YAMC) to commensal-polarized
macrophages induced phosphorylated Gsk3 (Ser9), active -catenin, and
Tcf4, suggesting activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling by MIBE. In vivo,
active -catenin was evident in both stromal and epithelial cells for
colon biopsies from E. faecalis-colonized Il10/ mice compared to
sham-colonized mice. In addition, we showed that 4-hydroxynonenal
(4-HNE), a byproduct of lipid peroxidation of 6 polyunsaturated fatty
acids, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) mediated activation of
Wnt/-catenin signaling. Epigenetic analysis revealed that MIBE activated
Wnt/-catenin signaling through DNA methylation in the CpG islands of
secreted frizzled-related protein 2 (Sfrp2), a soluble modulator of Wnt.
Next, we showed that exposure of YAMC cells to 4-HNE and TNF induced
expression of c-Myc, Klf4, Oct4, and Sox2factors essential for
pluripotent stem cells. Immunofluorescent staining of colon biopsies from
E. faecalis-colonized Il10/ mice showed increased expression of these
factors in colonic epithelial cells, suggesting dedifferentiation induced
by MIBE. This was confirmed by qRT-PCR and Western blots that showed
increased expression of Dclk1 and CD44, two markers for colorectal CSCs.
Furthermore, increased expression of DCLK1 was noted in human tubular
adenomas and invasive CRCs compared to hyperplastic polyps. Finally,
inhibition of -catenin/TCF4 using FH535, and by silencing CTNNB1,
decreased DCLK1 expression in HCT116 human colon cancer cells, supporting
the notion that Wnt/-catenin signaling induces cellular dedifferentiation
leading to colorectal CSCs.In summary, these results demonstrate that
commensal-polarized macrophages activate Wnt/-catenin signaling and
induce dedifferentiation of colonic epithelial cells through 4-HNE and
TNF-mediated bystander effects. These findings provide new evidence for
the origin of CSCs in colorectal carcinogenesis and should lead to novel
strategies for CRC prevention and therapy.

