Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncomine focus assay: Simultaneous detection of clinically
relevant hotspot mutations, CNVs, and gene fusions in 52 oncogenes
relevant to solid tumors


Introduction: The Oncomine Focus Assay (OFA) is aimed to simultaneously
detect and report hotspot mutations, Copy Number Variants (CNVs) and gene
fusions in 52 oncogenes clinically relevant to solid tumors. With minimal
DNA/RNA input, OFA employs AmpliSeq library preparation chemistry to
enrich target regions for Ion Torrent Next Generation Sequencing.
Variants are annotated for actionability by Oncomine Knowledgebase. Here
we report an analytical validation of OFA.Methods: DNA and RNA, extracted
from the FFPE processed GM12878, was used as the negative control to
evaluate the specificity of OFA. A RNA sample containing multiple
oncogenic gene fusions and a DNA sample containing multiple hotspot SNV
and indels were used as the positive controls. Fresh DNA from cancer cell
lines (HCC1143 or NCI-H2122) along with DNA from matched normal cell
lines, HorizonDx NGS standards TruQ-1, TruQ-2, several engineered FFPE
samples with gene fusions or copy number changes, and 43 clinical FFPE
samples of a variety of solid tumor types (non-small cell lung cancer,
colorectal cancer, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, ovarian cancer,
pancreatic cancer, and melanoma) were used to evaluate the OFA
performance. The analysis of the sequencing data was primarily performed
with the OFA pipeline integrated with the Oncomine Knowledgebase. Only
the genetic alterations with clinical utility were selected as the final
output from the data pipeline. The SBS and indels detected by OFA were
confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Any CNVs detected were confirmed by FISH,
if possible, and detected fusions were confirmed by RT-PCR or
FISH.Results: No clinically relevant genetic alterations were detected
from the negative control FFPE-GM12878, indicating the high specificity
of the OFA. The LOD for SBS and short indel detection was 5%, as assessed
by TruQ-1 and TruQ-2, each containing 9-10 variants. The assay can
detectgene fusion RNA present as 0.1%-1% of the total RNA, and gene
amplifications are detected with a minimum of 50% tumor cell content. A
known 12X CCND1 amplifications in HCC1143 and a 13X MYC amplification in
NCI-H2122 were detected. In addition, a 13X EGFR amplification and 11X
CDK4 amplification were detected in a lung cancer FFPE sample and
confirmed by FISH. The analytical specificity for detection of SBS and
indels was 100% (25/25). The analytical specificity for detection of CNV
gain and gene fusions, and the assay sensitivity are currently under
assessment.Conclusions: These results demonstrate the high sensitivity
and specificity of OFA. With as little as 10 ng RNA and 10 ng DNA, OFA
provides biomarker analysis of patient FFPE tumor specimens focusing on
the detection of genetic alterations that have been targeted by oncology
drugs or supported by published clinical evidence.

