Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly accurate genetic profiling of circulating tumor cells using
a label-free inertial microfluidic approach coupled with droplet
PCR-based next-generation sequencing


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) could provide significant
insights into cancer metastatic events and potentially even inform
clinical decisions. However, the scarcity of CTCs, compounded by the
abundance of circulating white blood cells, poses a major technical
challenge in the isolation, yield and downstream molecular analysis.
Moreover, next-generation sequencing (NGS) of CTCs has been challenged by
low CTC purity and nucleic acid yields commonly derived from existing
technologies. Here, we present a label-free microfluidic approach that
utilizes curvilinear microchannel geometry for high purity CTC enrichment
from 7.5 ml whole blood.Methods: We showed high purity isolation of CTCs
using a label-free inertial focusing microfluidics platform, ClearCell
FX. The lung cancer cell line, NCI-H1975, with known EGFR, CDKN2A and
TP53 mutations, were spiked into 7.5ml healthy donor peripheral blood
samples at varying concentrations (50, 100, 200 cells). DNA was extracted
using the QIAamp Micro kit. The Thunderbolts Cancer Panel droplet digital
PCR NGS library preparation method was used to enrich 230 loci in 50
known cancer genes from the isolated CTC gDNA. The libraries were
sequenced on a MiSeq system.Results: The CTCs were sufficiently enriched
with an average recovery of 45.8% and purities ranging from 1% - 70%. All
libraries were successfully generated and sequenced with 1400 mean
coverage, even with as little as 2 ng of starting material. Known EGFR,
CDKN2A and TP53 mutations in H1975 were successfully detected in all the
samples (n = 9), with a significant variant frequency that correlates
with CTC purity levels.Conclusion: We have demonstrated a highly accurate
and sensitive workflow utilizing a combination of inertial focusing and
digital droplet microfluidics to detect low numbers of rare CTCs and
interrogate their molecular profiles from as little as 10 cells/mL
frequency. This workflow has the potential for further development and
adoption as a liquid biopsy approach for non-invasive genomic profiling
of metastatic cancers.

