Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microfluidic single cell exome-seq and RNA-seq analysis of tumor
composition


Human breast tumors have been shown to exhibit extensive inter- and
intra-tumor heterogeneity. While recent advances in genomic technologies
have allowed us to deconvolute this heterogeneity, few studies have
addressed the functional consequences of diversity within tumor
populations. Here, we identified an index case for which we have derived
a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) as a renewable tissue source to
identify subpopulations and perform functional assays. On pathology, the
tumor was an invasive ductal carcinoma which was hormone
receptor-negative, HER2-positive (IHC 2+, FISH average HER2/CEP17 2.4),
though the FISH signal was noted to be heterogeneous. On gene expression
profiling of bulk samples, the primary tumor and PDX were classified as
basal-like. We performed single cell RNA and exome sequencing of the PDX
to identify population structure. Using a single sample predictor of
breast cancer subtype, we have identified single basal-like,
HER2-enriched and normal-like cells co-existing within the PDX tumor, a
finding replicated in several independent experiments. Genes
differentially expressed between these subpopulations are involved in
proliferation and differentiation. One population was characterized by
high MYC and the other high EGFR/KRT14. These findings were validated
using immunohistochemistry on PDX and primary tumor material. Further
functional experiments showed that that EGFR subpopulation has stem cell
character istics and forms metastasis in the animal model. Microfluidic
whole genome amplification followed by whole exome capture of 81single
cells, along with exome sequencing of the germline, primary and post
treatment tumor and whole PDX showed that BRCA1 and TP53 are mutated in
all single cells, as well as a number of sub-clonal mutations that are
being investigated further. Loss of heterozygocity was observed in 16
TCGA cancer driver genes and novel mutations in 7 known cancer driver
genes. Careful comparison of the exome sequencing data allowed the
association of driver gene mutation prevalence with tumor progression.
These findings are important in our understanding the functional
consequences of intra-tumor heterogeneity with respect to clinically
important phenotypes such as invasion, metastasis and drug-resistance.

