Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TASC1, a selective anti-senescence therapeutic which potently and
selectively counteract resistance to chemo- and radiotherapy


Resistance to therapy is a major limitation towards the cure of
irresectable cancer.Cellular senescence, induced by chemotherapy and
radiotherapy, can drive therapy resistance in vivo. Senescence is a tumor
suppressive mechanism, but senescent cells can secrete a range of
proteins that ironically promote tumor growth, migration and
metastazation and therapy resistance. Recent evidence has shown that
genetic removal of senescent cells indeed causes a strong reduction in
tumor growth and metastasis formation. Unfortunately however, therapeutic
options to remove senescent cells are currently lacking.Here, we show the
development and optimization of a biochemical compound, TASC1, that
potently and selectively kills senescent cells in vitro and in vivo and
lowers organ toxicity in a mouse model employed to address the off-target
effects of cancer therapy. This encouraged us to test the effect of TASC1
against cancer therapy resistance. We focused on Glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM), the most aggressive and lethal stage of glioma (III-IV) with a
median survival of less than 15 months. Treatment of GBM involves a
combination of surgery, radiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy
(Temozolomide). Response to radiotherapy is generally strong, but
resistance occurs rapidly, after which currently no successful follow-up
treatment exists. We observed radiation therapy to induce senescence in
astrocytes and senescence-like effects in GBM cells, without affecting
their progression.Strikingly, while both TASC1 and radiation at various
doses independently failed to reduce growth of these GBM cells, the
combination of TASC1 with radiation showed a potent synthetic lethal
response. Similar effects were seen for other types of cancer and their
respective therapies. Thus, TASC1 is a potent adjuvant to (re)sensitize
therapy-resistance metastatic cancer cells to treatment.

