Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The synergistic anticancer activity of 1-acetoxychavicol acetate
and sodium butyrate in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells


Introduction: It has been suggested that the combined effect of natural
products may improve the effect of treatment against the proliferation of
cancer cells. We evaluated the combination of 1-acetoxychavicol acetate
(ACA), obtained from Alpinia galangal, and sodium butyrate (NaB), a major
short chain fatty acid, on the growth of HepG2 cells. ACA exhibits
chemopreventive effects on chemically induced tumors in mouse skin as
well as on rat oral, colonic, esophangeal, and pancreatic tumors. ACA
also exerts antitumor activity by inducing apoptosis in various tumor
cells. On the other hand, sodium butyrate has multiple effects on tumor
cells cultured in vitro, including, most notably, inhibition of cell
proliferation and induction of apoptosis, as well as initiating the
differentiation of various carcinoma cells. The aim of our study was to
elucidate the synergistic interaction of ACA and NaB on cell viability in
the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 and to examine the
mechanism of the anti-cancer effect of combined ACA and NaB
treatment.Methods: HepG2 cells or HT-29 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's
modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% FBS.Results: The number of
HepG2 cells was synergistically decreased via apoptosis induction with
the combined treatment of ACA and NaB. In ACA- and NaB-treated cells,
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and NADPH oxidase
activities were increased significantly. The decrease in cell number
after combined treatment of ACA and NaB was improved with the treatment
of catalase. These results suggest that an increase in intracellular ROS
levels is involved in cancer cell death. AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) plays an essential role in controlling processes related to tumor
development. In ACA- and NaB-treated cells, AMPK phosphorylation was
induced significantly, and this induction improved when cells were
pretreated with catalase. These results suggest that the increase in
intracellular ROS is involved in the increase of AMPK
phosphorylation.Conclusion: These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that combination treatments can sensitize cancer cells more
effectively than individual treatments. We reported that combination
treatment of ACA and NaB synergistically induced apoptotic cell death via
an increase in intracellular ROS and an increase in pAMPK levels. Our
findings may provide new insight into the development of novel
combination therapies against hepatocellular carcinoma.

