Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-treatment platelet counts as a prognostic factor in stage II
and III rectal adenocarcinoma


Background. Thrombocytosis is often associated with malignancies and has
been confirmed as an adverse prognostic factor in various cancers. We
investigated if pre-treatment elevated platelet counts could provide
prognostic information in patients with stage II and III rectal
adenocarcinoma that received neo-adjuvant treatment before
surgery.Patients and Methods. Platelet number on diagnosis of stage II
and III rectal cancer was evaluated in 51 patients receiving neo-adjuvant
treatment and for whom there were complete follow-up data on progression
and survival, as well as pathologic outcome at time of surgery.
Pathologic response after neo-adjuvant treatment of patients with lower
platelet counts (150-300 109/L) was compared with that of patients with
higher platelet counts (>300 109/L) by the 2 test. Overall and
progression free survival Kaplan-Meier curves of the two groups were
constructed and compared with the LogRank test.Results. A significant
difference was present between the two groups in regards to pathologic
response with patients with lower platelet counts being more likely to
exhibit a good or complete response to neo-adjuvant treatment than
patients with higher platelet counts (P = 0.015). There was also a
significant difference between the CEA at presentation of patients that
exhibited a good or complete response and those that had no response or a
minimal to moderate response. Patients with a good or complete response
were more likely to present with a CEA of less than 5 (P = 0.00066).
There was no significant difference in overall and progression free
survival between the two groups (LogRank tests p = 0.42 and p = 0.35,
respectively).Conclusion. In this retrospective analysis of stage II and
III rectal cancer patients, platelet counts at the time of diagnosis had
prognostic value for neo-adjuvant treatment pathologic effect.
Pre-treatment CEA also held prognostic value in regards to treatment
effect.

