Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-283: a novel RAF Dimer inhibitor, displays potent antitumor
activity in HCC patient derived xenograft models


Liver cancer has the third highest mortality rate among all cancers in
China and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of liver
cancer. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway is
often constitutively active in HCC. The growth of HCC requires the
formation of new blood vessels. and VEGF is critical in this process.
Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor that targets both RAF and VEGF
receptor, is to date the only approved drug to treat advanced stages of
HCC. Despite sorafenib extended the survival in patients with HCC, its
clinical benefits remain modest and drug resistance is common. BGB283 is
a second generation RAF inhibitor with unique RAF dimer and VEGFR
inhibition activity. Thus, there is good rationale to test BGB-283 in
HCC. In this study, we compared the in vitro and in vivo activities of
BGB-283 and sorafinib in human HCC cell lines and patient derived HCC
xenograft models.In the biochemical assays, BGB-283 demonstrated great
potency for BRAF-V600E, BRAF-WT, CRAF(IC50 = 32, 69 and 6.5 nM,
respectively) and for VEGFR family enzymes, VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and VEGFR3
(IC50 = 25, 14 and 58 nM, respectively). In the cellular assays, the
anti-proliferative effect of BGB-283 and sorafinib was evaluated in
several HCC cell lines. A head-to-head comparison of in vivo anti-tumor
activities of BGB-283 and sorafinib were also evaluated in human primary
HCC xenograft mouse models. The patient derived xenograft (PDX) HCC
models were established in house using HCC patient surgical samples.
Sorafinib was not active in 2 out of 7 models. Oral administration of
BGB-283 resulted in significant tumor growth inhibition in all 7 models
and was significantly more efficacious than sorafinib in 4 models and
similar in the other 3 models.In conclusion, BGB-283 is a unique RAF
dimer inhibitor with VEGFR inhibition activity. BGB-283 has also
demonstrated better anti-tumor activity than sorafinib in HCC PDX models,
suggesting BGB-283 could be a promising drug candidate for treating HCC
patients.

