Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beta-catenin nuclear translocation in colorectal cancer cells is
suppressed by PDE10A inhibition, cGMP elevation, and activation of PKG


Phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10A) is a cGMP and cAMP degrading PDE isozyme
that is highly expressed in the brain striatum where it appears to play
an important role in cognition and psychomotor activity. PDE10 inhibitors
are being developed for the treatment of schizophrenia and Huntington's
disease and are generally well tolerated, possibly because of low
expression levels in most peripheral tissues. We recently reported high
levels of PDE10 in colon tumors and that genetic silencing of PDE10 by
siRNA or inhibition with small molecule inhibitors can suppress colon
tumor cell growth with a high degree of selectivity over normal
colonocytes (Li et al., Oncogene 2015). These observations suggest PDE10
may have an unrecognized role in tumorigenesis. Here we report that the
concentration range by which the highly specific PDE10 inhibitor,
Pf-2545920 (MP-10), inhibited colon tumor cell growth parallels the
concentration range required to increase cGMP and cAMP levels, and
activate PKG and PKA, respectively. Moreover, PDE10 knockdown by shRNA
reduced the sensitivity of colon tumor cells to the growth inhibitory
activity of Pf-2545920. Pf-2545920 also inhibited the translocation of
-catenin to the nucleus, thereby reducing -catenin mediated transcription
of survivin, which resulted in caspase activation and apoptosis. This was
determined to be through a PKG mediated pathway through the use of small
molecule inhibitors of PKG and PKA. PDE10 mRNA was also found to be
elevated in colon tumors compared with normal tissues in a cDNA array. We
also report the increase in PDE10 mRNA in 50% of a small collection of
human clinical specimens collected at the Mitchell Cancer Institute (n =
13). In addition, novel PDE10 inhibitor, MCI-030, reduced tumor size and
activated PDE10 signaling mechanisms in vivo. These findings suggest that
PDE10 can be targeted for cancer therapy or prevention whereby inhibition
results in cGMP elevation and PKG activation to reduce -catenin-mediated
transcription of survival proteins leading to the selective apoptosis of
cancer cells.

