Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic profiling of cell death in human lung cancer cells by
a novel digitoxin analog


Background:Digitoxin, a cardiac glycoside had shown considerable promise
as an anti-cancer therapeutic. However, doses of digitoxin required to
inhibit cancer cell proliferation lead to cardiotoxic side effects. We
have previously shown that a novel analog of digitoxin, MonoD, activates
apoptosis in human lung cancer cells at much lower concentrations as
compared to digitoxin. We postulate that treatment with MonoD leads to
distinct metabolic signatures on lung cancer cells as compared to
digitoxin, which will help delineate the pathways that dictate MonoD
action.Experimental Approach:NCI-H460 cells from identical passages were
used for metabolite analysis using an optimized version of the
methanol/water (80:20) protocol for metabolite extraction. The
supernatant containing metabolites were suspended in 0.1% formic acid
spiked with an internal standard for Q-Exactive analysis. The data was
analyzed using SIEVETM 2.0 software with the component extraction
algorithm that has been specifically designed for optimal data analysis
in untargeted metabolomics experiments. Metabolites that were found to be
significantly different between treatment groups were detected via
Chemspider/HMDB database search.Results:We observed several metabolites
along the prostaglandin synthesis pathway which were downregulated in
MonoD treated lung cancer cells. Prostaglandins play a key role in the
generation of the inflammatory response. Chronic inflammation has been
shown to be a causative factor in a variety of cancers. Cyclooxygenase2
(COX-2) derived prostaglandin has been previously shown to promote tumor
growth by binding its receptors and activating signaling pathways which
control cell proliferation, migration, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Using
the metabolite profiling data, we posited that COX-2, a key enzyme
involved in prostaglandin synthesis, in addition to NFB, a key
transcription factor of proinflammatory signaling pathway are
downregulated with MonoD treatment. Immunoblotting confirmed the
downregulation of COX-2 and NFB in MonoD-treated cells.Conclusion: Using
metabolite profiling, we have elucidated an important mode of action for
MonoD in lung cancer cells, and shown that MonoD exerts its
anti-tumorigenic properties by downregulating key factors involved in
inflammatory response.

