Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective gene-expression profiling of metastasizing breast tumor
cell subpopulations complements the predictive power of Mammaprint Dx and
Oncotype Dx


Gene-expression profiling has yielded prognostic tests, such as
MammaPrint and Oncotype Dx, which facilitate clinical decision-making in
breast cancer patients. These tests are based on signatures constructed
from whole tumor tissue, including tumor as well as stromal cells. Since
metastatic tumor cells are not uniquely identified in these signatures,
these tests may have reduced clinical specificity and sensitivity in
predicting risk of metastasis. In contrast, we captured breast cancer
cells in the act of migration/dissemination using an in vivo invasion
assay and expression profiled these cells to create a distinct signature
named the human invasion signature (HIS). A comparison between HIS and
MammaPrint in the NKI295 cohort demonstrated that both signatures perform
comparably in selecting a group of patients with significantly poorer
outcomes. However, when compared to MammaPrint, the initial slope of the
high-risk patients identified by the HIS is significantly steeper,
suggesting that the HIS may identify patients at higher risk of early
distant metastatic recurrence. Therefore HIS carries prognostic
information beyond that captured by MammaPrint. Additionally, a more
thorough examination of candidate genes present in HIS yielded two
predictive tissue-based biomarkers: TMEM score which measures the density
of cancer cell intravasation sites, and MenaCalc which measures the
expression of invasive isoforms of the actin-regulatory protein Mena
(MenaCalc = PanMena-Mena11a), thereby identifying tumor cells that
disseminate. Both, TMEM density and MenaCalc independently predict the
development of distant metastases in breast cancer patients. Here, we
show that in a small patient cohort (n = 58), there is no correlation
between TMEM density and the Oncotype recurrence score (RS). In
particular, a subgroup of patients had tumors with high-Oncotype DX and
low TMEM score while another subgroup had low Oncotype DX and high TMEM
score. These findings indicate that TMEM and Oncotype Dx address
different tumor biology and could be used in a complementary fashion for
more accurate patient stratification, as well as better selection of
systemic therapies to avoid over- and under-treatment.

