Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 protein isoform heterogeneity investigated by single-cell
western blotting


Accounting for 20% of breast cancers, half of metastatic HER2-positive
breast cancer patients treated with trastuzumab plus chemotherapy will
experience progression of disease within one year. Trastuzumab treatment,
though associated with improvement in median overall survival, still sees
drug resistance as an unmet challenge. Differential response to therapy
may arise from tumor heterogeneity. Further complicating the situation is
the fact that HER2/erbB2 biology is complex. HER2 is not simply one
full-length protein (p185) overexpressed on tumor cell surfaces, but also
includes truncated isoforms, t-erbB2 (e.g., 95 and 110 kDa isoforms)
lacking the extracellular domain targeted by trastuzumab (and pertuzumab
and T-DM1). The t-erbB2 isoforms are implicated in tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and therapeutic response. Given existing pathology and life
sciences tools, the high heterogeneity and need for single cell
resolution presents a tremendous challenge.We introduce here a novel
microfluidic device to quantitatively assess HER2 protein isoforms in
heterogeneous tumor biopsies with single-cell resolution. The single-cell
western blot (scWB) provides both the sensitivity and specificity needed
to detect t-erbB2 isoforms owing to use of a single-cell electrophoretic
protein separation followed by immunoprobing. The assay further provides
enough sensitivity to obviate the need for cell pooling, which obscures
cell-to-cell heterogeneity. We assay 1000's of single cells on one
microscope slide in a 4-6 hr workflow.First, we validated that the scWB
can separate full length (p185) from truncated (p95) HER2 in single p185-
and p95-genetically engineered CHO cells. The p95 was resolved from p185
protein in a short 1 mm separation lane (resolution = 0.970.03, n>500
cells). Next, we assessed a HER2-positive breast cancer cell line (BT474)
and found Accounting for 20% of breast cancers, half of metastatic
HER2-positive breast cancer patients treated with trastuzumab plus
chemotherapy will experience progression of disease within one year.
Trastuzumab treatment, though associated with improvement in median
overall survival, still sees drug resistance as an unmet challenge.
Differential response to therapy may arise from tumor heterogeneity.
Further complicating the situation is the fact that HER2/erbB2 biology is
complex. HER2 is not simply one full-length protein (p185) overexpressed
on tumor cell surfaces, but also includes truncated isoforms, t-erbB2
(e.g., 95 and 110 kDa isoforms) lacking the extracellular domain targeted
by trastuzumab (and pertuzumab and T-DM1). The t-erbB2 isoforms are
implicated in tumorigenesis, metastasis, and therapeutic response. Given
existing pathology and life sciences tools, the high heterogeneity and
need for single cell resolution presents a tremendous challenge.We
introduce here a novel microfluidic device to quantitatively assess HER2
protein isoforms in heterogeneous tumor biopsies with single-cell
resolution. The single-cell western blot (scWB) provides both the
sensitivity and specificity needed to detect t-erbB2 isoforms owing to
use of a single-cell electrophoretic protein separation followed by
immunoprobing. The assay further provides enough sensitivity to obviate
the need for cell pooling, which obscures cell-to-cell heterogeneity. We
assay 1000's of single cells on one microscope slide in a 4-6 hr
workflow.First, we validated that the scWB can separate full length
(p185) from truncated (p95) HER2 in single p185- and p95-genetically
engineered CHO cells. The p95 was resolved from p185 protein in a short 1
mm separation lane (resolution = 0.970.03, n>500 cells). Next, we
assessed a HER2-positive breast cancer cell line (BT474) and found <3%
t-erbB2 expressing cells. To further investigate the effect of t-erbB2 in
HER2-related signaling, we examined phospho-proteins including p-HER2,
p-HER3, p-ERK Thr187/Tyr185, p-ERK Thr202/Tyr204, p-rs6 from each t-erbB2
expressing BT474 cell. Protein activation in t-erbB2 expressing cells was
similar to cells expressing full length HER2.This first-in-kind study
demonstrates a powerful single-cell resolution multiplexing capability
including for phospho-proteins. We are now applying the novel scWB to
measure t-erbB2 in HER2-positive and triple positive (ER/PR/HER2) breast
tumor biopsies and will report our results at AACR.Taken together, the
microfluidic single-cell resolution western provides a
sensitive,quantitative, and multiplexed tool to assay clinically-relevant
oncoprotein isoforms that are currently difficult or impossible to assay.
Correlating isoform expression ratios with clinical outcomes may confer a
more comprehensive understanding of drug resistance responses derived
from oncoprotein isoform profiles within heterogeneous cancer cell
populations.

