Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemistry and radioimaging with hJAA-11 antibody to the
Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen: Potential theranostic application for
breast cancer


Theranostics through the utilization of immunohistochemistry followed by
radioimaging to determine if metastatic foci will react with a
therapeutic antibody will allow for the selection of the patient
population that will most benefit from this immunotherapy. The
Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen (TF-Ag) has been shown to be involved in 90%
of carcinomas, specifically breast carcinomas, making it a suitable
target for radioimaging and therapy. The anti-TF-Ag antibody, JAA-F11, a
mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb), has had success in localization,
blocking metastasis, and inhibiting cell proliferation, and binds to 80%
of breast cancer cell lines, without preference to receptor status. This
is significant since the triple negative breast cancer (ER-/PR-/HER2-)
has no current targeted treatment. Studies are extended to human breast
cancer tissue microarray immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis, which was
scored blindly by a pathologist on a semi- quantitative scale. JAA-F11
stained approximately 76% of all breast cancer specimens, which included
cases of mucinous, medullary, invasive ductal and neuroendocrine
carcinomas. The staining observed was irrespective of receptor status,
whereas in normal breast tissue, staining was either absent or very
weak/weak. In addition, all available matched lymph node metastasis
stained, with greater intensity observed in 39% of cases. JAA-F11 IHC
studies performed on human normal organ tissue arrays, showed staining
that for the most part was not significantly different from staining
obtained with isotype control antibody, or was observed in areas that
would not be therapeutically accessible. Furthermore, in an additional
IHC study, preliminary results suggest that JAA-F11 significantly stained
other carcinomas including those of the colon, bladder, ovary and
prostate. In vitro studies show that the humanized JAA-F11 (hJAA-F11) has
similar chemical specificity and higher affinity towards the TF-Ag.
Imaging studies were performed in a BALB/c mouse breast cancer model with
the hJAA-F11 to determine biological reactivity and to predict the
feasibility of theranostic imaging prior to therapy. After 10 days of
tumor growth, mice pretreated with cold iodine water and rabbit IgG to
inhibit binding to Fc receptors, were given tail vein injections of
hJAA-F11 conjugated with [124]-I. Clear tumor images were obtained up to
144 hours post injection. Biodistribution analysis has provided further
results indicating increased%ID/g (7.03.9%) in tumor tissue as compared
to healthy tissues (brain%ID/g to be 0.21.09, stomach 0.800.19%, and bone
0.902.4%). Results support that the hJAA-F11 antibody can be used in a
multi-step theranostic approach, with analysis of tumor binding in IHC,
followed by imaging to determine in vivo tumor targeting prior to direct
immunotherapy or antibody drug conjugate therapy with hJAA-F11.

