Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of notch1, numb, and musashi1 in non-small cell lung
cancer


Background: Deregulation of Notch pathway is associated with
carcinogenesis, and Notch signaling is identified as tumor activator in
non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC). The function of Musashi1 has been
found to activate Notch signaling through the translational repression of
Numb, which represses an intracellular Notch signaling. In NSCLC, the
association between Numb or Musashi1 expression and clinicopathological
factors or prognosis has remained unclear. In this study, we evaluated
the expression of Notch1, Numb, and Musashi1 in NSCLC. Methods: A total
of 135 surgically resected NSCLCs were immunohistochemically assessed for
Notch1, Numb, and Musashi1 expression. Only cytoplasm and nuclear
staining was considered in the evaluation of activated Notch1 expression.
The immunoscores were determined, and then its correlation with either
the clinicopathological variables or the survival outcomes was analyzed.
Results: Immunohistochemical reactivity for Numb, and Musashi1 was
detected in the cytoplasm and nuclear of the tumor cells. Notch1
expression was associated with several clinicopathological factors,
including pathological histology (p = 0.002), and differentiation of
tumor (p = 0.024). Numb expression was also associated with several
clinicopathological factors, including sex (p = 0.037), smoking habit (p
= 0.033), pathological histology (p = 0.002), and differentiation of
tumor (p = 0.015). No correlations were noted between Musashi1 expression
and any of the variables. Analysis of cellular biological expression
demonstrated a link between low Numb expression and high Notch
expression. Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that positive
Numb expression was an independent favorable prognostic factor.
Conclusions: We demonstrate that Numb expression was associated with
better prognosis in NSCLC. Numb might have the function as tumor
suppressor in NSCLC.

