Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A construction platform for hexavalent agonists targeting
receptors of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily: Where death meets
co-stimulation


Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily (TNFRSF) proteins are widely
expressed by immune and tumor cells. Their importance in many locations
and phases of the anti-tumor immune response is now broadly appreciated
and several TNFR agonists are currently in preclinical and clinical
development. Importantly, signaling through many TNFRSF members, such as
CD40, CD27, OX40, 4-1BB, HVEM and GITR, is potentially associated with an
enhanced anti tumor response via co-stimulation of immune cells.Apogenix
has established a development platform for a novel class of
TNFRSF-agonists for the treatment of cancer. Unlike their natural
homotrimeric counterparts, the Apogenix recombinant TNFSF proteins
consist of one single polypeptide chain composed of three
receptor-binding domain-forming protomers. These single-chain TNFSF
receptor-binding domains (scTNFSF-RBD) are mimics of the
three-dimensional organization of the natural TNFSF-cytokine and can be
used to engineer fully human fusion-proteins from a modular toolbox. For
example, fusing an IgG1 Fc-domain to the C-terminus of a scTNFSF-RBD
creates a hexavalent agonist as the Fc-domain acts as a dimerization
scaffold for two trivalent scTNFSF-RBDs. As a result of this molecular
design, each drug molecule is capable of clustering six receptors in a
spatially well-defined manner. Consequently, TNFSF receptor signaling
following treatment with the Apogenix scTNFSF-RBD-Fc in vivo is
independent of secondary clustering through Fc- receptors that is
required for many anti-TNFRSF agonistic antibodies (e.g., anti-TRAILR2 or
-CD40).Following up the scTRAIL-RBD-Fc prototype, this engineering
concept has now been successfully translated to CD40L and CD27L resulting
in hexavalent agonists suitable for further development. Expression of
the drug candidates in CHO suspension cells followed by an AFC and
SEC-based lab-scale purification process resulted in homogenous
aggregate-free protein lots. The purified proteins bind their respective
target-receptors with high affinity. In vivo stability/PK studies have
been performed in addition to in vitro experiments with primary human and
mouse lymphoid and myeloid cell populations. Specifically, it was shown
that scCD27L-RBD-Fc was able to bind CD27 expressed on primary human CD4+
and CD8+ T cells. Importantly, binding significantly increased T cell
expansion following activation. Treatment with scCD40L-RBD-Fc induced
differentiation of B cells and enhanced primary human monocyte
differentiation into DCs or M1 macrophages.Encouraged by the promising
results obtained with TRAIL, CD40L, and CD27L, Apogenix is currently
expanding the TNFRSF-agonist pipeline to target additional cell
populations, locations and phases of the immune response in order to
develop novel therapies to treat cancer and other conditions.

