Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Continuous, low intensity systemic dosing maximizes the
therapeutic margin of Eg5/KSP inhibition in an orthotopic model of
urothelial cell carcinoma


Urothelial Cell Carcinoma (UCC) is the fifth most common cancer, but no
new generation molecularly targeted therapies have been registered to
treat this disease. Non muscle-invasive bladder cancer can be treated by
systemic or intravesical dosing routes. However, the urothelium is one of
the most formidable permeability barriers in nature, and may limit the
penetration of small molecules into tumour tissue from the intravesical
location. Inhibitors of mitosis, including spindle proteins such as Eg5,
are attractive targets for cancer therapy, but their efficacy when dosed
systemically is severely limited by bone marrow toxicities such as
neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. AZ9814, a very potent and selective
small molecule inhibitor of Eg5, induces apoptosis and inhibits
proliferation of UCC cells in culture with a GI50 of Urothelial Cell
Carcinoma (UCC) is the fifth most common cancer, but no new generation
molecularly targeted therapies have been registered to treat this
disease. Non muscle-invasive bladder cancer can be treated by systemic or
intravesical dosing routes. However, the urothelium is one of the most
formidable permeability barriers in nature, and may limit the penetration
of small molecules into tumour tissue from the intravesical location.
Inhibitors of mitosis, including spindle proteins such as Eg5, are
attractive targets for cancer therapy, but their efficacy when dosed
systemically is severely limited by bone marrow toxicities such as
neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. AZ9814, a very potent and selective
small molecule inhibitor of Eg5, induces apoptosis and inhibits
proliferation of UCC cells in culture with a GI50 of < 1 nM. We have
developed an orthotopic model of bladder cancer in the nude rat coupled
with a programmable mini-pump system to continuously infuse AZ9814 into
the bladder, and compared the therapeutic index of this delivery route
with systemic dosing schedules using intraperitoneal injection and
continuous subcutaneous infusion using an osmotic mini-pump. Continuous
intravesical infusion resulted in severe bladder toxicity including
hydropic degeneration and ulceration of urothelium, mucosal erosion and
bilateral hydronephrosis, with limited penetration of compound into the
tumour, and no significant impact on tumour pharmacodynamics and growth.
In contrast, continuous low intensity systemic dosing resulted in
significant tumour pharamacodynamic activity and control of tumour
growth, albeit with significant but non-lethal effects on bone marrow
toxicity. Daily intraperitoneal injection of AZ9814 resulted in very
modest anti-tumour effects which were limited by bone marrow toxicity. It
is concluded that Eg5 inhibitors have potential to treat UCC, but
continuous systemic infusion is the best dosing schedule to maximize
therapeutic index.

