Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Medical history, lifestyle, and family history exposures and
chronic lymphocytic leukemia outcome


Background: Associations of medical history, lifestyle, and family
history of hematological disorders with risk of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) have been previously established (1), but these exposures
have not been well-studied as contributing factors to CLL prognosis. Here
we investigate the association of these exposures with time to first
treatment (TTFT) in 730 CLL patients.Methods: Newly diagnosed CLL
patients seen at the Mayo Clinic between 2002 and 2012 were enrolled. CLL
was defined according to the 1996 NCI-Working Group criteria (2). Risk
factor data (including body mass index, smoking, alcohol use, sun
exposure, having lived on a farm, any allergy, asthma, eczema, blood
transfusion, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and family history of
hematological malignancy) were collected from self-administered
questionnaires. Clinical and prognostic characteristics for CLL were
extracted from medical records. Analyses were performed using Cox
regression with first treatment as the event. Hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals were estimated. We used Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing with statistical significance at 0.004.Results: The
median age at CLL diagnosis was 63 years (range 36 - 89); 65% were male,
and 95% had a Rai stage0.1).Conclusions: We observed an improved CLL
prognosis in patients with a history of any allergies or asthma. These
results were independent of other prognostic markers and suggest that an
overactive IgE level from environmental exposures may provide insight
into the progression of CLL.Literature Cited1. Slager SL, Benavente Y,
Blair A, Vermeulen R, Cerhan JR, Costantini AS, et al. Medical history,
lifestyle, family history, and occupational risk factors for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma: the InterLymph
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Subtypes Project. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2014
Aug;2014(48):41-51.2. Cheson BD, Bennett JM, Grever M, Kay N, Keating MJ,
OBrien S, et al. National Cancer Institute-sponsored Working Group
guidelines for chronic lymphocytic leukemia: revised guidelines for
diagnosis and treatment. Blood. 1996 Jun 15;87(12):4990-7.

