Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incidence and natural history of cardiovascular toxicity
associated with biologic and targeted therapies used in hematologic
malignancies


INTRODUCTION: Unanticipated cardiac toxicity has been reported with anti
cancer targeted and biological treatments. In this retrospective study,
we aim at identifying the number of cardiac toxicity cases among patients
with hematologic malignancies (HM) who were treated with targeted
therapies over 10-year period with emphasis on natural history and
outcomes.METHODS: With the help of the Faculty Practice Decision Support
(FPDS) team, we used 114 diagnosis codes for HM and 17 codes for cardiac
diseases in order to mine our electronic medical records (EPIC) and
identify patients with HM and specific cardiac problems, then sorted them
according to whether they received known biologic agents such as
thymidine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), proteasome inhibitors, monoclonal
antibodies, hypomethylating agents, and immunomodulatory drugs.RESULTS:
FPDS team provided us with a file that contained medical records of 820
patients that had both HM and cardiac abnormalities. We pulled out 53
patients who received the drugs of interest. We were able to confirm
cardiac toxicity defined mainly by left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) of INTRODUCTION: Unanticipated cardiac toxicity has been reported
with anti cancer targeted and biological treatments. In this
retrospective study, we aim at identifying the number of cardiac toxicity
cases among patients with hematologic malignancies (HM) who were treated
with targeted therapies over 10-year period with emphasis on natural
history and outcomes.METHODS: With the help of the Faculty Practice
Decision Support (FPDS) team, we used 114 diagnosis codes for HM and 17
codes for cardiac diseases in order to mine our electronic medical
records (EPIC) and identify patients with HM and specific cardiac
problems, then sorted them according to whether they received known
biologic agents such as thymidine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), proteasome
inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, hypomethylating agents, and
immunomodulatory drugs.RESULTS: FPDS team provided us with a file that
contained medical records of 820 patients that had both HM and cardiac
abnormalities. We pulled out 53 patients who received the drugs of
interest. We were able to confirm cardiac toxicity defined mainly by left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of < 50%, arrhythmias, or ischemic
cardiovascular event in 44 patients. Ten patients were excluded because
of pre-existing cardiac disease. Thus the final analysis was performed on
the remaining 34 patients. The median follow-up was 9 mo (range, 1-78).
The median age of this group was 66 years (range, 27-81), male/female
19/15, 26 Caucasians, and 15 were still alive. The median time from
exposure to development of cardiac events was 120 days (range,
INTRODUCTION: Unanticipated cardiac toxicity has been reported with anti
cancer targeted and biological treatments. In this retrospective study,
we aim at identifying the number of cardiac toxicity cases among patients
with hematologic malignancies (HM) who were treated with targeted
therapies over 10-year period with emphasis on natural history and
outcomes.METHODS: With the help of the Faculty Practice Decision Support
(FPDS) team, we used 114 diagnosis codes for HM and 17 codes for cardiac
diseases in order to mine our electronic medical records (EPIC) and
identify patients with HM and specific cardiac problems, then sorted them
according to whether they received known biologic agents such as
thymidine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), proteasome inhibitors, monoclonal
antibodies, hypomethylating agents, and immunomodulatory drugs.RESULTS:
FPDS team provided us with a file that contained medical records of 820
patients that had both HM and cardiac abnormalities. We pulled out 53
patients who received the drugs of interest. We were able to confirm
cardiac toxicity defined mainly by left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) of < 50%, arrhythmias, or ischemic cardiovascular event in 44
patients. Ten patients were excluded because of pre-existing cardiac
disease. Thus the final analysis was performed on the remaining 34
patients. The median follow-up was 9 mo (range, 1-78). The median age of
this group was 66 years (range, 27-81), male/female 19/15, 26 Caucasians,
and 15 were still alive. The median time from exposure to development of
cardiac events was 120 days (range, <1-300). The diagnosis distribution
was as follows: multiple myeloma 16, B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL)
10, follicular NHL 4, Philadelphia positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia
3, MDS 1. Number of patients (n) who received suspected drugs
contributing to the cardiac toxicity: bortezomib (8), carfilzomib (4),
imatinib (2), dasatinib (4), Rituximab (13), and lenalidomide (3). Twenty
one patients had no prior cardiac disease, while 11 had known coronary
artery disease and 2 had known arrhythmias, while only 9 had no chronic
co-morbidities. Fourteen patients did not receive anthracyclines
including 2 who received rituximab. Nine patients had elevation in
troponin and were diagnosed with NSTE myocardial infarction at the time
of cardiac toxicity. Among the 19 dead patients, only 6 died of cardiac
causes, while the rest died of their cancers. Repeat echocardiograms
showed worsening of LVEF in 5 patients and improvement in 15
patients.CONCLUSIONS: About 4.1% of patients with HM experience
unanticipated cardiac toxicity with related mortality of 17.6%. Most
patients do well with stable compensated cardiac function with objective
improvement in LVEF. Whether Rituximab can cause cardiac toxicity is
controversial and we will present specific arguments.

