Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of surgery in the treatment of epithelioid trophoblastic
tumor: A single institution case series


Objective: Epithelioid trophoblastic tumor (ETT) is a rare variant of
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) that develops from
chorionic-type intermediate trophoblasts, simulates carcinoma, often
presents many years following a pregnancy event, is associated with low
or normal human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels, and is relatively
resistant to chemotherapy. Our aim was to identify the role of surgery in
the management of both localized and metastatic ETT.Methods: A
retrospective review of women with ETT treated at a gestational
trophoblastic disease center from 2010-2015 identified five women.
Medical records were abstracted for demographic data, clinical
presentation, hCG levels, prior pregnancy information, disease sites, and
treatment with chemotherapy and surgery.Results: The five women with ETT
ranged in age from 28 to 48 years. Clinical presentation was abnormal
uterine bleeding prompting dilation and curettage, which established the
diagnosis of ETT in three women. One woman presented with repeated
spontaneous pneumothorax requiring thoracoscopic resection, which
identified a 6 cm ETT in the lung. Another woman was initially treated
with methotrexate for a presumed ectopic pregnancy without a response.
Two women had no identifiable antecedent pregnancy, two women had
spontaneous abortions 19 and 72 months prior to the diagnosis of ETT, and
one woman had a normal term delivery 48 months earlier. Four of five
women had metastatic disease to the lungs. Three of these women underwent
pulmonary wedge resection as well as hysterectomy followed by
paclitaxel-cisplatin/paclitaxel-etoposide (TP/TE) chemotherapy, while the
other woman was treated with etoposide, methotrexate, actinomycin
D/etoposide, cisplatin (EMA/EP) chemotherapy and hysterectomy. The one
woman with nonmetastatic disease was treated with hysterectomy only. All
five women are currently without evidence of disease.Conclusions:
Surgery, including hysterectomy and resection of metastatic disease, is
an important component in the treatment of women with ETT. Adjuvant
chemotherapy with a platinum-containing regimen, such as TP/TE or EMA/EP,
should be used in women with metastatic disease. All five women with ETT
in this series were cured using this approach, including the four with
metastatic disease.

