Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the 3D tumor microenvironment via microbioreactors


Microfluidic devices can offer a unique opportunity to more fully examine
key factors of the tumor microenvironment that mediate metastasis. A
microfluidic bioreactor was fabricated and cast in (poly)dimethylsiloxane
(PDMS). Highly metastatic MDA MB 231-GFP+ tagged cells were allowed to
aggregate into spheroids over a 24 hour period via a hanging drop method.
The cancer cells were pipetted in droplets of media onto the inverted lid
of a 100 mm well dish. The lid was then re-inverted onto its base and the
dish was incubated overnight, where the cells in each drop would
aggregate into a single spheroid. Afterward, the center channel of the
microfluidic device was coated with an extra-cellular matrix (ECM), which
consisted of 56% HEPES buffer, 24% Type 1 rat tail collagen, and 20%
Matrigel. A single spheroid was then introduced into the center of the
device by lowering the lid of the well dish onto the device such that the
hanging drop was allowed to fall into an inlet hole, taking with it the
spheroid. After a brief incubation, the device was submerged in media in
a petri dish and monitored for 14 days. The device was used to study the
metastatic potential of the cancer cells as a function of the
microenvironment. In these experiments, NIH3T3-mcherry+-tagged
fibroblasts were loaded into the channel along with the ECM. The spheroid
remained fairly tightly aggregated during the first week, while the
fibroblasts on either side of the channel grew an array of tubules within
the ECM, migrating toward the spheroid. As the fibroblasts tubules
approached the spheroid in the center of the device, the spheroid began
branching out toward the incoming fibroblast tubules. The tumor cells
used the fibroblast tubules as a scaffold to migrate outward in a
single-file pattern. The cancer cells migrated a distance of roughly 0.55
mm/day. In other experiments, when a device containing a spheroid and
fibroblasts was constantly exposed to 10 ng/mL CXCL12, there was an
inhibition of fibroblast growth and tubule formation in the ECM, while
the cancer cells migrated extensively even in the absence of
fibroblast/matrix tubules, at a rate of roughly 0.37 mm/day. This
contrasted with the control devices, where the cancer cells did not
migrate until the fibroblast tubules reached the spheroid. In devices
that consisted of a spheroid alone, the cells remained tightly aggregated
and did not migrate into the surrounding environment. These data indicate
that the microbioreactor utilized herein will be useful to dissect the
interaction between cancer cell migration and the microenvironmental
factors that facilitate this migration, leading to metastasis. When
exposed to a pro-tumor chemokine environment or tubular fibrils laid down
by fibroblasts, cancer cells can migrate freely. However, in a neutral
microenvironment, the cancer cells may remain tightly aggregated until
appropriate stimuli are provided, even though they have an intrinsic
capability to metastasize.

