Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of replicative stress by deacetylation and
dephosphorylation


Over 3 billion base pairs of a mammalian cell have to be replicated with
every cell division. Limitations in the supply of nucleotides and DNA
lesions slow down replication fork speed and trigger a complex
replicative stress response to prevent genomic instability and cancer
development. The checkpoint kinases ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM),
ATM and Rad3-related (ATR), checkpoint kinase-1 (CHK1), and checkpoint
kinase-2 (CHK2) are at the heart of this response. These factors catalyze
processes that slow down the cell cycle as well as mechanisms that
stabilize the replication fork and processes that initiate DNA repair.
Such pathways ensure the faithful transmission of DNA without epigenetic
alterations and DNA mutations. As expected for such a pivotal mechanism,
checkpoint kinase signaling is highly regulated. Posttranslational
modifications including phosphorylation and acetylation regulate
checkpoint kinases at multiple levels. Recent data show that class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs) can affect checkpoint kinase signaling and
genomic stability. How these HDACs control checkpoint kinases exactly and
if they show specificity for certain checkpoint kinases and DNA repair
pathways has not been resolved. Moreover, although it is known that
phosphorylation triggers checkpoint kinase activation and that the
trimeric phosphatase PP2A attenuates checkpoint kinase phosphorylation it
is unknown how this activity of PP2A is modulated. PP2A consists of the
subunits A (structural component, PPP2R1A/B), C (catalytic activity,
PPP2CA/B), and B (discriminates between substrates to allow specificity
of the PP2A holoenzyme). Our data illustrate that class I HDACs are
required for checkpoint kinase phosphorylation in human and murine cells.
We show that these enzymes suppress the expression of certain PP2A
subunits and we reveal that one of the B type subunits specifically
targets checkpoint kinases for dephosphorylation by the PP2A holoenzyme.
With genetic and biochemical approaches, including RNAi, CRISPR-Cas9, DNA
fiber assays, confocal microscopy, and DNA and protein analyses, we
demonstrate how these mechanisms maintain S phase arrest and the survival
of cells undergoing replicative stress.

