Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and initial characterization of human hepatocellular
carcinoma organoid culture


Background:Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 3rd most leading cause
of cancer death in the world. Despite extensive research, HCC has a
strikingly bad prognosis due to the limited therapeutic options: Other
than surgical resection, there is no curative treatment. No cytotoxic
agent has shown efficacy so far, and the only currently approved systemic
agent, sorafenib, is only used in a palliative context.This dilemma is
due to the therapy-resistant biology as well as its variable pathogenesis
and biological diversity, which requires excellent preclinical models to
allow differential and innovative studies.Innovative 3D culture methods
such as organoid culture have been increasingly implemented in routine in
vitro research for many tumor entities. However, due to its distinct
biology, organoid culture of HCC has been a challenge. We here describe
the initial establishment and characterization of HCC organoid
culture.Materials/Methods:Surgical HCC tissue specimens were obtained in
the operating rooms of the University Hospital Dresden; biopsy specimens
were obtained via CT-/ultrasound-guided biopsy of HCC lesions. All
samples were processed according to a novel protocol and cultured in
Matrigel supplemented with a highly specialized culture medium. Organoids
were propagated, passaged and frozen at regular intervals. Proliferation
was measured using a modified WST proliferation assay protocol.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on corresponding triplets
of healthy tissue, tumor tissue and organoid samples using the TruSight
One Sequencing Panel (Illumina) on an Illumina MiSeq Sequencer. Histology
was performed on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded organoids using
standard protocols.Results:We were able to establish a method to culture
HCC samples as organoids in vitro. Proliferation assays revealed distinct
differences in organoid growth of HCCs from different patients and
correlated well with both clinical behavior and histological grading of
the tumors. Amplicon sequencing (targeting 4,813 cancer-associated genes)
of corresponding sets of tumor specimens and HCC organoids demonstrated
the HCC origin of the organoids and their genetic and genomic stability
in culture. Treatment of HCC organoids with sorafenib showed the expected
reduction in proliferation and viability. Interestingly, treatment of the
HCC organoids with hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) resulted in a marked
reduction in proliferation as opposed to healthy liver organoids, which
had increased proliferation activity upon stimulation with HGF. Histology
of the HCC organoids showed distinct features of HCC and corresponded
well with the corresponding HCC tissue samples.Conclusion:We successfully
established a protocol reliably allowing 3D organoid culture of HCC. The
organoids faithfully recapitulate the biology of the corresponding tumor
and can be used for multiple purposes including in vitro therapeutic
testing.

