Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mental health-related quality of life assessment at diagnosis as a
predictor for prognosis of colorectal cancer patients


Purpose: Health-related quality of life (HR-QoL) is emerging as an
important metric for assessing and predicting outcomes in colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients. While most studies focus on QoL in treatment
response, few studies have investigated the impact of baseline mental
health QoL variables on prognosis of CRC patients. The objective of our
study was to explore mental health and vitality QoL measurements and
association with prognosis in CRC patients.Patients and Methods: QoL was
assessed in a hospital-based cohort of 2,900 non-Hispanic white CRC
patients that completed the SF-12 questionnaire within 1-year of
diagnosis. Mental Component Summary (MCS) scores were dichotomized by the
normalized scoring-based mean of 50. Hazard ratios were generated using
univariate cox regression analysis and survival estimates generated using
the Kaplan-Meier method. Sub-domain variables under mental health
(downhearted and blue and calm and peaceful) and vitality (energy), were
scored and dichotomized before stratifying by patient demographics and
statistically evaluated.Results: We observed that CRC patients with poor
mental QoL (MCS175 months and 42.3 months, respectively (log-rank P =
2.911027). Several patient characteristics (alcohol use, tobacco use,
gender and marital status) were significantly associated with these
sub-domain measurements. We found those that reported combined poor
mental health and vitality had a dramatic reduction in survival by 102.7
months (log-rank P = 8.391018).Conclusion: We conclude that baseline
mental QoL assessment may identify CRC patients at increased risk of a
poor prognosis and merits further investigation of these variables as
independent CRC prognostic factors. Interestingly, a potential coping
mechanism may underlie the protective effect observed among current users
of alcohol, while smoking may serve as a risk factor for poor prognosis
in those that reported poor mental QoL. Further studies are warranted to
explore the relationship between these MCS sub-domain variables and
survival in CRC patients.

