Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic profiling identifies cMyc and TTF1 as biomarkers of
response to the aurora kinase inhibitor alisertib in small cell lung
cancer (SCLC)


Background: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most aggressive form of
lung cancer, with a 5-year survival rate of only 6%. The treatment of
SCLC has not changed in over 25 years, hence the development of new drugs
for SCLC represents a major unmet need. A recent phase II trial of the
aurora kinase inhibitor alisertib showed single agent activity in a
subset (21%) of SCLC (Melichar et al, 2015) and a second study is
underway testing alisertib in combination with chemotherapy
(NCT02038647). However, there are currently no established biomarkers to
identify patients likely to have the greatest benefit from alisertib. We
have previously demonstrated the utility of proteomic profiling to
identify targets and markers in SCLC. Here we use proteomics to identify
markers of response to alisertib in SCLC.Methods: The sensitivity (IC50)
of 51 SCLC cell lines to alisertib was assayed in 5-day proliferation
assays. Expression levels of 171 total and/or phosphorylated proteins
were measured by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) and correlated with
IC50s. Using two approaches 1) Spearman correlation of IC50 to protein
data for all cell lines and 2) t-test comparing protein data between the
most and least sensitive cell lines we generated consensus markers of
response.Results: Proliferation assays showed sensitivity to alisertib at
clinically achievable doses in 14/51 (27%) cell lines (based on Cmax =
1.8uM, Phase I single agent trial). High cMyc protein was the top marker
of sensitivity to alisertib (R = -0.47, p = 0.0006 as continuous
variables; fold difference = 3.52, p = 0.008 by t-test comparing
extremes). Further analysis revealed a bi-modal distribution of cMyc
protein, defined as high and low using a bimodality index. The cMyc
protein high group (25%) included cell lines that were both cMyc
amplified and non-amplified. While cMyc amplified cell lines (11%) are
more sensitive to alisertib than non-amplified (p = 0.002), high cMyc
protein captures a larger population of SCLC that is sensitive to
alisertib.In contrast, expression of thyroid transcription factor 1
(TTF1, a standard IHC marker used in the diagnosis of lung cancer) was
the top marker of alisertib resistance (R = 0.38, p = 0.006; fold
difference = -4.22, p = 0.003). TTF1 protein expression was also
bi-modal, with 32% of cell lines falling into a distinct TTF1-low (more
sensitive to alisertib) group.Conclusions: High cMyc and low TTF1 protein
expression identify a subset of SCLC cell lines (27%) that are sensitive
to single agent alisertib. cMyc protein as a marker of response is
consistent with other preclinical findings suggesting that cMyc amplified
SCLC may be more sensitive to aurora kinase inhibition. The association
of low TTF1 expression with alisertib sensitivity may prove to be of
particular value in selecting patients for treatment given that
immunohistochemical assessment of TTF1 is commonly used in the diagnosis
of SCLC.

