Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyper activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 initiates
large-scale metabolic changes in a cellular model of glioblastoma


PARP1 is a key enzyme of the Base Excision Repair (BER) pathway,
facilitating the repair of base damage and single-strand DNA breaks.
Activated PARP1 synthesizes poly (ADP-ribose) (PAR), triggering chromatin
de-condensation to facilitate recruitment of BER proteins to complete
repair. PARP1 activation is attenuated upon successful repair of the DNA
lesion. However, unrepaired DNA breaks lead to continuous PARP1
activation and cell death. The molecular mechanism underlying PARP1
activation induced cell death was recently revealed as independent from
NAD+ depletion. We have shown that PARP1 activation and PAR synthesis
affect glycolysis by directly inhibiting the glycolytic enzyme,
hexokinase 1 (HK1). Following on these discoveries, we decided to
investigate global metabolic changes triggered by hyperactivation of
PARP1. For this study, we used gas chromatography mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) to quantify over 150 cellular metabolites and Multiple-Reaction
Monitoring Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (MRM LC-MS) to measure
NAD+ metabolites. As a model, we tested glioblastoma cells overexpressing
methylpurine DNA glycosylase (MPG) to enhance the PARP1-activation
response to DNA damage induced by the alkylating agent MNNG.
Simultaneously, to monitor independence from the DNA damaging effect of
NAD+ depletion, we utilized an inhibitor of NAD+ biosynthesis, FK866. We
found that PARP1 activation leads to a strong accumulation of glucose,
likely as a secondary effect of HK1 inhibition. In addition, we observed
a significant change in the level of other metabolites including an
increase in inosine, inosine monophosphate (IMP), cytidine and uridine
levels upon PARP1 activation, suggesting an indirect effect of PARP1
activation on purine and pyrimidine metabolism. Ongoing studies will use
these global approaches to unravel the complete metabolic response of
cancer cells to genotoxic treatment.

