Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation as biomarkers to predict early recurrence of
T1-2N0 lung cancer


Purpose: Many patients die of recurrent NSCLC. Current clinical and
molecular tests fail to predict patients at high risk for recurrence. We
investigated the relationship between gene promoter methylation and
recurrence of NSCLC and its prediction accuracy.Materials and Methods: We
prospectively enrolled patients who underwent surgery for T1-2N0 NSCLC.
We collected primary tumors, regional lymph nodes (RLN) and mediastinal
lymph nodes (MLN). A total of 112 patients were included; cases (n = 39)
and controls (n = 73) were defined based on cancer recurrence within 40
months of surgery. Promoter methylation of eight cancer-related genes
(CDO1, TAC1, SOX17, p16, CDH13, RASSF1A, APC and MGMT) was obtained by
using nanoparticle-based DNA extraction followed by qMSP. Logistic
regression analysis adjusted by age, gender, race, tumor size and pack
year was used to study the relationship between the gene promoter
methylation and the risk of recurrence of NSCLC; machine learning
assessed its prediction accuracy.Results: Cases had significantly higher
p16 methylation levels than controls in all three tissue types by
univariate and multivariate analysis after adjusting for confounders
(age, gender, race, tumor size, smoking history, and other gene
methylation levels). SOX17 was significantly methylated among cases in
both RLN and MLN samples, and remained significant in MLN after adjusting
for confounders. Table 1 shows the prediction accuracy of p16 and SOX17
using tumor tissue alone and combined with RLN and/or MLN. Prediction
accuracies were increased after adding biomarkers from lymph
nodes.Conclusion: Increased methylation status in the promoter region of
p16 and SOX17 is associated with an increased risk of cancer recurrence
among patients with T1-2N0 NSCLC treated with curative resection. Adding
molecular analyses of lymph nodes to primary tumor samples significantly
increased the diagnostic accuracy of predicting recurrence in these
patients.
Prediction accuracy using tumor and combined with RLN and/or MLN.

