Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting hyaluronidase reduces stromal cell protection of chronic
myeloid leukemia to imatinib therapy


An estimated 20-30% of CML patients will become resistant to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) including imatinib. Recent reports suggest that
CML resistance to TKI's is driven by interactions with protective
microenvironment niches that influence their survival and self-renewal
capacity. Hyaluronic acid (HA) has emerged as a key contributor in this
phenomenon of CML resistance to TKIs. HA influences cell viability
through molecular weight dependent interactions with cell-surface
receptors CD44 and RHAMM. Low molecular weight (LMW) HA, is typically
found in association with many cancers including CML and promotes
apoptotic resistance, proliferation, and migration of cancer cells. High
molecular weight (HMW) HA is primarily produced by fibroblasts and its
catabolism to LMW HA is mediated by hyaluronidase (HYAL) activity. HYAL
activity may provide a potential therapeutic target in combination with
current TKI treatments. Using a co-culture model, we investigated the
role of HA produced by bone marrow stromal fibroblasts on CML viability
when subject to imatinib (IM) treatment. Furthermore, we investigated the
possibility of targeting hyaluronidase as an adjuvant in combination with
IM for the treatment of CML. Co-culture with stromal fibroblasts
protected CML cells from proliferation inhibition by IM. HA production
and its catabolic products including LMW HA were elevated in the
supernatant of co-cultures exposed to IM. The expression of genes
encoding for HA metabolic proteins including hyaluronic acid synthases
and HYALs, were significantly increased in co-cultures subject to IM
stress. Additionally, HA treatment of CML mono-culture protected against
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Treatment of CML co-culture with HYAL
inhibitor, glycrrhizic acid (GA), inhibited HYAL activity, greatly
reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis of CML cells alone and in
combination with IM. This investigation provides additional evidence of
the importance of stromal cell support in CML pathology and that
resistance to TKI therapy may be mediated in part through upregulation of
total HA production and its catabolism. Furthermore, we establish the
potent therapeutic effects of GA on CML cells alone and in combination
with current IM treatment strategies as a prospective method of
circumventing TKI-resistant CML. For the first time we demonstrate GA's
effectiveness as a HYAL inhibitor in culture. HYALs are an attractive
target not only in CML resistance but in many cancers due to the reported
role of its product, LMW HA, in inflammation, proliferation, and
apoptotic resistance.

