Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The promise of miR-205 in HER2+ breast cancer: predicting response
to Trastuzumab and overcoming resistance


HER2, member of HER family, is overexpressed in up to 30% of breast
cancers and often associated to a more aggressive phenotype, resistance
to chemotherapeutic agents and increased risk of metastasis. Anti-HER2
targeted therapies significantly increased the overall survival of HER2
breast cancer patients, however tumor cells frequently develop
alternative resistance mechanisms and the molecular bases of this
phenomenon are still far to be fully elucidated. A crucial issue is then
represented by the urgent need of biomarkers able to predict the response
to treatment, and certainly of new therapeutic tools to counteract the
resistance mechanisms. The oncosuppressive role of miR-205 in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer has been demonstrated, as well as a
possible cross-regulation between miR-205 and HER signaling. MiR-205 is
in fact negatively regulated by HER2 and is involved in the regulation of
HER2-mediated proliferation by directly targeting HER3, preferential
partner of HER2. We have investigated miR-205 role on trastuzumab
resistance by using human HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines
and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models. Here we show that HER3
silencing, either mediated by miR-205 or by a siRNA specific against
HER3, is able to improve the responsiveness to Trastuzumab, reducing
tumor cell growth and colony formation capability. This effect is
mediated by impairment of Akt-mediated pathway.Combination of Trastuzumab
treatment and in vivo delivery of miR-205-conjugated lipid nanoparticles
in PDX models is currently on going. Finally, expression analysis of
miR-205 in breast cancer patients treated in adjuvant with trastuzumab
has provided new insights about its possible role as predictive biomarker
of response. In summary, here we show that miR-205 improves the
responsiveness to Trastuzumab treatment at least partially though HER3
silencing, and associated to outcome of patients treated in adjuvant
setting, thus representing a potential adjuvant tool and predictive
biomarker.

