Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast and ovarian cancer prevention: is it time for population
screening for BRCA mutations


Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 confer high lifetime risk of breast
and ovarian cancer but importantly these risks are not irreversible.
Identification of asymptomatic carriers could significantly reduce the
incidence of these diseases. The traditional model of familial breast and
ovarian cancer practice involves ascertaining high-risk individuals based
on family history. In general, the family is first identified because one
member develops cancer and because of high-risk indicators, is referred
to a Familial Cancer Centre. However, more than 50% of women who carry a
BRCA1/2 mutation may not have a family history of cancer in a close
relative. Momentum toward genetic screening of the asymptomatic
population is growing but there remain some significant unknowns. For
example it is unclear what is the true frequency of actionable mutations
in the general western population and the extent to which the public
would accept such screening, particularly for those individuals
identified with an actionable mutation in the absence of an overt family
history. As a first step toward population based BRCA gene screening, we
are sequencing the entire coding region of 18 known and proposed HBOC
genes in 4,000 cancer-free Australian women recruited from the lifepool
study (www.lifepool.org), which is a cohort of women attending the
Australian population, based mammographic screening program. To date,
data from 1,997 women has identified 17 with actionable mutations in
BRCA1 (4 mutations), BRCA2 (9 mutations) or PALB2 (4 mutations). All 17
women subsequently accepted an invitation to attend a Familial Cancer
Centre and then proceeded to formal clinical genetic testing. In addition
4 women had pathogenic mutations in BRIP1. Our unique pilot data directly
demonstrates a population carrier frequency of 1% for pathogenic
mutations in these recognized high risk breast and/or ovarian cancer
genes and that such testing is well accepted by the screened population.

