Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT1 expression in the tumor-stroma microenvironment is
influenced by loss of PTEN in prostate cancer


The prostate cancer (PCa) microenvironment is an admixture of stromal
cells, such as lymphocytes, fibroblasts, myofibroblasts and blood vessel
endothelium. The reactive stromal microenvironment of PCa facilitates
tumor growth through cytokine and chemokine-mediated cell signaling.
STAT1, a transcription factor, induces cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and
modulates immune and inflammatory response through IFN-/ cytokine
activation. IFN-/ may be secreted in response to PI3K/AKT activation,
since this pathway is associated with JAK/STAT signaling. In addition,
the PI3K/AKT pathway can become activated when the PTEN prognostic
biomarker is deleted in PCa. The rationale for this project is that the
immediate stromal microenvironment of PCa may become pro-tumorigenic as a
result of induction of inflammatory cytokines caused by PTEN deletions
and activation of PI3K/AKT. We performed FISH analysis of the PTEN gene
on 172 cores on a PCa tissue microarray (TMA) derived from 43 patients
with intermediate risk disease. Analysis of cytoplasmic and nuclear STAT1
in both the tumor and stromal compartments was performed on each TMA core
using immunohistochemistry (IHC) to determine whether the tumor PTEN
deletion status was associated with STAT1 expression. In each core, tumor
and stromal cell histologies were evaluated independently to estimate the
percentage area that was stained positive by IHC. The staining was graded
as percentage of positive cells with 0 (negative), 1 (less than 10%), 2
(11% to 50%), and 3 (more than 51%). We found that STAT1 expression in
stroma was increased when the PTEN gene in the adjacent tumor was
homozygously deleted (p = 0,04). We also showed that mean STAT1
expression in benign tissue cores was reduced when compared to the
average score from tumor tissue with one (p = 0.01) or two copies (p =
0.03) of the PTEN gene.
STAT1 expression and PTEN gene copy numberThese results suggest that the
STAT1 pathway may be influenced by PTEN loss in this tumor, suggesting
that the JAK/STAT inflammatory pathway may have future clinical
applications in PCa.

