Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of combined treatment with hAT-MSC.sTRAIL and
panobinostat in brainstem glioma


Human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells expressing secreted form of
the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(hAT-MSC.sTRAIL) have demonstrated therapeutic activity against various
tumors. However, sTRAIL resistance remains a challenge in developing
anticancer strategies. To solve this problem, many studies have tried to
combine drugs to produce synergism or sensitize resistant cancer cells.
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have been known to induce
expression of TRAIL death receptors 4 and 5 (DR4/DR5). Herein, we
evaluated the use of combined therapy of hAT-MSC.sTRAIL with HDAC
inhibitor, panobinostat, in enhancing sensitivity to hAT-MSC.sTRAIL
mediated apoptosis against the brainstem glioma.A sTRAIL was introduced
into the characterized hAT-MSCs using electroporation. To confirm
appropriate treatment concentration of panobinostat to the glioblastoma
cells, dose titration was tested using cell viability assay. The
therapeutic effect of single or combination treatment against
glioblastoma was evaluated using primary cultured glioblastoma cells and
cell lines. Orthotopic xenograft brainstem glioma mouse model was
established using engineered firefly luciferase expressing tumor cells
for bioluminescence in vivo imaging.Panobinostat induced
anti-proliferative effects in dose and time-dependent manner (IC50 range,
0.05-0.2 M) and effectively enhanced the expression of TRAIL DR4 and DR5,
but not decoy receptors. Combined hAT-MSC.sTRAIL and panobinostat
significantly decreased the tumor cell growth compared to each alone.
Intriguingly, the combination treatment not only induced apoptosis but
also autophagy. Using a preclinical brainstem mouse model, we confirmed
that the combination of hAT-MSC.sTRAIL and panobinostat was safe and
induced regression of tumor volume. Furthermore, the combination therapy
prolonged the survival of brainstem glioma-bearing mice.Our results
suggested that combination therapy of panobinostat enhanced the
anti-cancer effect of hAT-MSC.sTRAIL and represent potential therapeutic
approach to the brainstem glioma.

