Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of TERT promoter mutations with telomerase expression
in melanoma


Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter mutations occur at a
high frequency in melanoma, but the functional consequences of these
mutations in melanoma remain to be clarified. In a large study of
melanoma samples by The Cancer Genome Atlas network, mRNA expression
analysis using RNA sequencing data showed that only TERT promoter
mutations at C228T were associated with high TERT expression levels. The
effect of hotspot C250 or C242T/C243T tandem mutations on telomerase
expression has not yet been determined. To assess telomerase expression
levels in melanomas harboring C250 or C242T/C243T mutations, we used
real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-qPCR) in a sample set of pediatric melanocytic tumors for which the
methylation status and the mutational profile of the TERT promoter were
known. We previously showed that in a subset of melanoma, TERT expression
is mediated epigenetically by promoter hypermethylation rather than by
promoter point mutations. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues
from 10 metastatic melanomas, of which 8 harbored a hotspot TERT promoter
mutation (5 C250T; 2 C228; 1 C242T/C243T) and 2 carried a hypermethylated
wild-type TERT promoter were examined. For controls, 9 atypical Spitz
tumors with a wild-type unmethylated TERT promoter were also studied.
Total RNA was isolated from FFPE tumor tissues and converted to cDNA.
TERT expression levels were determined by RT-qPCR by using the TaqMan
Gene Expression Assay and normalized with GAPDH as the endogenous
control. In the atypical Spitz tumor samples, TERT mRNA expression was
undetectable or negligible. In contrast, TERT expression in all melanoma
samples was elevated, ranging from 3- to 71-fold (median, 25-fold) when
compared to an atypical Spitz tumor as a reference. Our data support that
in melanoma, TERT promoter hotspot C250 and C242T/C243T mutations,
similar to C228T mutations, correlate with TERT overexpression and that
C250 and C242T/C243T mutations likely contribute biologically to
tumorigenesis in melanoma.

