Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endoplasmic reticulum stress as possible target for therapy in
glioblastoma


Introduction: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive form of brain
cancer with an overall survival of patients of only 1-2 years after
diagnosis. The current standard treatment is largely ineffective due to
high resistance and infiltrative nature of GBM. Cellular heterogeneity in
the tumor and the presence of cancer stem cells in GBM (GSCs) are
considered the main contributors to aggressiveness. Recently, different
molecular subtypes have been found in GBM. Proneural (PN) and Mesenchymal
(MES) GBM are most distinct and MES tumors are more aggressive and
infiltrative. Drugs that induce Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress (ER
stress)/Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) activation provide a potential
novel therapy for cancer treatment. In this study we aim to characterize
and explore the potential of ER stress-inducing drugs to target
GBM.Methods: GBM neurospheres PN and MES were tested for sensitivity to
the ER stress inducer Thapsigargin (Tg) by MTS. TGF was used to induce
mesenchymal transition in PN GBMs. Limiting dilution assay was performed
to analyze the spheroid formation capacity upon ER stress induction.
Activation of UPR was determined by analyzing protein expression of key
signals by Western Blotting or XBP1 splicing assay (RT-PCR). Caspase Glo
3/7 assay was performed as read-out for apoptosis.Results: GBM MES
neurospheres cells were 2-fold more sensitive to the ER stress inducing
drug Tg compared to PN cells. The reduction of cell viability upon ER
stress induction coincided with induction of apoptosis (caspase 3/7
activation). Consistently MES GBM cells showed stronger increase in
apoptosis activation. Tg-induced ER stress resulted in 2- 4-fold
reduction in spheroid formation capacity of MES GBM cells and higher Tg
concentration also reduced spheroid formation capacity in one of the PN
GBM cell lines. Interestingly, TGF-induced mesenchymal transition
sensitized particularly PN GBM cells to Tg. The activation of UPR was
confirmed by induction of GRP78 and CHOP expression. In MES GBM cells
particularly activation of the ATF6-UPR branch by Tg ER stress induction
was detected and XBP1 splicing activation appeared to be stronger in PN
cells. No significant differences were observed in PERK activation among
the different GBM subtypes.Conclusion: ER stress induction appears to be
effective for eradicating GBM neurospheres, particularly the aggressive
MES subtype. ER stress also targets the GSC compartment in GBM. ATF6 is
notably activated in MES GBM cells, while XBP1 seems more activated in PN
GBM cells upon Tg-induced ER stress. The relationship between an UPR
branch activation and the differential sensitivity for the ER stress
induction will be further explored. Overall, targeting the ER stress
response appears a promising approach to target GBM.

