Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Let-7b overexpression is associated with higher nucleotide
excision repair pathway in women with breast cancer


Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) is a critical pathway involved in breast
cancer (BC). We have previously published that a low DNA repair capacity
(DRC) is associated with a higher risk of BC in Puerto Rican women. In
recent years we have focused our investigations on microRNAs (miRNAs)
that are differentially associated with a low and a high DRC in women
with BC and controls. A discovery experiment with 29 BC cases and 27
controls produced 12 candidate miRNAs associated with DRC including
let-7b. The main objective of this study was to elucidate if there is a
correlation between let-7b expression and specific DRC levels. Let-7b
belongs to a miRNA family with tumor suppressor activity that targets
oncogenic genes such as Ras, Myc, and HmgA2. DRC was measured in
lymphocytes by means of a host cell reactivation assay with a luciferase
reporter gene. We isolated miRNAs from plasma of 145 Puerto Rican women
with and without BC (recently diagnosed, untreated cases and controls)
using the miRNeasy kit (Qiagen). These women were divided into four
groups according to their DRC level: high (>3.8%) and low (Nucleotide
Excision Repair (NER) is a critical pathway involved in breast cancer
(BC). We have previously published that a low DNA repair capacity (DRC)
is associated with a higher risk of BC in Puerto Rican women. In recent
years we have focused our investigations on microRNAs (miRNAs) that are
differentially associated with a low and a high DRC in women with BC and
controls. A discovery experiment with 29 BC cases and 27 controls
produced 12 candidate miRNAs associated with DRC including let-7b. The
main objective of this study was to elucidate if there is a correlation
between let-7b expression and specific DRC levels. Let-7b belongs to a
miRNA family with tumor suppressor activity that targets oncogenic genes
such as Ras, Myc, and HmgA2. DRC was measured in lymphocytes by means of
a host cell reactivation assay with a luciferase reporter gene. We
isolated miRNAs from plasma of 145 Puerto Rican women with and without BC
(recently diagnosed, untreated cases and controls) using the miRNeasy kit
(Qiagen). These women were divided into four groups according to their
DRC level: high (>3.8%) and low (<3.8%). The four groups consisted in BC
cases with high (n = 32) and low (n = 41) DRC, and controls with high (n
= 38) and low (n = 34) DRC. Let-7b expression was measured using TaqMan
microRNA assay. In addition, epidemiological data of these women has been
collected at their initial BC diagnosis (before treatment) and almost
five years after diagnosis. Within the BC group with low DRC, 9 women had
presented recurrence. We found no significant difference in let-7b
expression between controls without BC when compared to women with BC
with both high and low DRC levels. A significant difference in let-7b
expression was found in BC cases with high DRC when compared with the
remaining groups (pNucleotide Excision Repair (NER) is a critical pathway
involved in breast cancer (BC). We have previously published that a low
DNA repair capacity (DRC) is associated with a higher risk of BC in
Puerto Rican women. In recent years we have focused our investigations on
microRNAs (miRNAs) that are differentially associated with a low and a
high DRC in women with BC and controls. A discovery experiment with 29 BC
cases and 27 controls produced 12 candidate miRNAs associated with DRC
including let-7b. The main objective of this study was to elucidate if
there is a correlation between let-7b expression and specific DRC levels.
Let-7b belongs to a miRNA family with tumor suppressor activity that
targets oncogenic genes such as Ras, Myc, and HmgA2. DRC was measured in
lymphocytes by means of a host cell reactivation assay with a luciferase
reporter gene. We isolated miRNAs from plasma of 145 Puerto Rican women
with and without BC (recently diagnosed, untreated cases and controls)
using the miRNeasy kit (Qiagen). These women were divided into four
groups according to their DRC level: high (>3.8%) and low (<3.8%). The
four groups consisted in BC cases with high (n = 32) and low (n = 41)
DRC, and controls with high (n = 38) and low (n = 34) DRC. Let-7b
expression was measured using TaqMan microRNA assay. In addition,
epidemiological data of these women has been collected at their initial
BC diagnosis (before treatment) and almost five years after diagnosis.
Within the BC group with low DRC, 9 women had presented recurrence. We
found no significant difference in let-7b expression between controls
without BC when compared to women with BC with both high and low DRC
levels. A significant difference in let-7b expression was found in BC
cases with high DRC when compared with the remaining groups (p<0.001).
The down-regulation of let-7b family miRNAs is associated with poor
prognosis in various types of cancers, including breast, lung, and
ovarian, among others. Thus, our data reveal a possible role of let-7b
involving DRC intrinsically when the malignancy is developed. Our
findings support the association previously reported between a poor
prognosis in several cancers and low levels of let-7b expression. Our
study is innovative because it provides the first evidence that let-7b
might play role in DRC (through the NER pathway) regulation in BC. Also,
our study suggests that the overexpression of let7-b in women with BC and
a high DRC is associated with a better prognosis. Supported by grants
from the NCI Center to Reduce Health Disparities and NIH-NIGMS MBRS
Program grants #S06 GM008239-20, 9SC1CA182846-04, GM082406, and PSM-MCC
Partnership grant #5U54CA163071-04.

