Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing clinical utility of NGS with reduced bias, low DNA
input, library construction


Early detection and diagnosis of cancer substantially increases the
likelihood for successful treatment. Tools that aid in detecting and
diagnosing cancer early, therefore, have the potential to greatly impact
the clinical outcome for cancer patients. Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) has emerged as an important tool in this area. The technology is
sensitive, fast and high throughput to allow sequencing of many samples
at once. Unfortunately, many clinical samples go unanalyzed because they
do not yield sufficient quantities of DNA to generate NGS libraries or
the libraries generated require so many rounds of PCR amplification that
they display extreme sequence bias. Bias not only hampers data analysis,
but also increases costs by requiring excess sequencing to obtain
sufficient coverage over all relevant genomic regions.To enable the
increased use of NGS in the clinic and reduce the amount of sequence bias
generated during library preparation, we have developed a PCR free
library construction method that uses low quantities of DNA as input. As
an initial test of the method, we generated PCR free libraries from
100ng, 50ng and 25ng of human genomic DNA. The libraries where pooled and
sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq 500 instrument to approximately 10X
coverage. All libraries, irrespective of input amount, showed minimal
AT/GC bias and excellent coverage distributions, with most bases covered
within 5X of the expected coverage depth. In addition, regions identified
as difficult to sequence (Aird, D., et.al., 2011 and Ross, M. G., et.al.,
2013) showed coverage at near expected levels for all libraries. This
method can easily be adapted for use with extremely low DNA inputs by the
introduction of a minimal number of PCR cycles. In fact, we have used
this method to construct high quality NGS libraries with picogram
quantities of DNA input.Standard library construction methods require DNA
inputs of 2ug to 500ng when PCR amplification is omitted. This new method
utilizes inputs as low as 25ng to generate high-quality PCR free
libraries and picogram quantities when amplification is performed. We are
currently investigating the possibility of reducing input levels further
and exploring the limits of the method with low quality DNA samples.
Interestingly, we have observed substantial sample loss during DNA
shearing and reaction cleanup. Samples that do not require fragmentation,
such as DNA isolated from plasma (cfDNA) and low quality FFPE DNA, may
reduce the input requirements even further. Finally, this new method
utilizes low sample and reagent volumes, possibly paving the way for its
use in microfluidic devices.

