Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical verification of antitumor autoimmune response in eribulin
chemotherapy for breast cancer


Background: The immune environment of the cancer tissue not only
influences the response to immunotherapy, but also the response to and
outcomes after other anti-cancer therapies. Thus, the importance of
regulating and improving the cancer immune microenvironment is
increasingly being recognized. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) can
be used to monitor the immune response and are important in predicting
treatment responses and outcomes in various types of carcinoma. On the
other hand, it was reported that eribulin suppresses
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in basic studies, and we
investigated it with clinicalsamples. In addition, it is thought that
antitumor autoimmune response relates to suppression of EMT. In the
present study, we investigated clinically antitumor autoimmune response
in breast cancer with eribulin chemotherapy.Materials and Methods:
Eribulin chemotherapy was administered to 52 patients with locally
advanced or metastatic breast cancer. Samples of cancer tissue obtained
before and after treatment were available from 10 patients. We evaluated
response rate (RR) and analyzed protein expression by immunostaining of
specimens before and after treatment. We evaluated antitumor autoimmune
response by PD-1, CD8, FOXP3 expression in stromal TILs and PD-L1, PD-L2
expression in cancer cells. And, we examined the relation between the
expression of these immune related molecules and EMT markers (evaluated
by E-cadherin, N-cadherin, Vimentinexpression).Results: In 11 patients
(21.2%), it was possible to excise the lesion after treatment. In 10
evaluable cases without one pathological complete response (pCR) case,
PD-1, PD-L2, and FOXP3 expression turned to negative in 5 cases, PD-L1
expression turned to negative in 6 cases, and CD8 expression turned to
positive in 3 cases before and after treatment with eribulin
chemotherapy. Looking at the relation between the transition in this
protein expression and therapeutic effect, cases observed with negative
conversion in PD-L1, FOXP3 expression had significantly high RR (p =
0.024) (p = 0.004). Among high RR cases, CD-8 expression was increased,
the PD-1, PD-L1 and FOXP3 expression were remarkably reduced.
Furthermore, we found a inverse correlation between PD-L1, FOXP3
expression turning to negative and E-cadherin expression turning to
positive (p = 0.024) (p = 0.004).Conclusions: In the chemotherapy with
eribulin, PD-L1 and FOXP3 expression turning to negative before and after
treatment suggested improvement of the tumor immune microenvironment, and
this mechanism related to suppression of EMT.

