Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hematopoietic age at onset of breast cancer dictates disease
aggressiveness and progression


Aging is strongly associated with increased risk of developing breast
cancer. Young age at diagnosis is typically associated with more
aggressive disease, while breast cancer is generally more indolent in
older women. Among the different breast cancer subtypes, triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15% of invasive breast cancer cases and
TNBC patients have a poor prognosis due to lack of targeted therapies and
limited sensitivity to chemotherapy. Emerging studies indicate that older
women with TNBC have a better outcome than younger women for reasons that
are unclear. Nevertheless, older patients tend to suffer co-morbidities
associated with chemotherapy and often forego treatment, resulting in
disease recurrence and a poor outcome for these patients. Treatment of
TNBC therefore presents age-specific challenges.Here, we investigated how
age affects the composition and function of pro-tumorigenic bone marrow
cells using TNBC models that enable us to interrogate the impact of bone
marrow derived cells on both tumor cells and the tumor microenvironment.
Consistent with clinical observations, we found that disease progression
was significantly more aggressive in young mice relative to aged mice. We
identified age- and tumor-dependent molecular and functional changes to
bone marrow derived hematopoietic cells that impact TNBC progression. A
specific population of Sca1+/cKit- bone marrow cells that expresses CSF1R
and secretes the growth factor granulin to support stromal activation and
robust tumor growth in young mice, fails to promote tumor outgrowth in
aged mice, resulting in maintenance of disease indolence. Importantly,
bone marrow cells from young mice are sufficient to activate a
tumor-supportive microenvironment and rescue tumor progression in aged
mice.The results presented here indicate that hematopoietic age is an
important determinant of TNBC aggressiveness and provide rationale for
investigating age-stratified therapies designed to prevent activation of
tumor-promoting bone marrow cells.

