Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological WNT-inhibition acts synergistically with chemo-
and radiotherapy by overcoming treatment-resistance in glioma stem cells


Objective: Glioma Stem Cells (GSCs) are considered to be responsible for
Glioblastoma's (GBMs) dismal prognosis. WNT signaling is one of the major
players in GSCs that promotes their radio- and chemoresistance. In this
study we tested whether LGK974, an inhibitor of both canonical and
non-canonical WNT signaling, might sensitize GBM cells to
chemotherapeutics and irradiation and determined possible mechanisms
causing treatment-resistance in GBM.Methods: At first we analyzed MGMT
promoter methylation status of several GBM cell lines in order to define
cells resistant to the standard chemotherapeutic drug Temozolomide (TMZ).
For further investigations we chose two cell lines resistant or sensitive
to TMZ, respectively. IC50 concentrations of TMZ and LGK974 as well as
IC50 dose of -irradiation were tested via Titer Blue cell viability
assay. Effectiveness of different concentration of each single therapy
and its combination with LGK974 was determined to create a
drug-response-curve due to the computerized simulation of synergism and
antagonism in drug combination studies (Chou, 2006). A reporter assay for
canonical WNT/-catenin signaling was used to quantify the effect of TMZ
and irradiation alone and in combination with LGK974 on the canonical and
non-canonical WNT pathway. Western Blot and qPCR were applied to analyze
the effects of combinatory therapy on protein and gene expression
concerning WNT pathway activation.Results: We observed a significant
synergy of combined irradiation/TMZ with LGK974 in all cell lines. There
was no difference in effectiveness between cell lines resistant or
sensitive to TMZ. Interestingly, following TMZ treatment or irradiation
cells showed slightly decreased canonical WNT pathway activity.
Furthermore, non-canonical target genes and receptors were upregulated
under chemo- and radiotherapy, suggesting a reciprocal activation of the
non-canonical branch of WNT signaling pathway. This phenomenon might
possibly be responsible for the development of resistance against
standard chemo- and radiotherapy.Conclusions: We propose that GSCs
undergo a shift from canonical to non-canonical WNT signaling to become
treatment-resistant under standard chemo- and radiotherapy. Treatment
with LGK974 results in therapeutic synergy at least in part via
suppressing the therapy-induced activation of non-canonical WNT
signaling. Our results confirm the potential benefit of combining TMZ or
irradiation with the WNT inhibitor LGK974 to overcome therapy-resistance
in GBM.

