Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human mammary tumor virus (HMTV) is a breast cancer pathogen


Human mammary tumor virus (HMTV) a betaretrovirus 90-98% homologous to
Mouse Mammary Tumor Virus (MMTV), the causative agent for breast cancer
in mice, has been detected in approximately 40% of American women's
breast cancers. Mouse DNA contamination has been definitively excluded by
contamination-free guarantee techniques. In Western European countries
and their former colonies, age standardized rates (ASR) of breast cancer
incidence (47 to 92 per 100,000 per year) are higher than Asian incidence
(29 to 43 ASR/y). This difference could be explained by excess
HMTV-related breast cancer incidence. In 7 West European, American and
Oceania countries, 30 to 60% contain HMTV, while in 5 Asian nations HMTV
associated breast cancers range from 0 to 22%. Different indigenous
murine species with disparate MMTV burdens parallel these findings: mus
domesticus in the West with much MMTV in its genome, and mus castaneus or
mus musculus in the East with less. HMTV is found in cells in milk of 8%
of unselected American mothers and in milks of 21% of women previously
biopsied for unconfirmed cancer suspicion.HMTV isolated from primary
cultures of metastatic breast cells is able to infect In vitro, human
mammary epithelial cells, B and T lymphocytes and dendritic cells. MCF10A
breast cell line infected with HMTV shows molecular changes associated
with epithelial-mesenchymal transition, such as up-regulation of
vimentin, and down-regulation of E-cadherin.HMTV sequences were also
shown to be more prevalent in inflammatory, gestational and familial
breast cancers than in unselected sporadic samples, consistent with
association with more aggressive breast cancer phenotypes. To establish a
direct connection between the presence of HMTV sequences and metastatic
breast cancer, we have found HMTV sequences in 94% of primary cultures of
metastatic breast cells obtained directly from effusion fluids. HMTV
present in primary breast tumors has been demonstrated in their
metastatic axillary nodes.Taken together the results suggest an
association between the presence of HMTV sequences and breast cancer
aggressiveness. HMTV poses a new and challenging dimension in breast
cancer research involving causation, diagnosis, molecular mechanisms,
epidemiology, therapy and prevention.

