Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evaluation of NGS to identify gene fusions using RNA from FFPE
solid tumor samples


Gene fusions have long been considered strong drivers of cellular
transformation, making the accurate and precise assessment of these
variants a necessity for any tumor profiling assay. Recent studies have
indicated the utility of next-generation sequencing (NGS) for tumor
profiling due to increasing data output and decreasing costs of the
technology. Unfortunately, because a critical facet of NGS is the
evaluation of short DNA fragments, sufficiently covering all possible
breakpoint regions (many of which are intronic) has proven difficult and
costly. Recent studies have indicated that NGS may prove better at
detecting gene fusions using RNA instead of DNA, given the higher
probability of breakpoint-spanning reads. This allows for de-novo
discovery of fusion partners without knowing the precise breakpoint and
guarantees expression of the fusion transcript. To that end, Illumina is
developing a novel method for simultaneous library preparation from low
input amounts of degraded DNA and RNA from a single FFPE tumor sample.
With a turnaround time from nucleic acid to data of less than 4 days,
this enrichment-based assay surveys 170 genes for single nucleotide
variants and small indels, 57 genes for gene amplifications, 55 genes for
fusions and four genes for splice variants. To determine the limit of
detection for gene fusions, a panel of different synthetic RNA
transcripts were prepared in vitro, pooled at equal molar amounts, and
spiked into 20ng of cell line RNA (MCF-7). Fusions were detected over
several orders of magnitude down to 110-8 picomoles, equivalent to 3 to
15 fusion transcripts per cell. In addition, a similar range of fusion
detection was observed when RNA from two different cell lines were mixed,
as when RNA from a cell line with high expression of an FGFR2-COL14A1
fusion was mixed in proportional amounts with RNA from a different cell
line where FGFR2 is minimally expressed. Importantly, our method allowed
for fusion detection from as little as 100 picograms of cell line RNA. We
then tested our new method on previously characterized FFPE solid tumor
samples harboring known gene rearrangements identified by FISH and other
methods. Not only was the NGS method able to detect the majority of
previously characterized variants, including EML4-ALK and SDC4-ROS1, it
also identified the gene fusions and their uncharacterized fusions
partners by combining the non-targeted sequence information gained from
using an enrichment-based assay with novel fusion calling algorithms.
From this information, we were able to glean new insights into the
structure of the rearrangements and how the gene fusions may be involved
in tumorigenesis. These results indicate that NGS can identify fusions
from the low amounts of degraded RNA from solid tumor samples, identify
fusion partners not uncovered by current technologies, and further
emphasizes the advantage of NGS in solid tumor profiling.

