Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Neuropilin-2 in the maintenance of tumor associated
macrophages


Purpose: Macrophages are key regulators of the immune system and act as a
bridge between the innate and adaptive arms of the host immune responses.
However, they also comprise an important component of immune cell
infiltrates in various solid tumor microenvironments (TME) and impede
therapy. Tumor Associated Macrophages (TAMs) are inflammatory as well as
pro-tumorigenic and perform key functions which aid in tumor growth,
evasion of host immune surveillance, and correlate with poor prognosis in
many cancers. The objective of our current study is to elucidate the role
of Neuropilin-2 (NRP2), a non-tyrosine kinase receptor in TAMs and
illustrate the impact of targeting the molecular pathways regulated by
NRP2 in the reversal of TAM polarization and facilitation of tumor
specific host immune response.Methods: Human U937 monocyte cell line,
human peripheral blood monocytes as well as mouse bone marrow derived
progenitors were differentiated to macrophages to investigate whether the
expression of NRP2 could be induced under conditions mimicking normal
tissue homeostasis, acute inflammation and TAM polarization. NRP2
expression in TAMs was also evaluated in certain human malignancies using
Immunohistochemistry. Using cellular approaches and transgenic mouse
model, phagocytosis assay was performed under above-mentioned conditions.
Also, macrophages were stained for endocytic markers in the presence and
absence of NRP2 and viewed using Confocal Microscopy.Results: We observed
that NRP2 expression was induced in human and murine macrophages under
conditions mimicking normal tissue homeostasis, acute inflammation and
TAM polarization. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that macrophages
isolated from human malignancies also exhibited a significant expression
of NRP2. Phagocytosis assay in combination with Immunofluorescence data
indicated a possible defect in endocytic compartments in NRP2 depleted
conditions.Conclusions: Our data demonstrate the expression of NRP2 in
macrophages is induced under normal tissue homeostasis, acute
inflammation as well as in macrophages invading tumor stroma. Also, we
report a novel function of NRP2 in the regulation of the endosomal
maturation and thereby phagocytosis in macrophages. This will elicit a
favorable immune response in acute infections, but promote cancer growth
by efficient processing of efferocytosed tumor cell debris. Previous
reports have established that blockade of tumor cell efferocytosis
suppresses TAM polarization in the TME, breaks immune tolerance and
reduces metastasis. Our ongoing and future studies will establish the
therapeutic impact of targeting NRP2 regulated pathways in the tumor
infiltrating macrophages in combating therapy resistance. Hence, our
study carries the potential to open up new strategies to selectively
target and facilitate anti-tumor host immune response in multiple human
malignancies.

