Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of breast cancer progression using nuclear morphometry


Introduction:The progression of breast cancer (BrCa) involves nuclear
morphometric changes, which are used in the pathological diagnosis of
breast cancer. Although changes in nuclear morphometry (NM) contribute to
histologic alterations observed in breast cancer, an accurate and
autonomous quantification of NM changes have remained elusive. Here we
created an image analysis macro to quantify changes in nuclear
parameters, including size, shape, and DNA content and used these
parameters to predict BrCa progression.Materials & Methods:Three tissue
microarrays (TMAs) with 140 BrCa cases, stratified by TNM stage were used
for this study. The TMAs were generated using 6 mm cores from primary
tumors of a Korean cohort from Yengnam University Hospital, Daegu, South
Korea. Specimens were obtained from surgical resection between January
1995 and January 2004. Each case was represented by 2 cores on the TMAs.
Clinical information were provided by the pathology reports and patients
medical records. H&E slides were first used for pathological diagnosis of
BrCa after which slides were scanned with the Aperio scanner and the
image of each core was separated using Aperio ImageScope software. The
H&E stained nuclei from the tumor core were quantified using ImagePro
Premier 9.1 software (MediaCybernetics). For each core, data of all
regions of interest were pooled and the covariance of each parameter was
generated. Data were first analyzed alone and then in combination using
multivariate logistic regression (MLR) to predict the aggressive cases or
recurrence. For all analysis, pIntroduction:The progression of breast
cancer (BrCa) involves nuclear morphometric changes, which are used in
the pathological diagnosis of breast cancer. Although changes in nuclear
morphometry (NM) contribute to histologic alterations observed in breast
cancer, an accurate and autonomous quantification of NM changes have
remained elusive. Here we created an image analysis macro to quantify
changes in nuclear parameters, including size, shape, and DNA content and
used these parameters to predict BrCa progression.Materials &
Methods:Three tissue microarrays (TMAs) with 140 BrCa cases, stratified
by TNM stage were used for this study. The TMAs were generated using 6 mm
cores from primary tumors of a Korean cohort from Yengnam University
Hospital, Daegu, South Korea. Specimens were obtained from surgical
resection between January 1995 and January 2004. Each case was
represented by 2 cores on the TMAs. Clinical information were provided by
the pathology reports and patients medical records. H&E slides were first
used for pathological diagnosis of BrCa after which slides were scanned
with the Aperio scanner and the image of each core was separated using
Aperio ImageScope software. The H&E stained nuclei from the tumor core
were quantified using ImagePro Premier 9.1 software (MediaCybernetics).
For each core, data of all regions of interest were pooled and the
covariance of each parameter was generated. Data were first analyzed
alone and then in combination using multivariate logistic regression
(MLR) to predict the aggressive cases or recurrence. For all analysis,
p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.Results:Using
multivariate logistic regression (MLR) to differentiate aggressive BrCa
(TNM T3 & T4) from indolent BrCa (TNM T1 & T2) on the TMAs, our H&E NM
model generated an receiver operating characteristic curve-area under the
curve (ROC-AUC) of 0.75 with a sensitivity of 50.9% and specificity of
84.3% at the predictive probability cutoff of 0.50. Parameters of nuclei
diameter, size, staining intensity, and aspect ratio contributed to the
MLR model. In addition, our H&E NM model also showed power in the
prediction of recurrence based on the MLR (ROC-AUC = 0.80) with a
sensitivity of 25.9% and specificity of 96.3% at the probability cutoff
of 0.53. Parameters of nuclei diameter, size, staining intensity, and
cluster contributed to the MLR model. The predictive probability (PP) is
significantly higher in the aggressive and recurrent cases based on the
two MLR models, respectively.Conclusions:We discovered that our automated
quantification of tissue nuclear morphometry can be used to accurately
predict BrCa aggressiveness and recurrence in women who underwent
surgical resection of their primary tumors. Although further confirmatory
studies our needed, our data suggests that this tool could provide an
accurate predictor of tumor behavior and patient prognosis that could be
used to inform therapy for BrCa patients.

