Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stearoyl-CoA-Desaturase (SCD1) regulates lung cancer stemness via
stabilization and nuclear localization of YAP/TAZ


One of the most common traits of cancer is the radical change of cellular
metabolism. A distinctive aspect of this altered metabolic status is the
presence of a larger pool of monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA), the
precursors of the components of cell membranes necessary to sustained the
rapidly dividing cancer cells. MUFA are largely generated from saturated
fatty acids by the action of the two Stearoyl-CoA desaturases isoforms,
namely SCD1 and SCD5. Recent evidences suggest that the major isoform
SCD1 plays a role in several cancers.Our group has previously reported,
using primary adenocarcinoma cell lines from malignant pleural effusions,
that SCD1 inhibition selectively kills ALDH positive cells, a marker of
cancer stem cells, causes spheroid 3D cultures collapse in vitro and
impairs their growth in vivo. These results suggest that SCD1 may be a
critical target in lung cancer tumor-initiating cells and further studies
are needed to assess the role of this enzyme in lung cancer. An
increasing number of literature points to the Hippo (and their effectors
YAP/ TAZ) and to the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathways as key factors in
the development of cancer. Notably, SCD1 has been shown to be involved in
the secretion and maturation of active wnt ligands, contributing to the
activation of the -catenin signaling.We report here, using primary cell
cultures from adenocarcinoma of the lung, that YAP and TAZ are required
for the generation of 3D cultures, as silencing of both genes completely
abrogated the capability of generating lung cancer spheroids. Moreover,
simultaneously silencing of YAP and TAZ reduced the mRNA levels of OCT4,
Nanog and ALDH. We demonstrated that both silencing of SCD1 and its
pharmacological inhibition determined a decrease in the expression and
nuclear localization of both YAP and TAZ. Moreover, when SCD1 was
inhibited, YAP and TAZ transcriptional activity was reduced. We also
demonstrated that SCD1 blockade induced a dramatic reduction of the Axin2
mRNA level, one of the -catenin target genes and a decreased in the
-catenin transcriptional activity, without affecting -catenin protein
expression. YAP and TAZ downregulation induced by SCD1 blockade could be
rescued by the addition of exogenous wnt3a ligand, thus indicating that
the active -catenin signaling is necessary for YAP and TAZ stabilization.
Ultimately, we observed that the ubiquitin ligase -TrcP is involved in
the SCD1 mediated degradation of YAP and TAZ.These data, overall,
demonstrate for the first time the involvement of SCD1 in the regulation
of the Hippo pathway and -catenin pathway in lung cancer 3D spheroid
cultures, pointing to lipid metabolism as regulator of cancer stem
features. Moreover, these results can be the starting point for further
studies focused on the regulation of SCD1 in cancer stem cells,
suggesting a new perspective for improving chemotherapeutic responses in
cancer treatment, centered on SCD1 inhibition.

