Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone acetyltransferase activity of MOF is required for MLL-AF9
leukemogenesis


Chromosomal rearrangements of the Mixed-Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene are
found in 5-10% of all patients with acute leukemia and associated with a
poor prognosis. MLL-rearrangements are more frequently present in
pediatric and infant patients where AF9 is one of the most common fusion
partners.In order to identify novel druggable targets in MLL-AF9
rearranged leukemia, we conducted a chromatin regulator focused RNAi
screen in murine MLL-AF9 leukemia cells and found hairpins targeting
(K)Lysine Acetyltransferase 8 (Kat8, also known as Mof) and the
previously identified target Bromodomain Containing 4 (Brd4), to be the
most potent suppressors of cell growth. MOF is a histone 4 lysine 16
(H4K16) acetyltransferase and member of the MYST family of histone
acetyltransferases (HATs). MOF has been shown to be crucial for murine
embryogenesis and is a cell-type dependent regulator of chromatin state
and various cellular processes such as T-cell differentiation, DNA damage
response and cell cycle progression.Using a conditional murine Mof
knockout system, we studied the role of MOF in MLL-AF9 leukemogenesis in
detail. In vitro inactivation of Mof in MLL-AF9 transformed mouse
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells led to impaired colony-forming
capacity. The specificity of this phenotype was shown by expression of
exogenous full-length Mof, which fully rescued transformed cells from the
dramatic phenotype. Inactivation of Mof in vivo, lead to reduced tumor
burden and prolonged survival of mice bearing MLL-AF9 leukemia cells. RNA
sequencing data comparing MLL-AF9 cells with homozygous Mof loss to a
wild type control, showed a significant enrichment of genes within the
apoptosis (NES 1.98, FDR-q Chromosomal rearrangements of the
Mixed-Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene are found in 5-10% of all patients with
acute leukemia and associated with a poor prognosis. MLL-rearrangements
are more frequently present in pediatric and infant patients where AF9 is
one of the most common fusion partners.In order to identify novel
druggable targets in MLL-AF9 rearranged leukemia, we conducted a
chromatin regulator focused RNAi screen in murine MLL-AF9 leukemia cells
and found hairpins targeting (K)Lysine Acetyltransferase 8 (Kat8, also
known as Mof) and the previously identified target Bromodomain Containing
4 (Brd4), to be the most potent suppressors of cell growth. MOF is a
histone 4 lysine 16 (H4K16) acetyltransferase and member of the MYST
family of histone acetyltransferases (HATs). MOF has been shown to be
crucial for murine embryogenesis and is a cell-type dependent regulator
of chromatin state and various cellular processes such as T-cell
differentiation, DNA damage response and cell cycle progression.Using a
conditional murine Mof knockout system, we studied the role of MOF in
MLL-AF9 leukemogenesis in detail. In vitro inactivation of Mof in MLL-AF9
transformed mouse hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells led to impaired
colony-forming capacity. The specificity of this phenotype was shown by
expression of exogenous full-length Mof, which fully rescued transformed
cells from the dramatic phenotype. Inactivation of Mof in vivo, lead to
reduced tumor burden and prolonged survival of mice bearing MLL-AF9
leukemia cells. RNA sequencing data comparing MLL-AF9 cells with
homozygous Mof loss to a wild type control, showed a significant
enrichment of genes within the apoptosis (NES 1.98, FDR-q <0.0001) and
p53 (NES 2.23, FDR-q Chromosomal rearrangements of the Mixed-Lineage
Leukemia (MLL) gene are found in 5-10% of all patients with acute
leukemia and associated with a poor prognosis. MLL-rearrangements are
more frequently present in pediatric and infant patients where AF9 is one
of the most common fusion partners.In order to identify novel druggable
targets in MLL-AF9 rearranged leukemia, we conducted a chromatin
regulator focused RNAi screen in murine MLL-AF9 leukemia cells and found
hairpins targeting (K)Lysine Acetyltransferase 8 (Kat8, also known as
Mof) and the previously identified target Bromodomain Containing 4
(Brd4), to be the most potent suppressors of cell growth. MOF is a
histone 4 lysine 16 (H4K16) acetyltransferase and member of the MYST
family of histone acetyltransferases (HATs). MOF has been shown to be
crucial for murine embryogenesis and is a cell-type dependent regulator
of chromatin state and various cellular processes such as T-cell
differentiation, DNA damage response and cell cycle progression.Using a
conditional murine Mof knockout system, we studied the role of MOF in
MLL-AF9 leukemogenesis in detail. In vitro inactivation of Mof in MLL-AF9
transformed mouse hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells led to impaired
colony-forming capacity. The specificity of this phenotype was shown by
expression of exogenous full-length Mof, which fully rescued transformed
cells from the dramatic phenotype. Inactivation of Mof in vivo, lead to
reduced tumor burden and prolonged survival of mice bearing MLL-AF9
leukemia cells. RNA sequencing data comparing MLL-AF9 cells with
homozygous Mof loss to a wild type control, showed a significant
enrichment of genes within the apoptosis (NES 1.98, FDR-q <0.0001) and
p53 (NES 2.23, FDR-q <0.0001) pathway. These gene expression data suggest
that the importance of MOF in MLL-AF9 leukemogenesis may be through
interaction with p53, inducing proliferation and suppressing apoptosis.
In addition, we found a reduction of actively cycling cells and a loss of
global H4K16 acetylation (H4K16ac) upon Mof knockout. In line with this
finding of H4K16ac loss, rescue experiments with HAT domain mutated MOF
illustrated that the HAT activity of MOF is indispensable for MLL-AF9
leukemia maintenance. Finally, experiments with the selective MYST
protein HAT inhibitor MG149, showed a strong anti-proliferative effect on
murine, as well as human MLL-AF9 leukemia cell lines, and MG149
inhibition induced global H4K16ac loss in these cells.These results
indicate that MOF HAT activity is required for MLL-AF9 leukemia
maintenance. Our data further suggest that MOF HAT activity may be a good
target for new small molecule inhibitor development for the treatment of
patients with MLL-AF9 rearranged leukemia.

