Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assays for androgen receptor activity using cell based ARE
reporter systems


The androgen receptor (AR) transcription factor plays a key role in the
development and progression of prostate cancer. Inhibition of its ligand
by androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is consequently the main medical
treatment of invasive prostate cancer. AR is activated and maintained
throughout prostate cancer progression even in castration resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Prostate cancer cells escape from ADT using a
variety of mechanisms. The AR and target genes have therefore become even
more focused therapeutic targets in aggressive and disseminated prostate
cancer. AR and its classical target genes, such as KLK3 (PSA) are,
however, efficiently shut off in basal epithelial prostate cells and
possibly in prostate cancer stem cells (CSCs). To investigate mechanisms
of AR and AR target gene activation in different subpopulations of
prostate cancer cells, several androgen response elements (ARE) reporter
vectors were developed. Three ARE reporter vectors were constructed with
different ARE consensus sequences in promoters linked to either
fluorescence or luciferase reporter genes in lentiviral vector backbones.
Cell lines transduced with the different vectors expressed the reporters
in an androgen-dependent way according to fluorescence microscopy, flow
cytometry and multi-well fluorescent and luminescence recording. The 241B
promoter sequence reporter was selected among the constructed ARE
reporters on the basis of higher activity in initial screenings. The AR
positive and androgen responsive prostate cancer cell line, LNCaP, and
the prostate transit amplifying epithelial cell line, EP156T-AR with
exogenous AR, were transduced with the lentiviral 241B-mCherry
fluorescence reporter. Flow cytometry, multi-well reader and fluorescence
microscopy results corresponded when reporter cells were treated with
androgen and with the AR antagonist, enzalutamide, and with the
anti-androgen, abiraterone. An SV40-promoter GFP reporter element was
next cloned into the 241B-mCherry reporter. Constitutive expression of
GFP facilitated normalization of ARE driven mCherry fluorescent signals.
Furthermore, AR expression vectors were also constructed with the AR open
reading frames cloned into lentiviral expression vectors and used in
co-transfection and co-transduction experiments in AR negative cell
types. The developed ARE reporter system will help us to investigate the
role of the AR in differentiation and proliferation of prostate cells and
to study the AR activity in two and three dimensional cell cultures. This
system can also be useful in screening for drugs with activity against
the AR.

