Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch signaling is a key pathway involved in drug resistance in
melanoma cells


Background: Melanoma expresses a plastic and aggressive phenotype,
lacking the majority of regulatory mechanisms due to the aberrant
activation of various signaling pathways including the Notch pathway.
Oncogenic BRAF mutation has the target for therapeutic interventions such
as the drug vemurafinib but recent studies have indicated development of
resistance. Unfortunately, however, the mechanisms of vemurafenib-induced
resistance in melanoma are still poorly understood. We explored the role
of Notch signaling in development of vemurafenib drug resistance in
melanoma cells.Methods: We have utilized melanoma cell lines (especially
B16/F10, SKMEL-28, A2058, UACC275 SKMEL103 and M14) with and without the
common hot spot BRAFV600E mutation for the studies. We performed
hexoseaminidase and clonogenicity assays to determine the cell growth
rate and IC50 values in the cell lines. To generate drug resistant cells,
UACC275 and SKMEL-28 cells were repetitively grown in the presence of
vemurafenib. For stem cells, we did melanosphere formation assay. For
protein expression, we performed western blots.Results: In the initial
screening with vemurafinib, we observed a pattern of increased IC50
values in drug resistant cell lines, with UACC275 and SKMEL-28 being the
more sensitive cells. Following sequential exposure, we developed
vemurafinib-resistant cell lines, and observed that the IC50 values for
proliferation inhibition to be 8-10 fold higher than the parental cells.
Colony forming potential of the drug resistant cells was also not
affected by increasing concentrations of vemurafenib, confirming
acquisition of resistance. Furthermore, the drug resistant UACC275 cells
presented a smaller and round morphology compared to the usual elongated
and stretched appearance of the parent lines. Additionally, we also
observed a significant increase in size of melanospheres for the drug
resistance cells suggesting enrichment of stem cells. We further studied
the expression and activation of various notch signaling cascade proteins
and observed a significant increase in the levels of cleaved Notch-2, and
-4 in the drug resistant cells. Interestingly, early passages of cell
culture for drug resistant cells showed decrease in cleaved Notch-2
levels in cells with significant increase in basal levels of cleaved
Notch-2 levels at Background: Melanoma expresses a plastic and aggressive
phenotype, lacking the majority of regulatory mechanisms due to the
aberrant activation of various signaling pathways including the Notch
pathway. Oncogenic BRAF mutation has the target for therapeutic
interventions such as the drug vemurafinib but recent studies have
indicated development of resistance. Unfortunately, however, the
mechanisms of vemurafenib-induced resistance in melanoma are still poorly
understood. We explored the role of Notch signaling in development of
vemurafenib drug resistance in melanoma cells.Methods: We have utilized
melanoma cell lines (especially B16/F10, SKMEL-28, A2058, UACC275
SKMEL103 and M14) with and without the common hot spot BRAFV600E mutation
for the studies. We performed hexoseaminidase and clonogenicity assays to
determine the cell growth rate and IC50 values in the cell lines. To
generate drug resistant cells, UACC275 and SKMEL-28 cells were
repetitively grown in the presence of vemurafenib. For stem cells, we did
melanosphere formation assay. For protein expression, we performed
western blots.Results: In the initial screening with vemurafinib, we
observed a pattern of increased IC50 values in drug resistant cell lines,
with UACC275 and SKMEL-28 being the more sensitive cells. Following
sequential exposure, we developed vemurafinib-resistant cell lines, and
observed that the IC50 values for proliferation inhibition to be 8-10
fold higher than the parental cells. Colony forming potential of the drug
resistant cells was also not affected by increasing concentrations of
vemurafenib, confirming acquisition of resistance. Furthermore, the drug
resistant UACC275 cells presented a smaller and round morphology compared
to the usual elongated and stretched appearance of the parent lines.
Additionally, we also observed a significant increase in size of
melanospheres for the drug resistance cells suggesting enrichment of stem
cells. We further studied the expression and activation of various notch
signaling cascade proteins and observed a significant increase in the
levels of cleaved Notch-2, and -4 in the drug resistant cells.
Interestingly, early passages of cell culture for drug resistant cells
showed decrease in cleaved Notch-2 levels in cells with significant
increase in basal levels of cleaved Notch-2 levels at <10 passages.
Therefore, a reductionist model of vemurafenib resistance can be
developed using the UACC275 and SKMEL-28 cell line.Conclusion: As Notch-2
and -4 levels were higher in most of the resistant cells, therefore,
notch signaling may play critical role in the development of vemurafenib
drug resistance in melanoma cells. Targeting specific notch in patients
on chemotherapy especially on BRAF inhibitors will be a key event for
better progression and treatment of melanoma.

