Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC) and BRAF inhibitors
upregulates the expression of the plasma membrane Ca2+ pump, PMCA4b and
alters intracellular Ca2+ handling in BRAF mutant melanoma cells


The aim of our study was to test the effects of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) and BRAF inhibitors on the expression and activity of the plasma
membrane Ca2+ pump isoform 4b (PMCA4b) in BRAF mutant melanoma cell
lines. Remodeling of Ca2+ homeostasis during malignancy is caused by the
rearrangement of the Ca2+ signaling machinery, including Ca2+ pumps,
Na+/Ca2+ exchangers and channels. Plasma membrane calcium ATPases (ATP2B
- or PMCA) maintain the resting low intracellular calcium concentration
by pumping out excess calcium from the cytosol. Changes in PMCA
expression during malignant transformation have been described previously
in colorectal and breast cancer cells, and most recently by our group in
melanomas. We found that in BRAF mutant melanoma cells the PMCA 4b
protein level was markedly elevated by BRAF inhibitor treatment.
Overexpression of PMCA4b suppressed motility and metastatic potential.
Previously, it was shown that HDAC inhibitors-induced differentiation
up-regulated PMCA4b expression in gastric, colon and breast cancer cells.
In the present study we treated BRAF mutant and BRAF wild type melanoma
cells with HDAC inhibitors (SAHA (suberanilohydroxamic acid) or valproic
acid) and tested the changes in abundance, localization and function of
PMCA4b. Expression levels of the PMCA proteins were analyzed by qRT-PCR
and Western Blotting. Subcellular localization of the PMCAs and the
effects of treatments on cytosolic Ca2+ signaling were analyzed by
confocal microscopy. We found that treatment with the HDAC inhibitors
increased the level of PMCA4b expression at both mRNA and protein levels
in both BRAF wild type and BRAF mutant cell types. The increased PMCA4b
level was coupled with enhanced plasma membrane localization and with a
faster Ca2+ clearance after stimulation. Our results show that in
melanoma cells the expression of PMCA4b is under epigenetic control and
HDAC inhibitors efficiently enhanced PMCA4b expression independent of the
BRAF status of cells.

