Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive identification of miR-122 targetome in the liver and
HCC by HITS-CLIP analysis reveals conserved regulation of AMPK signaling
in hepatocarcinogenesis


miR-122, a conserved liver-specific miRNA, is critical for maintaining
liver homeostasis. Loss of miR-122 is associated with loss of hepatic
phenotype, metastasis and poor prognosis. Recent in vivo work has
established miR-122 as a bona fide tumor suppressor, with poorly
differentiated, Afp-positive, high grade, spontaneous HCC observed in
liver-specific (LKO) and germ-line (KO) miR-122 knockout mice. We
hypothesized that the pathophysiology exhibited by KO mice would be
mediated through de-repressed targets in KO livers and therefore,
dysfunctional regulation of specific pathways involved in liver
homeostasis and carcinogenesis. Although the role of miR-122 in the
maintenance of liver homeostasis is well established, systematic and
direct biochemical elucidation of the miR-122 target network remains
incomplete. To this end, we performed Ago-dHITS-CLIP analysis in livers
of 6 week-old wild type (WT) and KO mice to identify miRNA targetome in
vivo, which revealed 1800 miR-122 binding sites, with over 30 fold
enrichment for the miR-122 seed sequence sites in WT compared to KO
livers. Surprisingly, a majority of miR-122 binding sites were observed
on coding exons (40%) followed by 3-UTRs, introns and 5-UTRs. Motif
analysis of miR-122 dependent binding sites lacking the seed sequence
revealed a novel G-bulged motif in addition to the canonical miR-122 seed
sequences. Moreover, the hepatic gene expression profile of these mice
measured by RNA-seq showed up regulation of 2500 genes and down
regulation of 1200 genes in KO livers compared to WT livers. A comparison
of HITS-CLIP and RNA-seq data revealed that majority of miR-122 targets
harboring canonical binding sites at their 3UTRs as well as some coding
regions, are significantly upregulated in miR-122 KO livers without
notable alteration in the expression of or G-bulged targets at the RNA
level. HITS-CLIP analysis of several human HCC and matching benign liver
tissues also identified both canonical and G-bulged targets; where the
majority of both are located in the coding regions followed by 3UTRs.
Association of miR-122 targets with Argonaute was precipitously reduced
in HCCs expressing lower miR-122 levels than respective benign livers.
Notably, though miR-122 is completely conserved and highly expressed in
human and mouse livers, a large number of identified targets seem to be
species-specific. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of enriched targets revealed
conserved pathway specific regulation in mouse and human livers. Pathways
commonly associated with critical roles in liver carcinogenesis and liver
metabolism, such as AMPK signaling and PI3/AKT pathways, were the major
targets of miR-122-mediated regulation. This study suggests that miR-122
functionality is conserved across species.

