Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attenuated oncolytic virus HSV1716 increases in vivo expansion of
GD2- targeting CAR T cells in murine solid tumor models


Neuroblastoma, osteosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma are among the most
prevalent childhood solid tumors. Each of these tumor types as well as
melanomas exhibit increased levels of the tumor associated carbohydrate,
GD2 on their cell surface making them ideal targets for chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) T cell-directed therapies. Despite the ability of GD2 CAR
T cells to target tumor cells in vitro, there is great interest in
improving tumor clearance in vivo, especially for solid tumors where
current outcomes remain poor. We hypothesize that the immunosuppressive
milieu present within the solid tumor microenvironment serves as a major
factor limiting the effectiveness of GD2 CAR T cells. Additionally, we
propose that administration of oncolytic viruses could induce
inflammation within the tumor microenvironment that may enhance, rather
than inhibit, the effectiveness of immune based therapies. GD2 CAR T
cells composed of the 14G2a single chain variable fragment linked to the
cytoplasmic signaling domains of CD28 and CD3 zeta (GD2-28z) were
expressed in murine lymphocytes and evaluated for the ability to target
and lyse GD2-expressing tumor cells. Additionally GD2-28z T cells were
evaluated for their ability to secrete the proinflammatory cytokines IFN
and IL-2. In order to determine the oncolytic ability of attenuated
HSV1716, tumor cells were cultured in the presence or absence of HSV1716
and relative cell survival was measured. We observed specific lysis of
GD2-expressing tumor cells when co-cultured with GD2-28z, but not mock T
cells. Furthermore, GD2-28z T cells secrete IFN and IL-2 following
co-culture with GD2-expressing tumor cells. Interestingly, melanoma cell
lines were not susceptible to oncolytic lysis while rhabdomycosarcoma
(RMS) cell lines were susceptible. The combination of GD2-28z and HSV1716
enhanced CAR expansion in both melanoma and RMS models. Given that the
melanoma cells in our model are not susceptible to oncolytic lysis yet we
observe an increased T cell expansion when used in combination with
HSV1716, this supports our hypothesis that HSV1716 is inducing
inflammation, which may then triggering T cell expansion.

