Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Location of oncogene expression within a stratified squamous
epithelium drives distinct B and CD4 T-cell crosstalk to dictate the
tumor immune response


Tumors from stratified epithelium contain proliferating and
differentiating compartments, but it is not clear how tumor cells in
different layers alternatively engage the immune system. We have
established two doxycycline inducible Ras models in which oncogenic
RasV12G is targeted to either the epidermal basal/stem cell layer with a
Keratin14-rtTA transgene (K14Ras), or suprabasal differentiating cells
with an Involucrin-tTA transgene (InvRas). On threshold doxycycline
levels yielding similar tumor numbers and Ras expression over 30 days,
mice with basal cell targeted Ras developed focal squamous cell carcinoma
while suprabasal targeting caused benign squamous papilloma formation. On
a Rag1-/- background InvRas mice developed fewer tumors that regressed
over time while K14Ras mice developed more tumors with shorter latency
than Rag1+/+ controls. Depletion and adoptive transfer studies revealed
that nave B and CD4 T cells together, but not alone, suppressed tumor
formation in K14Ras mice but restored tumor numbers in InvRas mice.
Tumors developing in K14Ras mice showed a loss of proinflammatory CD4 T
and B cells and increased percentages of regulatory cells infiltrating
the tumor tissue. In vivo cotransfers show that B and CD4 T cells
reciprocally prime each other towards a regulatory phenotype in the
K14Ras tumor microenvironment, but in the InvRas tumor microenvironment
proinflammatory CD4 T and B cell phenotypes result. Coculture of
tumor-conditioned B cells with stimulated nave CD4 T cells showed an
importance of direct contact and CD40/CD40L interactions for the
generation of regulatory T cells (Tregs) by B cells in K14Ras mice. In
contrast, tumor-conditioned B cells from InvRas mice support generation
of proinflammatory CD4 T cells, and antagonize Treg development. This
function is restricted to tumor-conditioned B cells, as splenic B cells
from tumor-bearing mice had no effect on CD4 T cell phenotype. In vivo
blockade of CD40L in K14Ras mice resulted in significantly increased
tumor counts as well as reduced B and Treg prevalence. Blockade of CD40L
in InvRas mice significantly reduced tumor number, increasing Treg cell
count and decreasing neutrophil infiltration into the tumor tissue.
Time-course experiments suggest a protective role of Tregs in late stages
of K14Ras tumors, and a tumor-promoting role of proinflammatory CD4 T
cells in InvRas tumors. Thus, basal/stem cell expression of Ras provokes
a regulatory cell inducing microenvironment, suppressing tumor-promoting
inflammation in late-stage tumors. Ras expression in differentiating
cells activates a tumor promoting proinflammatory phenotype in B and CD4
T cells without provoking immunosurveillance. Taken together, these data
show that tumor cell position within a stratified epithelium
differentiation hierarchy provokes distinct B and CD4 T cell interactions
with opposing effects on tumor development.

