Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New non-integrative MS2-based lentiviral particles for mRNA
delivery: A safe and efficient opportunity for gene editing and
immunotherapy applications


Safe and efficient cancer therapies using adoptive transfer of engineered
T cells or gene editing are very challenging but very promising
approaches nowadays. The scientific and clinical communities have been
working for a long time together to encounter substantial clinical
advances they have made possible thanks to numerous improvements in cell
culture and gene transfer methods. Opportunities to improve gene transfer
into primary T cells or hematopoietic stem cells involve a better design
of the vectors used. Such improvements must lead to an increase of the
efficiency in the percentage of positive cells, as well as a better level
and duration of expression, cell phenotype preservation and the number of
genes delivered. Lentiviral vectors have seen their use largely increased
in clinical protocols over the past few years but safety concerns have
been highlighted. First, the permanent genetic modification remains a
focus of significant regulatory oversight and even integrase- or reverse
transcriptase-deficient lentiviral vectors leads to residual integration
events. Moreover it has been shown that some resulting CAR T cells can
exhibit toxicity due to high and persistent expression. If mRNA delivery
is a versatile, flexible, and safe mean for protein therapies, chemical
or electroporation-based transfection protocols are known to induce cell
toxicity and phenotype modifications of the target cells.Here, we
describe a new chimeric lentiviral platform that allows mRNA delivery
into the target cells without any genomic signature. The respective
properties of the MS2 bacteriophage and the lentiviral vectors have been
combined to build a non-integrative packaging system in which the wild
type HIV packaging sequence is replaced by the MS2 stem-loop repeats and
the MS2 Coat sequence is inserted into the NucleoCapsid sequence. The
resulting lentiviral particle is able to deliver a non-viral RNA into the
target cell, directly available for protein translation.Transduction of T
cells and HSC with these RNA lentiviral particles (RLP) shows an
efficient, fast and transient expression of both reporters and functional
proteins such as genome editing enzymes. Cell viability of such
engineered cells and multiple genes expression analyses will be
presented.This transient mRNA delivery mediated by a lentiviral particle
is a powerful tool, useful to induce an efficient CAR delivery and ensure
a complete loss of the CAR-driven T cells activity. The possibility to
express multiple genes at once in the target cells is an attractive
therapeutic perspective. One of the advantages of the MS2RLP system is
its ability to utilize lentiviral production platforms already validated
in clinical settings. The RNAs transferred by the MS2RLPs are directly
expressed into the cytoplasm, which completely removes the risk of
integration, an important safety consideration for human use.

