Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoscale ChIP-seq analysis in primary hepatocellular carcinoma
tissues reveals tumor-specific chromatin deregulation for oncogene
activation


Introduction: Emerging evidence that epigenetics converts alterations in
nutrient and metabolism into heritable pattern of gene expression has
profound implications in understanding human physiology and diseases.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the hepatic manifestation of
metabolic syndrome including obesity and diabetes which elevate the risk
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The metabolites derived from excessive
insulin, glucose and lipid may perturb epigenetic gene regulation through
DNA methylation, histone modifications, and RNA interference, leading to
activation of pro-inflammatory signaling and oncogenic pathways[1].
Transcriptional and chromatin patterns are mostly interrogated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). However, conventional ChIP
protocols necessitate the use of large numbers of cells and usually limit
to the studies in cell lines, which may display epigenetic patterns
distinct from primary tumors.Aims and methods: To study chromatin
deregulation in primary human NAFLD-related HCC tumor and adjacent
non-tumor tissues, we performed nanoscale ChIP sequencing (nano
ChIP-seq)[2], which allows genome-wide location of histone modifications
for scanty materials, of histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and
histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) for active promoters and
enhancers, respectively. We also integrated the nano ChIP-seq profiles
with transcriptomic data from TCGA and in-house cohorts.Results and
summary: We found that primary human HCC tumors were associated with
increased H3K4me3 occupancy, which occurred predominantly nearby the
transcription start sites. H3K4me3-occupied promoters were enriched with
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) binding sites,
which is in accordance with the crucial role of interleukin 6/STAT3
signaling in NAFLD-HCC initiation and progression. Moreover,
tumor-specific H3K4me3 and H3K27ac profiles correlated with gene
over-expression, including novel STAT3-driven oncogenes e.g. UBE2C and
PLK1 in HCC. In summary, our findings demonstrated the feasibility of
profiling chromatin using limited HCC tissues and identified aberrant
promoter and enhancer regulatory elements associated with NAFLD-related
hepatocarcinogenesis.Acknowledgements: This project was supported by the
University Grants Committee through the Collaborative Research Fund
C4017-14G, Theme Based Research Scheme T12-403/11-1 and General Research
Fund 14102914.References:1. Tian, Y., et al., Epigenetic regulation of
hepatocellular carcinoma in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Semin
Cancer Biol, 2013. 23(6 Pt B): p. 471-82.2. Muratani, M., et al.,
Nanoscale chromatin profiling of gastric adenocarcinoma reveals
cancer-associated cryptic promoters and somatically acquired regulatory
elements. Nat Commun, 2014. 5: p. 4361.

