Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual role of semaphorin5A in maintaining epithelial and
mesenchymal phenotype in metastatic pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a highly aggressive disease and in general has
metastasized to distant organs by the time of its clinical diagnosis.
Poor five-year survival rate of 7% with an average survival time of 5-8
months highlight the gravity of the situation and necessitate a better
understanding of the molecules and mechanisms that lead to metastatic
dissemination in PC. One of the key processes that lead to metastasis is
the gain of cellular migration ability. Previous reports from our
laboratory have identified semaphorin5A (SEMA5A), an axon guidance cue
molecule regulating cellular migration, as a putative cell adhesion
molecule which is involved in organ-specific homing during PC metastasis.
Also, differential expression of SEMA5A was observed in cells derived
from metastatic sites in comparison to those arising from primary tumors.
On the basis of the these findings, we hypothesize that SEMA5A regulates
epithelial to mesenchymal changes necessary to drive cellular migration
and further leads to establishment of these cells at secondary sites. We
utilized various cellular models such as the L3.3 and L3.6pl cell lines
with different metastatic potential, cell lines derived from metastatic
sites (Capan-1 and CD18/HPAF) with stable knock down of SEMA5A, and cell
lines derived from primary tumors (Panc1) with overexpression of SEMA5A.
We evaluated epithelial and mesenchymal markers, in vitro cellular
migration and the metastatic potential of these cells. We observed down
regulation of E-cadherin expression and re-localization of beta-catenin
from the membrane to the nucleus in SEMA5A knockdown cells. Similarly,
overexpression of SEMA5A in Panc1 cells resulted in higher E-cadherin
expression. We also observed higher SEMA5A and E-cadherin expression in
the highly metastatic L3.6pl cells in comparison with L3.3 cells.
Furthermore, knock-down SEMA5A in Capan-1 cells resulted in enhanced in
vitro cellular migration and higher metastasis when control or SEMA5A
knockdown cells were orthotopically implanted in nude mice. Our
observations suggest that SEMA5A plays a bi-functional role in mediating
epithelial to mesenchymal transition at primary site while regulating
mesenchymal to epithelial transition and establishment at secondary sites.

