Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methyl transferase inhibitors (DNMTis) upregulate NY-ESO
expression in several human primary cells: implications for co-therapy
with engineered adoptive T-cell therapies


The DNA methyl transferase inhibitors 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (decitabine
or DECI) and 5-azacytidine (azacitidine or AZA) have recently been
approved for the treatment of a variety of hematologic malignancies.
These cytidine analogues remove repressive epigenetic DNA methyl marks
and induce the transcription of numerous genes normally silenced during
the processes of cellular differentiation or transformation. DNMTis have
a net anti-neoplastic activity through the up-regulation of
tumor-suppressor genes involved in the induction of apoptosis, cellular
differentiation and cell cycle arrest. In addition, DNMTis promote the
expression of several cancer testis antigens (CTAs) by tumor cells,
including NY-ESO and MAGE-A1/A3. These observations suggest that the
combination of DNMTis with immunotherapeutic modalities may provide some
clinical benefit.Adoptive immunotherapies using autologous CD4+ and CD8+
T cells expressing an affinity optimized NY-ESO TCR are in clinical
trials and show robust clinical responses in patients across several
indications including synovial sarcoma, multiple myeloma or melanoma.
DNMTis were previously shown to induce the expression of NY-ESO in
antigen-low or -negative tumor cells and consequently enable the
activation of NY-ESO-specific T-cells. While there is compelling evidence
for the combination of DNMTis with T cells containing engineered
affinity-enhanced TCRs recognizing NY-ESO-1, safety data supporting this
approach are lacking. Initial tests into the safety of combining these
treatments investigated the effects of DECI and AZA on NY-ESO and LAGE-1
expression in a panel of primary adult human cells of different tissue
origins. Our data demonstrate that treatment with either compound
resulted in a significant up-regulation of NY-ESO transcription in a
subset of primary cells tested. The magnitude of increase in transcript
expression varied between cell types and, in some cases, was sufficient
to activate T cells expressing an affinity-optimized NY-ESO-specific TCR.
These findings raise important safety concerns with regards to the
potential combination of DNMTi compounds with NY-ESO T-cell therapy and
suggest that such co-therapies may result in on-target off-tumor
toxicities.

