Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bisphenol A treatment induces hyperplasia in primary and stem
cell-generated mammary glands from pregnant mice


Breast cancer is a commonly diagnosed cancer during pregnancy. However,
how endogenous and exogenous endocrine factors may contribute to the
development of pregnancy-associated mammary tumorigenesis is not clear.
There is growing evidence that mammary stem cells (MaSCs) may initiate
neoplastic transformation when dysregulated in mouse models. We
investigated the effect of the environmental endocrine disruptor
bisphenol A (BPA) on mouse mammary gland morphology, epithelial cell
composition, pre-neoplastic lesions, and the regenerative function of
MaSCs. Pregnant FVB mice with GFP transgene on Day E8.5 were implanted
with osmotic pumps that constantly release BPA at 0, 25 or 250 ng/kg/day
for 28 days and the mice were euthanized one month after weaning. In
agreement with the literature, we observed an abnormality of the
morphology of the mammary gland after BPA treatment characterized by
higher duct density and abnormal secondary and tertiary branching.
Quantification of percent hyperplastic mammary ducts in H&E-stained
tissue slides revealed a significant increase of ducts with hyperplastic
lesions after BPA treatment, particularly with the low dose. To
investigate the effects of BPA treatment on MaSCs, we used enzyme
digestion to isolate the CD24hi/CD49f+ luminal epithelial cells (also
termed as colony forming cell or CFC) and the CD24+/CD49fhi basal
epithelial cells (also termed as mammary repopulating unit or MRU) from
mammary gland tissues by FACS and found no significant difference in
percent of luminal or basal cell population after BPA treatment. Because
the basal cells are enriched with MaSCs that can form mammospheres in
suspension culture and subsequently form solid 3D organoids when cultured
in Matrigel, we transplanted the solid 3D organoids into cleared mammary
fat pads of syngeneic FVB mice and immune-compromised nude mice to
examine how BPA treatment might alter MaSC function. Significantly,
similar to the results from the primary mammary glands, the regenerated
mammary glands by MaSCs from mice treated with the low dose of BPA showed
increased duct density, secondary and tertiary branching, and a
significantly greater number of hyperplastic lesions. Taken together, our
study demonstrated that BPA exposure at very low dose could induce
pre-neoplastic lesions in the mammary gland of pregnant mice, apparently
by directly targeting MaSCs, and implicates BPA as an exogenous endocrine
factor that may promote pregnancy-associated mammary tumorigenesis.

