Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Podophyllotoxin acetate (PA) as an anti-cancer drug candidate
regulates various malignancy traits of non-small cell lung cancer


Here, we reported that podophyllotoxin acetate (PA) showed various
aniti-cancer effects: induction of several cell death pathways,
inhibition of -ionizing radiation (IR)-induced cancer invasion,
chemo-sensitizer effect with topoisomerase (TOP) inhibitors against
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines as follows. (1) Stimulation
of cell death via various mechanisms. First, PA dose-dependently induced
cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase, as shown by accumulation of the
mitosis-related proteins, p21, survivin and aurora B. This arrest was due
to the PA-induced inhibition of microtubule polymerization that related
to DNA damage (reflected by accumulation of -H2AX) resulting induction of
intrinsic/extrinsic damage apoptotic pathways. PA also activated the
pro-apoptotic ER stress pathway, as evidenced by increased expression
levels of BiP, CHOP, IRE1-a, phospho-PERK, and phospho-JNK. Next, PA
induced autophagy that reflected the expression of beclin-1, Atg3, Atg5
and Atg7, and the cleavage of LC3. (2) Inhibition of IR-induced cancer
invasion. IR increased the invasion/migration of A549 cells, and this
effect was decreased by PA treatment that the expressions/activities of
matrix metalloprotase (MMP) -2, MMP-9, and vimentin, suggesting that PA
could block the IR-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In
this study, we also identified IR-induced new signaling pathway, EGFR -
p38/ERK - CREB-1/STAT3 - EMT pathway, that was inhibited by PA. (3)
Chemo-sensitizer effect conjugated with TOP inhibitors - etoposide (Eto)
and camptothecin (Cpt). Combination Index (CI) values of the combinations
showed synergistic effects between PA and topoisomerase inhibitors.
Combination with PA and Eto/Cpt promotes disruption of dynamics of actin
filaments, which subsequently enhanced apoptotic cell death that
accompanied to increased phosphorylation of p38. We also observed these
combinations also inhibited activation of CREB-1, synergistically.
Therefore, this study indicated that PA functions as a chemosensitizer by
enhancing apoptosis through activation of p38/caspases apoptotic axis and
suppression of CREB-1.Taken together; these results suggest PA is a new
anti-cancer drug candidate that could control several malignancy traits
of cancer including uncontrolled cell cycle and IR-induced invasion.

