Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The National Cancer Institute's biospecimen research database: A
community resource for improving specimen quality


Tissue and blood biospecimens used in cancer research are collected,
processed and stored using standard operating procedures (SOPs) that can
vary tremendously across institutions. This lack of standardization in
biospecimen collection and processing practices across sample sets and
institutions can be a contributing source of research variability and can
compromise analytical results. In an effort to minimize preanalytical
variability and improve the quality of biospecimens used for cancer
research, the National Cancer Institute's Biorepositories and Biospecimen
Research Branch (BBRB) developed the Biospecimen Research Database (BRD;
http://biospecimens.cancer.gov/brd). The BRD is a free and publically
accessible online database that aims to (i) improve access to
peer-reviewed articles that investigate the impacts that biospecimen
collection and handling practices can have on clinical, molecular, and
proteomic endpoints, (ii) facilitate transparency between institutions
and researchers by promoting SOP sharing and distribution, and (iii)
improve the quality of biospecimens through the development of
evidence-based procedural guidelines. To date, the BRD houses more than
2,300 articles and 200 SOPs from 30 different participating biobanking
institutions. Articles are meticulously categorized and annotated by a
team of Ph.D.-level scientists according to the type of biospecimen and
technology platform used and the preanalytical factors investigated.
Literature contained within the BRD serves as the foundation for
internally developed reviewed papers as well as evidence-based procedural
guidelines, termed Biospecimen Evidence-Based Practices, which focus on
biospecimen collection, preservation, and processing. In addition, more
than 90% of the BRD's SOP library was contributed by other government
offices, non-profit, private, and international biobanks and
institutions. BBRB has invested a substantial and continued level of
effort in the establishment of this scientifically accurate and robust
database. Ongoing participation by the scientific community in the form
of public commenting, article suggestions and SOP submissions is
encouraged and will increase both the diversity and value of the BRD.

