Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and optimization of a fluorescence polarization-based
assay for the discovery of inhibitors of the RBBP4/7-Histone H3
interaction


Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a multi-subunit epigenetic
complex critical for the maintenance of stem cells. Its dysregulation has
been implicated in various diseases, including cancer. There are four
core subunits in PRC2: the catalytic SET domain-containing histone
methyltransferase EZH2 and three core accessory proteins (SUZ12, EED, and
RBBP4 or 7), which together mediate gene repression via trimethylation of
histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3). Importantly, overexpression of PRC2
subunits is associated with poor clinical outcome in several cancers.
While numerous inhibitors of EZH2 have been developed and showed
pre-clinical efficacies in hematological malignancies they have yet to
show as much efficacy in solid tumors. One perhaps better alternative for
inhibiting PRC2 is to disrupt its scaffolding function, thereby
preventing the complex formation. Therefore, the discovery of novel
inhibitors of PRC2, outside of the active site, has been a growing
interest.Our preliminary observations have suggested that the PRC2
subunits retinoblastoma binding protein 4 and 7 (RBBP4/7) could be a
specifically attractive alternative for PRC2 inhibition. Knockdown of
RBBP4/7 significantly decreased cell growth, reduced H3K27me3 levels and
inhibited mammosphere formation of triple negative breast cancer cell
lines. In PRC2, RBBP4 and RBBP7 are responsible for nucleosomal
association of the complex by binding to the N-terminal tail of histone
H3. Here we describe the development and optimization of a fluorescence
polarization (FP) based assay to determine the binding affinities (Kd) of
the RBBP4/7-histone H3 interaction and the Ki of potential inhibitors.
Using a 384-well format, the assay measures the competitive binding of a
fluorescein-labeled H3 peptide (aa 1-21) to RBBP4 (Kd = 400 nM). It
exhibits a Z of > 0.7 and a dynamic range of 65. It reaches equilibrium
after 5 minutes and is stable for over 24 hours. Furthermore, using this
assay, we completed a systematic analysis of the RBBP4-H3 interaction by
truncation and modification studies and uncovered the smallest H3 peptide
required for the interaction (aa 1-9).We have successfully developed an
FP assay for the interaction of human RBBP4 protein and an optimized H3
probe. High throughput screening (HTS) is being carried out with this
assay using a diverse set of small molecule and natural products obtained
from commercial, government and academic collections. This study, along
with our biological data, will provide a concrete basis for the
development of novel PRC2 inhibitors.

