Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphaplatins are potent inducers of pigment epithelial- derived
factor (PEDF)


Pigment Epithelial Derived Factor (PEDF) is a secreted glycoprotein that
exhibits several biological activities, most notably as a potent
anti-angiogenic agent as well as a neurotrophic factor. As such, this
molecule has potential application as therapeutics for cancer and a
variety of neurological diseases. However, prior art methods directed
towards enhancing and stabilizing PEDF expression in vivo have met with
little success. Therefore, methods that could lead to the stable
expression of PEDF in vivo are still needed. We have recently shown that
PEDF protein is overexpressed in tumor cells treated with platinum based
drugs; phosphaplatins that are platinum-(II) and platinum-(IV) complexes
coordinated to a pyrophosphate moiety. The objective of this study is to
extend our previous findings by measuring PEDF expression in both
malignant cells and normal neuronal tissues after treating them with
these compounds. We also investigated the impact of PEDF upregulation on
important biological processes such as apoptosis, proliferation and
invasion of tumor cells. Our data showed that there was a significant
upregulation (over 4-fold) of PEDF in brain of mice treated with
phosphoplatins when compared to the control animals. The compounds were
found to stimulate PEDF expression in cultured neuronal cells when
assessed in vitro (PPigment Epithelial Derived Factor (PEDF) is a
secreted glycoprotein that exhibits several biological activities, most
notably as a potent anti-angiogenic agent as well as a neurotrophic
factor. As such, this molecule has potential application as therapeutics
for cancer and a variety of neurological diseases. However, prior art
methods directed towards enhancing and stabilizing PEDF expression in
vivo have met with little success. Therefore, methods that could lead to
the stable expression of PEDF in vivo are still needed. We have recently
shown that PEDF protein is overexpressed in tumor cells treated with
platinum based drugs; phosphaplatins that are platinum-(II) and
platinum-(IV) complexes coordinated to a pyrophosphate moiety. The
objective of this study is to extend our previous findings by measuring
PEDF expression in both malignant cells and normal neuronal tissues after
treating them with these compounds. We also investigated the impact of
PEDF upregulation on important biological processes such as apoptosis,
proliferation and invasion of tumor cells. Our data showed that there was
a significant upregulation (over 4-fold) of PEDF in brain of mice treated
with phosphoplatins when compared to the control animals. The compounds
were found to stimulate PEDF expression in cultured neuronal cells when
assessed in vitro (P<0.05 vs. untreated control groups). In tumor cells,
phosphoplatins upregulated PEDF expression in a dose-dependent manner in
various tumor cell lines. In one particular mouse breast tumor cell line
(4T1), the data showed that phosphaplatin doses in the range of 25 to 100
M stimulated the expression of PEDF at 12 and 24 hrs, which declined
thereafter. Remarkably, a subsequent treatment of the tumor cells with
phosphaplatins at 24 hrs prevented the decline of PEDF expression,
suggesting a direct correlation between phosphaplatins and PEDF
overexpression. The upregulation of PEDF in the tumor cells was
paralleled by increased apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation and
invasion. In summary, phosphaplatins mediated overexpression of PEDF in
vivo suggests a potential neuroprotective effect of these compounds.
While in tumors, phosphaplatins may exhibit antitumor activity via
multiple effects, including anti-angiogenesis, enhanced apoptosis, and
decreased proliferation and invasion, predominately through stimulating
overexpression of PEDF.

