Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The retinoblastoma protein regulates hypoxia-inducible
factor-1-mediated transcriptional programs, tumor cell invasiveness,
tumor growth and metastasis in human breast cancer cells


The retinoblastoma protein (Rb) is capable of attenuating the hypoxic
response in tumor cells. This process is mediated by the hypoxia
inducible factor 1/2 (HIF1/2) and its dimerization partner the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT/ HIF1). Rb modulates HIF
activity by virtue of its association with the thyroid hormone
receptor/retinoblastoma interacting protein 230 (TRIP230), an essential
cofactor of the HIF1/ARNT transcriptional complex. We used short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) technology and microarray analysis to interrogate the
Rb-negative and wild-type MCF7 cell transcriptomes and generated lists of
genes that were either up- or downregulated in response to both loss of
Rb and hypoxia. We found that loss of Rb enhances the expression of
hypoxia-regulated genes involved in invasion and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and significantly decreases the
expression of genes involved in cell anchoring and differentiation in
MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Genes were validated using both
qRT-PCR and immuno-blot analysis. Additionally, gene ontology analysis
revealed that AKT and ERK1/2 are downstream effectors of hypoxic gene
programs that are sensitive to loss of Rb. Furthermore, these factors
regulate the acquisition of a more invasive phenotype in breast cancer
cells. Finally, we found that Rb knockdown in combination with
pre-treatment of cells with hypoxia increased growth of tumor foci in the
lungs after i.v. injection and increased the development of spontaneous
metastases from orthotopically implanted breast tumor cells in female
NOD-SCID mice. Primary tumors lacking Rb demonstrated enriched protein
levels of genes identified in our arrays when compared to negative
control tumors. These results show that Rb is a negative modulator of
hypoxia-regulated genetic programs by virtue of its direct effects on the
HIF-complex. Understanding the HIF complex and the molecular mechanisms
controlling the progression from benign tumors to metastasized and lethal
forms will allow us to develop more specific breast cancer therapies.

