Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HuR dependent inhibition of PARG enhances PARP inhibitor therapy
for DNA repair proficient and deficient pancreatic cancer cells


Introduction: Despite our deep understanding of genetic drivers of the
disease, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) continues to be
associated with dismal survival rates. Targeting the DNA repair machinery
has emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy to treat pancreatic
cancer patients carrying DNA damage repair (DDR) mutations. Such
mutations promote tumorigenesis, but also paradoxically render tumor
cells particularly susceptible to platinum-based agents and PARP
inhibitors (PARPi). However, despite promising preclinical and clinical
results, early data demonstrate that eventually most tumors, regardless
of DDR status, become resistant to PARPi-therapies.The mRNA-binding
protein HuR, predominantly expressed in the nucleus, translocates to the
cytoplasm upon tumor-associated stress where it post-transcriptionally
regulates select mRNA cargo, resulting in resistance to DNA damaging
agents in a harsh tumor microenvironment. Here, we sought to evaluate the
role of HuR in regulating PARPi efficacy.Results: In response to cellular
stress induced by IC50 dosages of a panel of PARPis such as Veliparib,
Olaparib, Rucaparib, Talazoparib and Niraparib, nuclear localized HuR
undergoes cytoplasmic translocation. Silencing of HuR via siRNA, CRISPR
and a DOX-inducible system resulted in significant decrease in long and
short- term PDA cell survival, irrespective of DDR status. To complement
and validate in vitro findings, we employed a heterotropic mouse
xenograft model using Mia.sh290 cells wherein DOX induction significantly
reduced HuR expression. Olaparib mediated PARP inhibition (50mg/kg, 5
days a week) combined with DOX-induced HuR silencing resulted in
significant reduction in tumor volumes, compared to Olaparib alone or DOX
alone.Mechanistically, we demonstrate that the pro-survival protein HuR
facilitates PDA cells to recover from PARPi insult by, in part,
regulating poly ADP ribose glycohydrolase (PARG), the major enzyme
responsible for hydrolyzing poly-ADP ribose (PAR) polymers, on chromatin
and associated proteins. HuR binds to two 41- 43bp long sites in the 3
untranslated region (3UTR) of PARG, increasing its mRNA stability and
protein expression. Increased PARG activity, further validated via
exogenous overexpression, promotes DNA repair efficiency and increases
PDA cell survival. Functional analysis indicate that such inhibition of
HuR and/or PARG significantly enhances PARPi sensitivity in PDA cells,
via increased accumulation of DNA damage H2AX foci, preventing efficient
removal of PAR polymers, and enhancing detrimental trapping of PARP1 on
chromatin.Conclusions: Taken together, our results indicate that HuR-
mediated upregulation of PARG acts as a universal pro-survival mechanism
and HuR inhibition could significantly potentiate PARPi therapy in PDA,
irrespective of DNA repair status.

