Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation mediated conformational changes defines nuclear
role of phosphatase and tensin homology (PTEN) in tumor suppression


Loss of function of tumor suppressor PTEN (Phosphatase and tensin
homolog) causes cancer in various tissues. PTEN C-terminal
phosphorylation (pPTEN) inactivates PTEN, leading to multiple
malignancies with increased severity. However, little is known about the
molecular mechanisms underlying such inactivation. Therefore, the
objective of our work is to ascertain the molecular mechanisms by which
PTEN phosphorylation drives lung cancer. PTEN C-terminal phosphorylation
at a serine-threonine cluster (Ser380, Thr382, Thr383 and Ser385)
conformationally inactivates PTEN, abrogating its tumor suppressor
function. Replacement of these serine/threonine residues with alanine
generated an artificial phosphorylation-deficient mutant of PTEN
(PTEN-4A), which is constitutively active. PTEN-4A suppressed cell
proliferation and migration to a greater extent as compared to PTEN-WT.
PTEN-4A preferentially localized to the nucleus and suppressed the
E2F-mediated transcription of cell cycle genes. The nuclear localization
sequence and phosphatase activity of PTEN-4A is critical for this
transcriptional suppression. Immuno-precipitation assays show that PTEN
physically associates with the transcription factor E2F1, a likely
mechanism for its suppressive effect on E2F1 related genes. Further,
deletion analysis of PTEN-4A protein revealed that the C2 domain is
indispensable for suppression of E2F-related genes. Systematic
transcriptional assays identify disease-associated C2 domain mutations
that lose their ability to suppress E2F-mediated transcription,
supporting the concept that these mutations are oncogenic in patients.
Taken together, we reveal nuclear functions of PTEN-4A in tumor
suppression that can be therapeutically leveraged for developing
adjunctive cancer therapies. Small molecule inhibitors that hinder PTEN
phosphorylation maybe utilized to activate PTEN nuclear function in
tumors. Such adjunctive therapy has a high likelihood to reduce toxic
doses of chemotherapeutic agents and targeted inhibitors, including
kinase inhibitors that are being used in clinical settings.

