Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fabrication of minocycline loaded PLGA microparticles for the
treatment of intracranial tumors


Minocycline is a tetracycline derivative that was originally used
clinically as an antibiotic and is currently being investigated as an
anti-angiogenic factor for the treatment of different cancers including
intracranial tumors such as glioblastomas. Due to its lipophilic nature,
it has difficulty dissolving completely in organic or aqueous solvents
and thus, presents a challenge for the fabrication of these particles via
the emulsion-solvent evaporation method. The aim of this study is to
investigate the effects of different methods of fabricating minocycline
loaded microparticles on particle properties, such as the diameter, drug
loading and release kinetics of the microparticles. Microparticles loaded
with drug during the fabrication process were produced via two different
methods: 1) an oil-in-water (O/W) single emulsion-solvent evaporation
method where the drug was dissolved in the oil phase (denoted as O/W
particles) and 2) a water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) double emulsion-solvent
evaporation method where the drug was dissolved in the first water phase
(denoted as W/O/W particles). Empty microparticles were also fabricated
by a W/O/W method and loaded with drug after fabrication by dripping a
drug solution onto freeze dried particles which were then left overnight
at 4C to allow the drug to adsorb onto and absorb into the particles
(denoted as prefabricated particles). Light microscopy images of the
particles were obtained and used to measure the diameters of the
particles with the ImageJ software. The drug loading and release kinetics
were determined by measuring the absorbance of minocycline at 350 nm with
a microplate reader. The prefabricated particles resulted in larger
diameters compared to the O/W and W/O/W particles which were loaded
during the fabrication process. This could have resulted from the use of
a vortex instead of a homogenizer/sonicator for the prefabricated
scaffold which produces an emulsion with a lower speed compared to a
homogenizer/sonicator. The prefabricated particles had a higher amount of
drug loaded compared to O/W and W/O/W particles which were loaded during
the fabrication process. By loading the drug after fabricating the
particles, almost all of the drug can be adsorbed onto and/or absorbed
into the particles without resulting in much loss of the drug.
Alternatively, by loading the particles during the fabrication process, a
lot of drug is lost into the water and/or oil phase and thus reducing the
loading efficiencies of the particles. However, the particles loaded
during the fabrication process were able to prolong the release of the
loaded drug compared to the prefabricated scaffold which lost almost all
of its drug by Day 1. In conclusion, although the prefabricated particles
allow for the complete loading of the drug, the particles loaded during
the fabrication process are more promising as controlled release vehicles
as they are able to better sustain the release of the loaded drug.

