Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ferroptosis: A novel nonapoptotic cell death overcomes head and
neck cancer resistance to cisplatin


Ferroptosis was recently identified as a novel form of iron-dependent
cell death different from apoptosis or necrosis. Inhibition of key
molecules related to ferroptosis, cystine-glutamate antiporter (xCT) and
glutathione peroxidase (GPX4), may induce the eradication of cancer cells
resistant to conventional chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The present study
investigated whether ferroptosis overcome head and neck cancer (HNC)
resistant to cisplatin treatment. Three cisplatin-resistant HNC cell
lines (AMC-HN3R, -HN4R and -HN9R), their parental lines, and other human
HNC lines were used. The effects of cysteine and glutamate alteration and
pharmacological and genetic inhibition of xCT were assess by measuring
viability, death, total and cytoplasmic lipid reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production, mitochondrial membrane potential (m), protein
expression, and preclinical mouse tumor xenograft models. Conditioned
media with no cysteine or high glutamate supplement induced ferroptosis
of both cisplatin-sensitive and -resistant HNC cells without apparent
change of necrosis and apoptosis markers, RIP1 and RIP3 and casplase-3
expression, and m. This was blocked by antioxidants trolox or N-acetyl
cysteine pretreatment. Sulfasalazine, artensunate, and erastin inhibited
the growth of HNC cells and accumulated cytoplasmic lipid ROS via
induction of ferroptosis and inhibition of xCT protein expression.
Genetic silencing of xCT with siRNA or shRNA treatment also induced the
effective cell death (ferroptosis) of resistant HNC cells. These effects
were blocked with trolox or ferrostatin-1 pretreatment. Pharmacological
and genetic inhibition of xCT significantly sensitized resistant HNC
cells to cisplatin in vitro and in vivo. Cystine deficiency or glutamate
excess induces ferroptosis in HNC cells. Further, pharmacological and
genetic inhibition of xCT overcomes the cisplatin resistance of HNC cells
by inducing ferroptosis.

