Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput screen to evaluate combinations with ibrutinib in
various B-cell malignancies


The primary objective of this study was to discover synergies leading to
mechanistic insights and novel combinations for ibrutinib, a
small-molecule inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK). Ibrutinib has
been approved for relapsed/refractory (R/R) and del(17p) chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, and R/R mantle-cell lymphoma (MCL). BTK is part of
the B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling pathway, so it is of interest to
examine synergy between ibrutinib and agents that target other aspects of
the BCR pathway. These include PI3K and IRAK inhibitors and apoptosis
inhibitors. Combinations were evaluated in a high-throughput, tumor
microenvironment-directed format.Ibrutinib was combined with inhibitors
of the BCR pathway and apoptosis, whose targets included MCL-1, BCL2,
XPO1, and isoforms of PI3K, IRAK, and BRD. Histologies examined included
follicular lymphoma (FL), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), MCL,
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), acute B-lymphoblastic leukemia, and
Burkitt's lymphoma. Cell lines were screened in the presence of human
marrow stromal-cell-conditioned media and B-cell receptor stimulation via
anti-IgG/anti-IgM antibodies in a 72-hour cell viability ATP lite assay
(384-well plate, 99 optimized matrix, 4 replicates). Dose response matrix
screening was used to measure combination effects, which manifest as
potency shifts or efficacy boosts. Combination effects can be
characterized by comparing each data point to a combination reference
model derived from single-agent curves using the Loewe additivity
model.Ibrutinib demonstrated varying activity across cell lines.
Combination activity was classified based on synergy score raw values.
The best combination among tested compounds was with ABT-199, a BCL2i.
This combination showed high or medium synergy in 2/5 DLBCL, 3/4 FL, and
2/5 MCL cell lines; this was also the only agent to show good synergy in
AML (3/5 lines). Interestingly, ABT-737, a BCL2i that also targets
BCL-XL, has previously been shown to be synergistic with ibrutinib in
DLBCL lines. Synergy was also seen with other apoptotic agents such as
MCL-1i and the epigenetic BETi JQ-1 across B-NHL, but in fewer lines.
Among the PI3Ki, PI3K/i did not show much activity, but the PI3K/i
IPI-145 was synergistic in 2/5 DLBCL, 3/4 FL cell lines, and 1/5 MCL cell
lines, a pattern very similar to the PI3Ki CAL-101 (idelalisib).
Ibrutinib also combined well with IRAK1/4i and XPO1i selinexor, with high
activity in 1/5 DLBCL cell lines each, and medium activity in 1/5 DLBCL,
1/4 FL, and 2/5 MCL (XPO1i) and 1/5 DLBCL, 2/4 FL, and 1/5 MCL cell lines
(IRAK1/4i).Synergy was mostly observed in B-cell malignancies, but
interesting synergy was observed with ABT-199 in AML. In B-NHL, ibrutinib
combined with BCL2i and PI3Ki showed the best combination activity.
Ibrutinib was also synergistic with other agents in selected B-NHL lines
with no observed antagonism, suggesting that further study in specific
histologies is warranted.

