Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ionizing radiation switches the function of tumor-derived exosomes
from messengers of tolerance to inducers of antitumor immunity


Tumor-derived exosomes (TEX) are constantly shed by cancer cells and have
been shown to carry tumor-derived antigens to dendritic cells (DCs).
However, presentation of tumor antigens derived from TEX in the absence
of activation signals for DCs leads to immune tolerance. Our lab has
demonstrated that ionizing radiotherapy (RT) can convert the irradiated
tumor into an in situ vaccine, leading to anti-tumor immune responses. We
hypothesized that TEX derived from irradiated cancer cells play a role in
RT-induced anti-tumor immunity by delivering tumor antigens together with
pro-inflammatory signals that activate DCs and prime tumor-specific
effector T cells. To begin to address this hypothesis we first studied
how RT modifies TEX molecular composition and their ability to induce DC
activation in vitro.Mouse carcinoma cells TSA cultured in exosome-free
media were treated in vitro with sham RT (control TEX), or 3 fractions of
8Gy (RT-TEX). TEX were isolated from supernatants 48 hr later using
differential ultracentrifugation and purified with a sucrose gradient.
Electron microscopy was used to confirm TEX size and morphology. Mass
spectrometry (LFQ-MS) followed by MS/MS analyses was used to characterize
protein composition. miRNA were analyzed by nanoString nCounter Mouse
miRNA expression assay kit using a panel of 578 mouse miRNAs. Normalized
results were analyzed with MultiExperiment Viewer. Mouse bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDC) were cultured with TEX for 48
hours. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry for expression of activation
markers.Significant changes in microRNA and protein compositions were
seen in RT-TEX compared to control TEX. Specifically, RT-TEX showed
increase in proteins involved in the Antigen Processing and Presentation
pathway. Additionally, 17 unique proteins were present only in RT-TEX and
included proteins involved in T cell development, MHC class I peptide
processing, and pro-inflammatory lipid signaling.Analysis of DCs cultured
with RT-TEX, but not control TEX, revealed an increase in cell surface
expression of CD80 (1428 MFI vs. 963 MFI) and CD86 (3487 MFI vs. 2578
MFI). Interestingly, culturing BMDC with RT-TEX also resulted in an
increase in DCs expressing CD103 and CD8a (2% vs 1.2% of CD11c+ cells),
suggesting that RT-TEX may influence differentiation of BMDC towards this
subset, which is critical for cross-presentation of tumor antigens to T
cells.Obtained data support the hypothesis that RT-TEX may switch
tolerogenic DCs into activated DCs by providing activation signals
together with tumor-derived antigens. Further in vivo experiments are
ongoing to determine the ability of RT-TEX to stimulate anti-tumor immune
responses.

