Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of MAPK pathway inhibitors in the tumor immune
microenvironment


Immunotherapeutic agents have shown great promise in the clinic in recent
years and this has led to their approval as single agents or as immune
doublet combinations in melanoma and lung cancer. In order to increase
the extent of benefit from these agents and to extend immunotherapies to
additional patients, combinations are being evaluated of
immunotherapeutic agents with chemotherapy and targeted agents.Inhibitors
of the mitogen-activated kinase protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, including
BRAF and MEK inhibitors, have been approved in melanoma, and are being
evaluated in additional indications. We evaluated the effects of MEK and
ERK inhibitors on human T cells cultured in vitro as well as on the tumor
microenvironment in preclinical syngeneic mouse models. In studies with
human T cells in vitro, we find that MEK or ERK inhibition reduced
proliferation of nave T cells, but had little effect on the proliferation
of central memory cells, suggesting a differential requirement on MAPK
signaling for proliferation of these T cell subsets. In vivo, MEK and ERK
inhibition resulted in an increase in CD8+ infiltration in the tumor, as
well as a decrease of markers of T cell exhaustion such as PD-1 and
EOMES. The combination of MEK or ERK inhibitors plus anti-PD-L1 resulted
in increased CD8+ effector function as measured by increased interferon
gamma (IFNg) levels. In some cases, the MEK and ERK inhibitors showed
differences in their pharmacodynamic effects as single agents; however,
in combination with anti-PD-L1, the effects were similar. For example,
single agent MEK inhibition but not single agent ERK inhibition increased
the number of CD4+ helper and regulatory T cells (Tregs) in the tumor.
However, both of these CD4+ subsets, as well as CD4+ IFNg levels, were
increased with MEK or ERK inhibitors combined with anti-PD-L1. Similarly,
single agent MEK inhibition decreased the number of infiltrating
CD11b+Ly6G+ myeloid cells whereas single agent ERK inhibition increased
the number of infiltrating CD11b+Ly6C+ myeloid cells. However, in
combination with anti-PD-L1, these changes in myeloid populations were
less apparent.Taken together, these data show that MAPK pathway
suppression can modulate multiple immune cell subtypes within the tumor,
with many of these changes expected to activate the immune infiltrate.
Despite the increase in Tregs in response to ERK and MEK inhibition in
combination with anti-PD-L1, these combinations were efficacious. This
suggests that the other immune stimulatory effects of these treatments
are sufficient to drive efficacy despite the presence of increased Tregs.
Our data suggest that the combination of MAPK inhibition plus anti-PD-L1
inhibition, such as with atezolizumab, is a promising hypothesis to test
in the clinic.

