Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug repurposing: Validation of sulfasalazine as a radiosensitizer
in melanoma by blocking system Xc


Melanoma is a cancer that has become increasingly frequent over the last
decades in the western world. Initial treatment for primary and
locoregional melanoma is surgery. In metastatic disease, systematic
treatment and recently immunotherapy has been the mainstay. At this stage
however, the prognostic outlook is still bleak. Thus, new treatments are
urgently needed.Melanoma is considered to be a radioresistant cancer. The
mechanisms underlying radioresistance are multiple and incompletely
characterized. In some tumors, radioresistance is mediated by increased
synthesis of anti-oxidants that scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS),
induced by radiotherapy. Glutathione (GSH) is an anti-oxidant synthesized
from cystine and constitutes a major defense system against oxidative
stress in mammalian cells. Cystine is taken up through system Xc (SXC),
an anti-port transmembrane protein with catalytic subunit xCT.
Sulfasalazine, a drug approved in the 1950s for treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease, has been shown to block SXC.
Based on previous reports by others, and our own recent findings, we
hypothesize that: I) xCT represents a mechanism for radioresistance and
is expressed in radioresistant melanoma cancer and II) xCT inhibitors can
act as radiosensitizers to potentiate the efficacy of radiotherapy.
Expression of the catalytic subunit of SXC, xCT, was found in tissue
micro array of primary and secondary melanoma biopsies. In addition, SAS
treatment dramatically reduced cystine-uptake and GSH levels in melanoma
cells in vitro, and markedly increased the levels of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Furthermore, SAS and radiation synergistically increased
DNA double-strand breaks and increased glioma cell death, whereas adding
the anti-oxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) reversed cell death. Moreover,
SAS and irradiation synergistically reduced subcutaneous melanoma tumor
growth in vivo, compared to controls or either treatment alone. Thus,
future experimental studies are warranted to validate SAS as a
radiosensitizer in the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Future studies
will also be aimed at assessing the effect on pulmonary melanoma
metastasis.

