Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forced induction of differentiation in osteosarcoma tumor
initiating cells


Osteosarcoma (OS) is a highly malignant bone cancer that is defined
histologically by the secretion of immature osteoid. The chemotherapeutic
regimen has not changed in the last 40 years, and similarly the five-year
survival rate has remained a dismal 60%, largely due to metastatic spread
to the lungs. OS is believed to originate from osteogenic committed
progenitors, involving disruption of extracellular matrix synthesis in
favor of proliferation.In previous work, our lab developed a method to
selectively identify Tumor Initiating Cells (TICs) in OS xenografts based
on their ability to activate a transcriptional reporter comprised of a
human OCT4 promoter linked to the coding sequence for Green Fluorescent
Protein (GFP). Clonally derived, stably transfected OS Oct4/GFP+ cells
are capable of initiating and maintaining the growth of heterogeneous
tumors and driving disease progression. The loss of GFP expression and
tumorigenic capacity occurs during tumor formation in response to cues
within the tumor microenvironment. These conditions appear to reprogram
the GFP+ cells, resulting in loss of reporter activity, reduced
proliferation, and adoption of a specialized secretory phenotype as an
adaptive survival mechanism: a phenotypic change similar to that seen in
normal physiological differentiation. During skeletal formation, Bone
Morphogenetic Proteins (BMP) play key roles in osteogenic maturation.
Because the OS lineage of origin suggests an innate sensitivity to BMP
proteins, we hypothesize that BMP stimulation will force the induction of
differentiation in OS TICs and will impair the ability of these cells to
initiate and maintain tumor growth.To test our hypothesis, we
investigated the expression of BMP receptors in two primary OS cell
lines, using Mesenchymal Stem Cells and Human Fetal Osteoblasts as
positive controls. Expression of BMP Receptors II, 1A, and 1B was
confirmed using flow cytometry indicating that the OS cells could
potentially respond to BMP stimulation. The functionality of the BMP
signaling pathway was subsequently investigated after stimulation with
BMP heterodimers, BMP2/7 and BMP4/7. Immunoblotting showed OS TICs are
capable of activating canonical and non-canonical BMP signaling pathways
after BMP stimulation, suggesting a functional and intact signaling
network potentially able to induce differentiation. However, only cells
treated with BMP4/7 showed changes in cell cycle distribution as
visualized by DAPI. Furthermore, BMP4/7-stimulated TICs showed reduced
tumor formation in our xenograft mouse modelOur data suggests an
inhibition of OS tumorigenicity due to a BMP4/7 induced differentiation
based response. Currently, we are investigating if forced expression of
BMPs using an OS specific recombinant Adeno-Associated Virus can inhibit
tumor growth in vivo. Such a differentiation-based therapy could become a
more effective and safer alternative to cytotoxic chemotherapy.

