Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) inhibition in metastatic
melanoma promotes tumor regression in vivo


Melanoma is a deadly variety of skin cancer, which is responsible for
three-fourths of skin cancer-related deaths, but constitutes less than 5%
of all skin cancer cases. It has been estimated that in 2015, about
73,870 new cases of melanoma will be diagnosed in United States alone, of
which 9,940 are expected to die. According to the ACS, melanoma is also
the fastest growing cancer, which makes it essential to investigate the
pathogenesis involved in the advanced stage of melanoma, and design
effective therapeutics for its treatment.Drugs targeting epigenetic
modifiers like EZH2 are becoming increasingly popular because of the fact
that most epigenetic modifications and their effects can be reversed
using these drugs. There has been no study till date investigating the
role of EZH2 in melanoma. Our laboratory is investigating the role of
EZH2 in the pathogenesis involved in the advanced stage of melanoma, to
enable the design of effective therapeutic strategies for the treatment
of melanoma. Here we investigate the relationship between EZH2 and tumor
suppressors E-cadherin and RUNX3 in melanoma using matched melanoma cell
lines (WM115 and WM266-4), formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
patient tissue samples and in vivo xenograft model. The studies performed
in cell lines and FFPE tissue samples suggested EZH2-mediated silencing
of E-cadherin and RUNX3 by promoting H3K27-trimethylation of the
E-CADHERIN and RUNX3 promoters in WM266-4 cells (metastatic; high EZH2;
low E-cadherin) relative to WM115 cells (primary; low EZH2; high
E-cadherin). Furthermore, we observed that EZH2 inhibition restores
E-cadherin and RUNX3 expression in metastatic melanoma cells by reducing
EZH2 and H3K27me3 occupancy at E-CADHERIN and RUNX3 promoters
respectively. In addition, we found that inhibition of EZH2 besides
inducing apoptosis and inhibiting cellular proliferation, also adversely
affected invasion of metastatic melanoma. E-cadherin depletion had an
opposite effect, suggesting that EZH2 mediated E-cadherin silencing
promotes invasion in metastatic melanoma. In vivo, treatment of WM266-4
xenografts with EZH2 inhibitor resulted in significant reduction of tumor
growth. In combination with Dabrafenib, this effect was highly
synergistic. Analysis of harvested tumors indicated increased E-cadherin
and RUNX3 levels in EZH2 inhibited group compared to vehicle, due to
reduced H3K27me3 enrichment by EZH2 at E-cadherin and RUNX3 promoters,
validating our in vitro finding. Tumor regression by combination therapy
was also accompanied by significant increased pro-apoptotic proteins like
Bak, Bax and decreased anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-xL and Bcl-2.Hence,
our findings suggest strong potential of EZH2 inhibitors as promising
melanoma drugs either by itself (monotherapy), or in conjunction with
other chemotherapeutics (combination therapy).

