Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galeterone-induced degradation of the androgen receptor involves
inhibition of deubiquitinating enzymes


Galeterone is a highly selective oral small molecule drug candidate that
disrupts androgen receptor (AR) signaling through degradation of the AR,
is a potent CYP17 lyase inhibitor, and possesses AR antagonist activity.
Galeterone-induced AR degradation was observed in models having either
full-length AR or known constitutively active truncated forms of the AR
receptor that lack the ligand binding domain (LBD), AR-V7 and AR567es,
suggesting the LBD of the AR is not required for galeterone-dependent AR
degradation. Further, galeterone-induced AR degradation activity is
blocked by co-administration of the proteasome inhibitor MG132. Along
these lines, galeterone-induced AR degradation can be blocked by
selective knock-down of the E3 ligases, Mdm2 and CHIP. We utilized a
series of biochemical and cell-based in vitro methodologies to further
elucidate and characterize additional signaling molecules participating
in the proteasomal-dependent mechanism of galeterone-induced AR
degradation. We screened a panel of 22 deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) in
vitro and demonstrated that galeterone selectively inhibited enzymatic
activity of two of the DUBs, USP12 and USP46. Separately, we used surface
plasmon resonance to demonstrate a dose-dependent direct binding of
galeterone to each of USP12 and USP46, alone or when pre-complexed with
UAF1. USP12 is a co-activator of the AR, and selective knock-down of this
DUB has been shown to increase AR degradation. USP12/USP46 have also been
linked to regulation of phosphatases (PHLPPs) through ubiquitination.
PHLPPs dephosphorylate AKT, providing an important regulatory mechanism
for controlling the PI3K/AKT pathway. It is known that galeterone induces
an increase in pAKT and pMdm2, the latter being a substrate of activated
AKT. This suggests that inhibition of USP12/USP46 may regulate pAKT
levels through enhanced degradation of PHLPPs via increased
ubiquitination. These data support a differentiating mechanism of
galeterone from other AR targeting agents whereby inhibition of
USP12/USP46 leads to enhanced AR degradation.

