Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of gene expression in high-risk B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia by Casein Kinase II


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy in
childhood. Although advances in the treatment of ALL have resulted in a
high cure rate for this disease, high-risk ALL is characterized by both
resistance to conventional chemotherapy and a poor prognosis. The
pathogenesis of high-risk ALL is still not understood. Casein Kinase II
(CK2) is an oncogenic kinase that is overexpressed in both B-cell ALL
(B-ALL) and T-cell ALL (T-ALL) and is associated with poor outcome.
Inhibition of CK2 results in a strong therapeutic effect in a preclinical
model of leukemia. However, the mechanism by which CK2 promotes
oncogenesis in leukemia is unknown. Here, we studied how CK2 regulates
expression of histone demethylase KDM5B in ALL. The KDM5B gene encodes a
histone demethylase that regulates levels of histone modification H3K4me3
in leukemia. Molecular inhibition of CK2 using shRNA that targets the CK2
catalytic subunit resulted in transcriptional repression of KDM5B in ALL
as evidenced by qRT-PCR. A similar effect was observed when leukemia
cells were treated with the CK2 inhibitor CX-4945. Inhibition of CK2
resulted in reduced expression of KDM5B with an increase in the global
cellular level of H3K4me3 as evidenced by Western blot. The use of
quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (qChIP) showed that CK2
inhibition enhances DNA binding of the Ikaros tumor suppressor to the
promoter of the KDM5B gene. Ikaros is a DNA-binding protein that
regulates transcription of its target genes via chromatin remodeling.
Loss of Ikaros function results in high-risk ALL. Serial qChIP analysis
demonstrated that the increased Ikaros binding to the KDM5B promoter
following CK2 inhibition is associated with an alteration of the
epigenetic signature at the DNA region that surrounds the Ikaros binding
site. Specifically, enhanced Ikaros binding results in increased
occupancy of the H3K27me3 histone modification, along with a reduced
occupancy of the H3K9ac histone modification at the KDM5B promoter. These
results are consistent with the formation of heterochromatin and
transcriptional repression. We tested the effect of CK2 inhibitors on
Ikaros-mediated repression of KDM5B in primary, high-risk B-ALL cells
that have a deletion of one Ikaros allele. Results showed that CK2
inhibition in high-risk B-ALL restores Ikaros binding to KDM5B promoter
and represses KDM5B transcription. These data suggest that the inhibition
of CK2 controls expression of KDM5B and the global H3K4me3 level in ALL
by regulating the function of Ikaros as a transcriptional repressor of
KDM5B. This presented data demonstrates the role of the CK2-Ikaros
signaling axis in the regulation of both gene expression and the global
epigenetic signature in ALL, and provide a mechanistic insight into the
role of CK2 in the pathogenesis of ALL.

