Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved sensitivity and in vitro efficacy of RGD grafted
PEGylated gemcitabine liposomes in RRM1 siRNA pretreated cancer cells


Aim of the study was to prepare and characterize RGD grafted PEGylated
liposomes of gemcitabine (PLGs) and to evaluate its cellular uptake, in
vitro anti-proliferative activity and apoptotic effect in siRNA
pretreated lung cancer cells.PLGs were prepared by thin film hydration
method and optimized for particle size, zeta potential and entrapment
efficiency. Functionalization of liposomes was done by coupling reaction
between DSPE mPEG and cRGD peptide by maleimide based reaction.
Similarly, RGD grafted RRM1 siRNA liposomes were also formulated and
evaluated. MTT assay was done to determine IC50 values of RGD grafted
PLGs in A549 and H1299 cancer cells which were pre-treated with RGD
grafted RRM1 siRNA loaded liposomes at a concentration of 50 pM of siRNA
for gene silencing. DNA content analysis was done by flow cytometry using
rhodamine in A549. The mode of cell death at different time and
concentration was determined by FITC-AnnexineV assay in A549 cells and
confocal microscopy was performed to assess the potential of RGD grafting
on cellular uptake.RGD conjugated and unconjugated PLGs were found Nano
sized and had negative zeta potential with entrapment of 65%. H1299 cell
line showed more amount of viable cells after 48 hr as compared to A549
cells in RGD conjugated PLGs. siRNA pre-treated PLGs exposed cells showed
significantly less IC50 values as compared to cells without siRNA
pretreatment and non-grafted liposomes. The results showed that the RGD
conjugated liposomes at the concentration of 7nM showed 46% G1 phase
arrest in siRNA pretreated cells as compared to 22% G1 phase arrest
without prior siRNA treatment at 16hr. Two types of mode of cell death
were found during the FITC-Annexine V assay. At 24 hr, the treatment with
RGD grafted PLGs resulted in 17% & 4.4% necrotic & apoptotic cell death
respectively. While at equivalent drug concentration, the PLGs and drug
solution showed 5.3% & 32.2% and 4.2% & 29.6% necrotic & apoptotic cell
death respectively. Furthermore, the apoptosis was found to be time and
concentration dependent. Results substantiate the sensitization effect by
pre-exposure of siRNA in liposomal forms at Pico molar concentration
along-with phagocytosis as mechanism of uptake of RGD-grafted
liposomes.To conclude, prior silencing of the resistance imparting gene
can manifest the effect of therapy by conferring improved sensitivity in
cancer cell lines. The effect can further be augmented by employing
receptor targeting peptides such as RGD. Hence, Nano-constructs of
chemotherapeutic drugs conjugated with RGD can effectively target lung
cancer cells and pretreatment of RRM1 siRNA can probably reduce the
limitation of drug resistance associated with lung cancer chemotherapy.

