Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matrix metalloproteinase 9 has a novel tumor suppressive role in
inflammation associated colorectal cancer by modulating intrinsic tumor
microenvironment


Colitis associated cancer (CAC) is a deadly complication of inflammatory
bowel disease, and a subtype of colon cancer. CAC malignancy progresses
through enhanced DNA damage. Observance of microsatellite instability and
chromosomal instability in non-cancer related inflammatory conditions,
supports the fact that inflammation could contribute to genomic
destabilization by generating reactive oxygen nitrogen species, producing
double strand breaks leading to DNA damage. Thus chronic colitis can
induce DNA damage and modulate DNA repair systems- components of the
intrinsic pathway to modulate tumor microenvironment. Matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the most prominent family of proteinases
associated with almost all the junctures of inflammation and
tumorigenesis. They mediate inflammation, tissue remodeling, invasion,
metastasis and tumor growth. Among the 24 known human MMPs, MMP9 is very
unique as it is undetectable in normal tissues but highly expressed in
inflamed or ulcerated tissues. We have observed that MMP9 has a
protective role in CAC, which is exclusive and contrary to its
traditional role of a facilitator in acute inflammation and sporadic
colon cancer. In this study we explore the molecular mechanism by which
MMP9 prevents DNA damage by activating tumor suppressors and DNA repair
pathways in CAC. We generated transgenic mice overexpressing MMP9 in
intestinal epithelium (TgM9) and to mimic human CAC, 3 cycles of 3% DSS
(dextran sodium sulfate, a colonic inflammation inducer) for 5 days,
followed by two weeks of recovery was used for in vivo model.
Stably-transfected HCT116 cells with/without p-EGFP-MMP9 plasmid were
used for in vitro experiments. We have observed that in CAC, TgM9 mice
had significantly decreased tumor incidence and dysplastic lesions and a
lower histological score compared to their WT littermates. TgM9 mice
exhibited increased apoptosis, protein expressions of active-Notch1,
p19ARF, p53, p21WAF1/Cip1, caspase-3 and cyclinE in CAC compared to WTs.
HCT116-cells overexpressing MMP9 indicated decreased cell proliferation.
FACS analysis indicated S-phase cell-cycle arrest and WB analysis of
phosphorylated gamma-H2AX expressions indicated less DSBs compared to
vector. HCT116 cells overexpressing MMP9 indicated increased expression
of MDC1 and mis-match repair proteins MLH1. Our study highlights two
novel findings i) MMP9 being a secretory protein activates transcellular
protein Notch1 which translocates to nucleus and activates wildtype p53
via ARF and ii) MMP9 suppresses DNA double strand breaks by activating
MMR gene- MLH1 and removing the damaged cells by apoptosis and or cell
cycle arrest. Our study highlights the paradox of using MMP9 inhibitors
in current therapies to treat CAC patients, implying that MMP9 expression
might be a natural/ biological way to suppress inflammation associated
ulceration.

