Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad analysis of recurrent somatic mutations in cancer reveals a
common novel non-coding mutation in the promoter of PMS2 associated with
greatly increased tumor mutation load


PurposeTumor mutation load is an emerging prognostic and diagnostic
marker for many cancers. Sensitivity to immunotherapeutic agents, which
stimulate an antitumor immune response by selectively inhibiting
immunosuppressive cell surface ligands, is known to correlate with high
mutation load in the tumor. Numerous somatic and germline defects can
cause genomic instability, including alterations affecting the mismatch
repair pathway, DNA polymerases, and cell cycle regulators. We describe
here the discovery of previously unreported mutations in the promoter of
the PMS2 gene that are associated with significantly increased tumor
mutation load.MethodsComprehensive genomic profiling by hybridization
capture of exonic regions from either 236 or 315 cancer-related genes and
select introns from 19 genes commonly rearranged in cancer was used to
characterize more than 60,000 clinical FFPE cancer specimens. At least 50
ng of extracted DNA was analyzed per sample and the constructed libraries
were sequenced to high, uniform median coverage (>500x). Samples were
assessed for base substitutions, short insertions and deletions, copy
number alterations and gene fusions/rearrangements. Mutation load is
assessed as the number of somatic coding point mutations per megabase of
targeted territory.ResultsMutation load from targeted cancer gene
analysis recapitulates previous results evaluating whole exome and whole
genome mutation load in tumors and cell lines. A novel mutation hotspot
was identified in the promoter of PMS2, which codes for the PMS2 protein,
a dimerization partner of MLH1 and integral to the DNA mismatch repair
complex. Promoter mutations were found in 7.5% of melanoma specimens (n =
101/1348) and 17% of skin squamous cell carcinomas (n = 30/175). In both
diseases, PMS2 promoter mutations are the most significant genomic
correlate of high mutation load. In melanoma, PMS2 promoter mutant
specimens have 4x the median mutation load of the general melanoma
population. Skin squamous cell carcinomas show a 2.5-fold increase.
Functional characterization is underway to support the hypothesis that
these mutations lead to modified PMS2 transcriptional activity, which is
known to cause hypermutation.ConclusionsThe growing corpus of cancer
genome data continues to enable novel discoveries in cancer biology.
Non-coding and regulatory mutations have not been the target of focused
study, and our findings extend the small set of regulatory mutations
thought to affect tumor development. Our discovery highlights the power
of large-scale genomic analysis to uncover additional disease mechanisms,
and furthers our understanding of how cells maintain genome integrity.
With the documented association of mutation load and immunotherapy
sensitivity, investigation into the response of PMS2 promoter mutant
tumors is warranted.

