Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The first ACT: an efficient data tracking and sharing tool for ADC
and linker-payload development


Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) are anti-cancer agents that more
selectively deliver potent cytotoxins to tumors via targeted antigens.
ADCs are modular biotherapeutics composed of antibody (Ab), linker (L),
and payload (P). The LP may be conjugated to different antibody
locations, including endogenous cysteine or lysine residues; recent
advances in conjugation technology also have enabled site-specific
conjugation to engineered cysteine, glutamine, or other sites. Pfizer has
utilized a platform approach to identify novel LPs and ADCs, hence large
numbers of linkers and payloads have been synthesized and conjugated to
many different antibodies at conventional and site-specific locations.
This has generated thousands of permutations of antibody, conjugation
site, linker, and payload. Moreover, there are large volumes of metadata
and analytical data associated with each ADC component as well as with
the final conjugated product. Hence, there is an avalanche of data that
must be tracked and accessed in order to ensure efficient decision making
and communication as ADCs advance through our biological testing funnel.
To handle this information challenge, we designed and implemented a new
ADC tracking system. First, we created a systematic nomenclature to
enable automated assignment of ADC names. ADC names are concatenated in
the format Ab-(site)_L_P. In addition, specific antibody properties are
defined within the Ab portion of the name, such as antigen, clone ID,
mutation, isotype, etc. Second, we built a Java web-start enabled desktop
application known as Antibody Conjugate Tracker (ACT). ACT integrates ADC
bioanalytical and structural information into a user-friendly interface.
The application recapitulates our synthesis and testing workflow:
antibody inventory, LP inventory, project team synthesis requests, ADC
registration, and sample physical inventory. ACT enables system-generated
ADC name assignment by defined rules as well as registration of every ADC
with corporate identifiers to allow biological data reporting. The
systematic naming allows for facile uniqueness checking, thus eliminating
possible redundancies and minimizing confusion about ADCs that use
similar components. Third, we integrated ACT with the corporate
registration system and the biological results database, allowing
seamless access of in vitro and in vivo screening data for each ADC. By
tracking both platform and program ADCs via ACT, we now have a rich
database of constructs and biological results that can be used to
interrogate structure-activity relationships (SAR) of new
linker-payloads. Overall, benefits of the ACT system include more
efficient conjugation workflows, inventory tracking, enhanced
communication among scientists from synthesis to testing, and streamlined
SAR analysis of novel linker-payloads. These efficiencies have ensured
accurate tracking and delivery of innovative ADCs into our clinical
development pipeline.

