Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin reduces growth of tumors generated from neuroblastoma
stem cells in a xenograft mouse model; role of Cdc42 in mediating the
effects


Neuroblastoma, the most common malignant childhood cancer of the
postganglionic sympathetic nervous system, is derived from the neural
crest cells. Despite the standard therapy, the mortality rate remains
high in children with neuroblastoma. Growing evidence confirm that cancer
stem cells are responsible for drug resistance, and disease relapse.
Hence targeting of cancer stem cells is an effective strategy to cure
cancer. In the present study we tested if anti-diabetic drug metformin
(N, N-dimethylbiguanide) has anti-survival effects against neuroblastoma
stem cells.Using a panel of human neuroblastoma cell lines of different
genetics- SH-SY5Y, SK-N-BE(2), IMR-32, NGP, and SK-N-F1 cells, we
demonstrated that metformin dose-dependently reduced the protein
expression of stem cell-specific transcription factors- sox2, oct4 and
nanog. Neuroblastoma cells, in stem cell specific medium, formed compact
and distinct spheroids which were enriched in stem cells. Addition of
metformin (0.5 mM and onwards) significantly inhibited initiation of
spheroids, and no spheroid formation was observed at 20 mM metformin. We
further examined if metformin interfered with self-renewal and
differentiation capacity of neuroblastoma stem cells. Our results
demonstrated that metformin-treated primary spheroids lost their ability
to form secondary spheroids in a metformin depleted medium (drug
withdrawal experiment). However, addition of pharmacological inhibitor of
Cdc42 (ML141) along with metformin increased the numbers of spheroids
suggesting involvement of Cdc42 in spheroid formation. To further test
the inhibitory effect of metformin on the tumorigenicity of neuroblastoma
stem cells, we generated subcutaneous tumors by inoculating spheroids in
athymic mice. Metformin (10, 30, and 100 mg/kg per mouse) was given daily
by oral gavage, and tumor volume was measured. The size of tumors
collected from mice fed with 30 and 100 mg/kg metformin was significantly
reduced compared to tumors from metformin-untreated mice. In these
tumors, metformin induced DNA fragmentation and apoptosis by activating
caspase-3. The presence of cleaved caspase-3 signal in both
sox2-expressing and sox2-nonexpressing cells indicated that metformin
induced cell death in both normal tumor cells and tumor stem cells. These
data validate the anti-survival activity of metformin against
neuroblastoma stem cells.The fact that metformin is non-toxic and already
approved by FDA to treat type 2 diabetes in children suggest metformin is
a novel therapeutic drug to treat neuroblastoma.

