Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multispectral optoacoustic tomography detects orthotopic
pancreatic tumors in vivo using a nano-contrast agent


There have been very modest developments in pancreatic cancer detection
and treatment with mortality essentially remaining unchanged in the last
four decades. The major challenge for both early detection and treatment
of pancreatic tumors lies in overcoming various biological barriers,
especially poor perfusion, insufficient contrast agents/drugs uptake by
the tumor, and limitations of traditional imaging modalities. The
combination of accurate real-time imaging with tumor-specific
nano-contrast agents could mitigate these impediments. We constructed
highly stable nano-contrast agents by encapsulating GNRs having aspect
ratio 3:1 in PAA (1.5 0.5 nm), and MS (6.25 0.25 nm) shell, respectively
and targeted to insulin growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1-R) positive
pancreatic tumor cells via Syndecan-1 ligand. IGF1-R specific binding of
Syndecan-MS GNRs and Syndecan-PAA-GNR was determined using in an IGF1-R
negative cell line (MiaPaca-2) or a blocking antibody to IGF1-R in
S2VP10L pancreatic cancer cells determined via flow cytometry. In vivo,
mice bearing orthotopic pancreatic tumors were iv injected with 100 nM of
Syndecan-MS GNRs and accumulation was determined four hours post
injection via Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography. Biodistribution was
determined using a Region of Interest method. The cellular uptake of
Syndecan-MS-GNRs significantly enhanced in the S2VP10L cells (503.4
counts) compared to MiaPaca-2 cells (64.1 counts), blocking agent
(323.7counts) and untargeted MS GNRs (average 47 counts) revealing that
Syndecan-MS-GNRs enhanced both tumor specificity and OA signals by
binding with IGF1-R in S2VP10L cells. In vivo, Syndecan-MS-GNRs
significantly accumulated in S2VP10L orthotopic pancreatic tumors (233.1
MSOT a.u.) with minimal accumulation in kidney(29.7 MSOT a.u.) and liver
(31.4 MSOT a.u.). The Syndecan-MS-GNRs did not accumulate within the
orthotopic MiaPaca-2 (IGF1-R negative) mouse model with the
biodistribution of pancreas tumor (12.4 MSOT a.u.), kidney (114.3 MSOT
a.u.), and liver (35.2 MSOT a.u.).

