Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of TRAIL-induced apoptotic signaling by the autophagy
receptor p62 in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells


Autophagy is an evolutionary conserved process that degrades and recycles
cellular components through the lysosomal pathway to maintain cellular
homeostasis. It has long been considered as a pro-survival mechanism to
maintain viability under stressful conditions. However, a growing body of
evidence demonstrates that autophagy could also promote or act as a
pro-death program. Autophagy plays an ambivalent role in cancer: it can
operate either as a pro-tumoral mechanism or paradoxically as an
anti-tumoral mechanism depending on the context and the stage of the
tumours, making it an interesting field of investigation.p62/SQSTM1 is an
adapter protein playing a key role during the autophagy process. It
promotes the selective degradation of ubiquitinated cellular substrates
(i.e. proteins and organelles). As a multidomain protein adapter, p62 is
involved in the regulation of various signaling pathways including those
that control cell death pathways. In this regard, p62 can directly
interact with the death receptor DR5 and promotes death receptor
induced-apoptosis through caspase 8 stabilization.Acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) is a heterogeneous disease characterized by an abnormal
proliferation of myeloblasts (precursors of myeloid white blood cells)
without differentiation. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype
of AML characterized by the translocation t(15;17)(q22;q12) which results
to the expression of the chimeric protein PML-RAR alpha. All-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) induces cancer cells differentiation and results in
complete clinical remission in APL patients. It is now used as a
first-line therapy. Despite the success of this treatment, some patients
are refractory to ATRA or relapse. Thus, new therapeutic strategies are
needed.We previously showed that ATRA-induced APL cell differentiation
was associated with autophagy induction and p62/SQSMT1 accumulation, a
response that confers a survival advantage to mature APL cells. As recent
findings showed several molecular links between p62 and extrinsic
apoptosis pathway, we decided to investigate the link between p62/SQSMT1
and cell death in AML cells upon treatment by TRAIL, an inducer of
extrinsic apoptosis. We found that p62/SQSTM1 is required for apoptotic
responses in APL cells. Our results also reveal the synergic cooperation
between TRAIL and ATRA to increase apoptosis. We are currently
investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying the role of autophagy
as well as the autophagy receptor p62/SQSM1 in TRAIL-induced apoptosis in
APL cells.

