Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CtBP1 and metabolic syndrome modulate cell adhesion and target
multiple miRNAs in breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death among women, after
skin cancers. Although genetic susceptibility clearly influences cancer
risk, non-inherited factors determine most of the differences in cancer
risk across populations and among individuals. Metabolic syndrome (MeS)
increases the incidence and aggressiveness of breast cancer. C-terminal
binding protein 1 (CtBP1) is a co-repressor of tumor suppressor genes
that is activated by low NAD+/NADH ratio. Previously, we found that both,
CtBP1 and MeS modulated breast carcinogenesis and tumor growth using a
MeS experimental mice model by chronically feeding animals with high fat
diet (HFD). The most severe form of breast cancer is metastatic and at
this stage the disease is often fatal. The aim of this work was to
investigate CtBP1 and MeS role on cell adhesion, a key process for the
establishment of metastasis. We found that CtBP1 protein diminished
adhesion of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. More important, serum from
MeS animals diminished breast cancer cell adhesion compared to control
serum. In addition nude mice fed with CD or HFD were subcutaneously
injected with MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cells with CtBP1 depleted
expression or control cells. We found that CtBP1 and MeS modulated
expression of cell adhesion targets in the xenografts, such as Vimentin,
Slug, ITGB4, Col17A1, FABP4 and PRSS2.Interestingly, miRNA expression
profile obtained by RNA from CtBP1 depleted or control xenograft tumors
hybridization to GeneChip miRNA 4.0 (Affymetrix) identified 42 CtBP1
regulated miRNAs. We found 77 predicted miRNAs target genes up- and 30
genes down-regulated by this set of 42 differentially expressed miRNAs,
using miRecords data base. Gene ontology (GO) analysis of all these genes
revealed an enrichment of localization, metabolic processes, cellular
process and biological regulation categories, among other biological
functions. Examining processes within these GO functions; we found
important categories overrepresented, such as cell cycle, cell
communication, vesicle-mediated transport and primary metabolic
process.These results clearly show that CtBP1 and MeS diminish adhesion
of breast cancer cells and suggest a key role for these components in the
begining of metastasis. In addition, understanding CtBP1 and MeS
regulation of miRNAs could be crucial as markers for the prevention,
follow up and treatment of breast cancer.

