Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the Transforming Growth Factor beta pathway in human
glioblastoma cell lines induces apoptosis and inhibits anoikis escape


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the most prevalent malignant brain tumor
accounting for 60-70% of all gliomas. Current achieved median patient
survival ranges only 12-15 months, and improvements in survival over the
last century can be measured only in weeks. A hallmark of this malignancy
is the intrinsic resistance to current therapies. The Transforming Growth
Factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway plays a key role in GBM. Several
inhibitors of different elements and regulators of the TGF-beta pathway
have entered to clinical trials.Here, we analyzed the potential effect of
P144, a TGF-beta pathway inhibitor peptide, over cell proliferation and
apoptosis in commercial GBM cell lines (A172 and U-87 MG). We found that
treatment with P144 significantly decreased cell proliferation of both
cell lines analyzed. In addition, different apoptosis determinations such
as ELISA and Acridine Orange/Ethidium Bromide (AO/EB) staining, confirmed
a significant increase in apoptosis in both cell lines.Quantification of
SMAD2 phosphorylation status and its nuclear translocation, by western
blot, confirmed the inhibition of TGF-beta signaling by P144. These data
support the correlation between TGF-beta pathway inhibition and the
apoptotic process induction.Anoikis escape sustains invasiveness and
metastatic potential in GBM, and has been established as a clear target
against tumor progression. Due to P144 clear effect on apoptosis, we
analyzed its influence on anoikis escape. The inhibition of anoikis
escape by P144 was confirmed in A172 and U-87 MG cell lines under in
vitro anchorage-independent culture conditions. The significant
upregulation of BAX, Lamin A and Lamin C produced by P144 confirmed the
induction of this apoptotic subtype process in the analyzed cell lines.We
can conclude that P144 increases apoptosis and induces anoikis through
inhibition of the TGF-beta signaling pathway. Our results highlight the
therapeutic potential of P144 for the treatment against GBM. However,
previous to further clinical development, additional studies are required
in order to confirm the effect of P144 over GBM in the brain environment,
as well as to explore the therapeutic potential of P144 in combination
with current and emerging molecular based therapies.

