Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel claudin-low molecular subtype of high-grade urothelial
bladder cancer is highly immunogenic yet immunosuppressed


Rationale: High-grade urothelial carcinoma of the bladder is a
heterogeneous disease, with molecular subtypes characterized by distinct
tumor biologies and prognoses. Our group and others have described the
basal and luminal subtypes, and we now report on the discovery of the
claudin-low subtype, all of which resemble analogous subtypes in breast
cancer.Methods: We analyzed mRNA sequencing and whole exome sequencing
data for The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) bladder tumors and tumors
collected at UNC. We performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering on
relative gene expression values with significance testing using SigClust
to identify the claudin-low subtype. Basal, luminal, and claudin-low
bladder tumors were compared for enrichment of genetic features (single
nucleotide and copy number variation), gene set expression, immune gene
signature expression, T cell receptor (TCR) and B cell receptor (BCR)
gene segment expression, and number of predicted MHC Class I and Class II
neoantigens. We further report on the first use of our VDJician software
to reconstruct full-length rearranged BCR sequences from short-read RNA
sequencing data in bladder cancer.Results: Claudin-low bladder tumors
were defined by low expression of tight junction claudin-proteins, high
expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition genes and immune gene
signatures, and were associated with reduced overall survival compared to
luminal tumors. A minimal gene set classifier to identify claudin-low
tumors showed some but not complete overlap with an optimal classifier
derived in breast cancer. Claudin-low bladder tumors were enriched for
multiple genetic features: increased rates of RB1, EP300, and NCOR1
mutations, increased frequency of EGFR amplification, decreased rates of
FGFR3, ELF3, and KDM6A mutations, and decreased frequency of PPARG
amplification. Claudin-low tumors showed the highest expression of immune
gene signatures (including an immunosuppression signature), however in
contrast to basal tumors, increased immune gene signature expression was
not associated with prolonged survival. Claudin-low tumors also showed
the highest overall expression of rearranged BCR sequences but lowest BCR
repertoire diversity. Predicted neoantigen burden did not vary
significantly by subtype, however broad cytokine and chemokine expression
levels were elevated in claudin-low tumors, potentially related to low
PPARG activity driving increased NFKB activity.Conclusions: Claudin-low
bladder cancer is a novel molecular subtype with distinct molecular and
immunologic features and prognostic significance. Given the presence of
dense immune infiltrates, BCR repertoire characteristics consistent with
an antigen-driven response, and high expression of immunosuppression
genes, claudin-low bladder tumors may be primed to respond to immune
checkpoint inhibitor therapy.

