Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The isolation of CTC from diagnostic leukapheresis


IntroductionAt present, the CellSearch system is the only validated
method for the detection of circulating tumor cells (CTC) that has been
cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. This system, designed
for the enumeration of CTC in 7.5 mL of blood, detects CTC based on their
expression of EpCAM and cytokeratins and negativity for CD45. However,
the number of CTC that are detected in patients with metastatic
carcinomas is in most cases too small to reliably determine tumor
heterogeneity and to be representative as a liquid biopsy. Our aim is to
identify and isolate a sufficient number of circulating tumor cells in
virtually all metastatic cancer patients to enable their characterization
and to represent a real-time liquid biopsy. For this purpose we used
Diagnostic LeukApheresis (DLA) to increase the blood volume to be
analyzed. We developed several techniques to isolate CTC from DLA to
enable a multicenter comparison of CTC detection in DLA
products.MethodsDLAs were performed for 1 hour to obtain 40 mL of product
containing 4 x109 mononuclear cells representing 1 liter of blood. Using
CellSearch a maximum of 2 mL of DLA could be processed for EpCAM+ CTC
(Fisher et al. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1313594110) and EpCAM- CTC (de Wit et al
doi: 10.1038/srep12270). Using filtration through microsieves with 5 m
pores a maximum of 1.0 mL of DLA could be processed. To process 18 mL DLA
product protocols were developed for leukocyte depletion using RosetteSep
(StemCell Technologies, USA) and for EpCAM selection using an anti-EpCAM
coated column (Leukocare AG). All enriched cell fractions were stained
using CD45 PerCP, Cytokeratins PE and the nuclear dye DAPI, followed by
fluorescence microscopy scanning and analysis.ResultsLeukocyte depletion
using the RosetteSep CTC Enrichment cocktail was first optimized using
small sample volumes (1 mL) spiked with cells from cancer cell lines.
Depletion of leukocytes ranged from 3.1 to 3.9 logs with an average
recovery of spiked cancer cells of 50-60%. Isolation of CTC expressing
EpCAM was pursued using anti-EpCAM coated columns and optimized for
selection and release of EpCAM expressing cells by passage of cells from
cancer cell lines through the column resulting in 34-100% recovery. Both
procedures were scaled up to enable processing of 18 mL of DLA.
Leukocytes were depleted using RosetteSepTM by 3.1 - 3.9 logs whereas
with anti-EpCAM columns only 1.7 - 1.8 logs depletion were reached. Using
RosetteSepTM 21% and with the anti-EpCAM coated columns 2% of the tumor
cells spiked into 18ml DLA were recovered.ConclusionStandard operating
procedures were developed to isolate CTC in DLA's from breast, prostate
cancer and lung cancer patients for evaluation and comparison in the EU
sponsored consortiums CTCTrap (www.utwente.nl/tnw/ctctrap/) and CANCER-ID
(www.CANCER-ID.eu). Isolation of EpCAM expressing CTC using the
anti-EpCAM coated columns will need further optimization before it can
proceed to multicenter comparison.

