Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IT-139 holds potential for combination therapy


IT-139, sodium trans-[tetrachlorobis(1H-indazole)ruthenate(III)] is a
ruthenium based small molecule that has successfully completed a phase I
clinical trial in 41 patients with mild to moderate systemic toxicities.
There were no dose limiting hematologic toxicities observed. IT-139 holds
potential for continued clinical development because of its aqueous
solubility, long half-life and manageable toxicity. Stable disease was
observed in 11 of the 41 patients of the Phase I clinical trial, but we
believe IT-139's future clinical development will be in combination
therapy. In vitro studies revealed potential for additive and synergistic
combinations. Few in vivo combination studies were completed previously
due to challenges associated with administration. Here we show that by
overcoming the administration challenges in our animal models we were
able to identify a dependable maximum tolerated dose (MTD), optimize
dosing regimens for combination xenograft efficacy studies and extend the
length of treatment in efficacy studies. In an HCT116 subcutaneous model,
increased efficacy was demonstrated when IT-139 was dosed in combination
with oxaliplatin over oxaliplatin alone. In an A549 lung carcinoma
subcutaneous model, increased efficacy was observed when IT-139 was dosed
in combination with cisplatin over cisplatin alone. Increased toxicity
from the combined treatment was observed after the initial treatment and
the chemotherapeutic dose was reduced for the duration of the study.
However, clinical pharmacokinetic results confirmed IT-139's long plasma
half-life and metabolic studies have confirmed its high affinity for
plasma proteins. Based on these data we staggered the dosing of IT-139 by
24 hrs allowing us to dose both IT-139 and a chemotherapeutic agent at
their MTDs. This dosing regimen saw an increase in efficacy in an HT-29
colorectal xenograft model treated with IT-139 and the anti-metabolite
5-FU over treatment with 5-FU alone. We also observed improved efficacy
with IT-139 dosed weekly instead of the q4d schedule, suggesting that the
pharmacokinetics of IT-139 allows less frequent dosing without
compromising efficacy. The toxicology report from IT-139 dosed at 50
mg/kg shows microscopic alterations in the liver and kidney. Minimal to
moderate hepatocellular alterations were noted in periportal regions at
48 hrs. Renal tubular necrosis was noted at 24, 48 and 72 hrs, but
tubular regeneration was noted at 48 and 72 hrs time points. In the
combination therapy (IT-139 at 50 mg/kg plus oxaliplatin) mice there were
no results in the liver and kidneys to suggest exacerbation of the noted
alterations. There were no observations of either liver or kidney
toxicity in the Phase I human study. These findings further attest to the
potential of IT-139 in combination therapy, but suggest further
investigation to identify the optimal dosing regimen. Current mechanism
of action studies will collaborate and support our in vivo studies for
the future success of IT-139's return to the clinic.

