Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulation of Hippo pathway in metastatic prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is prevalently diagnosed and more than
80% of late stage PCa patients develop bone metastases. We hypothesized
that the selective lodging of the PCa cells in the bone can be
contributed by increased RANK-mediated cell signaling network. Cancer
cell-derived RANKL orchestrates a complex bone-remodeling program
facilitating PCa bone colonization through the activation of specific
transcription factors (TFs) promoting PCa-bone microenvironment
interaction through increased epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT),
cell growth, and osteomimicry. Overexpression of RNAKL in indolent LNCaP
cells drives cancer bone and soft tissue metastases.Methods and Results:
Microarray gene expression was performed to compare RANKL- and
Neo-vector- transfected LNCaP cells, LNCaPRANKL and LNCaPneo,
respectively. qRT-PCR and western blot were performed to confirm the
expression of RANKL-targeted genes in these cells. We found the new
extracellular diffusible signal mediated by RANKL, regulating Hippo
pathway in the aggressive PCa cells. Recombinant RANKL-treated indolent
PCa cells, LNCaP and LAPC4, were shown to gain increased aggressiveness.
The RANKL-treated indolent PCa cells exhibited down-regulation of Hippo
pathway core kinases (Mst1/2 and Lats1/2) but up-regulation of YAP/TAZ
expressions. By deleting downstream effectors of Hippo pathway, YAP/TAZ,
interrupted the aggressive PCa cells to migrate, proliferate and invade
and reversed their EMT phenotype. Inhibitions of YAP/TAZ in aggressive
PCa cells via genetic knockdown approach resulted in E-cadherin increase
and Vimentin decrease. With the identification of crosstalk between Hippo
and TGF-, or Wnt pathways, this opened up a new network and targeting
opportunity for PCa bone metastasis. The metastatic PCa cells with
YAP/TAZ deletions were illustrated for sensitization to other therapeutic
agents such as TGF- inhibitors. These results prompted us to study the
mechanism, validate the functional significance, and devise potential
targeting strategies of Hippo pathway in PCa bone metastasis.Conclusions:
Our results showed that dysregulated Hippo pathway in the aggressive PCa
cells. With deletions of YAP/TAZ, PCa metastatic abilities were
inhibited. Our findings might explain why PCa cells prefer bone as
primary metastatic sites. In addition, targeting YAP/TAZ could be a
potential therapy for PCa bone metastasis.

