Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TCF7L1 constrains Wnt/-catenin signaling and tumor growth in
pancreatic cancer


Wnt/-catenin signaling plays important roles in pancreatic adenocarcinoma
(PDA) tumor initiation and progression through its promotion of various
pro-tumorigenic phenotypes. While RNF43 mutations increase Wnt signaling
activity and confer Wnt growth-dependency in a subset of PDA, other key
driver mutations in the Wnt pathway are only rarely encountered in PDA.
To gain additional insights into alternative mechanisms contributing to
increased Wnt pathway activity in PDA, we examined the expression and
activity of LEF/TCF family members, the key transcriptional binding
partners for -catenin in canonical Wnt signaling. Luciferase-based
-catenin-activated reporter (BAR) assays demonstrated variable Wnt
activity across a large panel of PDA cell lines, which was used to
dichotomize cell lines into groups with high or lower
-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription. Supervised analysis of PDA cell
line microarray data and parallel western blot analyses identified
distinct patterns of TCF/LEF expression, including increased TCF7 and
TCF7L2 (aka TCF4) expression in high BAR lines and increased TCF7L1 (aka
TCF3) expression in low BAR lines. RNAi-mediated knockdown of individual
or combinations of TCF/LEFs in PDA lines revealed TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 both
function to repress -catenin-activated reporter activity. TCF7L1 protein
was also found to be targeted for rapid downregulation following Wnt
pathway activation by treatment with either Wnt3A ligand or GSK3
inhibitor. RNAi knockdown of TCF7L1 in PDA lines increased
anchorage-independent growth and tumor cell migration in vitro and
increased in vivo PDA growth in an orthotopic xenograft tumor model. In
summary, differential patterns of TCF/LEF expression are correlated with
and functionally responsible for differences in Wnt pathway activation
and function in PDA. Furthermore, these data implicate abrogation of
TCF7L1 growth suppressive phenotypes via -catenin-mediated downregulation
of TCF7L1 as a potentially important mechanism through which Wnt
signaling promotes pancreatic tumorigenesis.

