Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diabetes medication use in association with survival among
patients of breast, colorectal, lung, and gastric cancer


Background: Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of several
cancers and overall mortality and cancer mortality. Previous studies have
suggested that metformin use may decrease cancer mortality, though
findings have been inconsistent. We examined metformin and other diabetes
medication use and survival from breast, colorectal, lung, and gastric
cancers with respect to timing of diabetes medication initiation.
Methods: Electronic medical record (EMR) data on diabetes medication use
was extracted for 2,890 participants from the Shanghai Men's Health Study
(SMHS) and Shanghai Women's Health Study (SWHS) with incident breast (n =
633), colorectal (n = 892), lung (n = 822), or gastric (n = 543) cancers
diagnosed after 2004. Individuals with and without diabetes diagnosis
were analyzed for the association between diabetes medication use
(metformin, sulfonylureas, and insulin) and cancer survival using Cox
proportional hazards models. Results: After adjustment for patient and
clinical characteristics, ever use of any diabetes medication was
associated with a decrease in all-cause mortality among all four cancer
types (HR = 0.84, 95% CI: 0.74, 0.94). Compared to non-users of any
diabetes drug, lower mortality was observed among all cancer patients who
ever took metformin (HR = 0.78, 95% CI: 0.65, 0.93) or sulfonylureas (HR
= 0.80, 95% CI: 0.69, 0.93). When stratified by initiation of diabetes
medication use with respect to cancer diagnosis, the association was
significant for both metformin and sulfonylureas use, but only among
those who initiated use after cancer diagnosis. When cancers were
analyzed individually, significant associations were observed for lung
and colorectal cancer cases for metformin or sulfonylureas use among
those who initiated use after cancer diagnosis. The inverse associations
were predominantly observed among those whose diabetes diagnosis could be
verified by EMR. Diabetes medication use was not significantly associated
with survival from breast or gastric cancer. Conclusions: Use of
metformin or sulfonylureas was associated with improved survival among
lung and colorectal cancer patients. The association was primarily
observed among those who initiated diabetes medication use after cancer
diagnosis. While a possible survival time bias can't be excluded,
additional investigation on the topic is needed given the potential
translational impact if our finding were proved to be true.

