Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing the efficacy of tosedostat through carboxylesterase
induction


Malignant cells, including acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), have high
protein turnover to support their accelerated cell growth.
Aminopeptidases regulate proteolysis, supplying free amino acids for new
protein synthesis. Inhibition of aminopeptidases depletes free amino
acids, impairing new protein production, leading to impaired cell growth
and proliferation. Hence, aminopeptidase inhibition is of particular
interest as a therapeutic strategy for AML. Tosedostat (CHR-2797) is an
aminopeptidase inhibitor which is converted to its active metabolite,
CHR-79888, by intracellular carboxylesterases (CES). This active
metabolite is poorly membrane permeable, resulting in intracellular
accumulation. Tosedostat has shown promise as a potential therapeutic
strategy for AML and is well-tolerated in adult patients. However, its
efficacy in paediatric AML has not been established. We set out to
investigate the use of tosedostat for paediatric AML and enhance its
efficacy through CES1 induction. It is hypothesised that inducing CES
will lead to increased CHR-79888 production and subsequently, increased
tosedostat efficacy. The IC50 of tosedostat across 11 AML cell lines (6
paediatric and 5 adult), determined by resazurin reduction assay, was
approximately 13M. Biochemical assays demonstrated that tosedostat
inhibited cellular aminopeptidase activity in a concentration-dependent
manner. However, this inhibitory effect was reversible with rapid, but
incomplete, enzyme activity recovery upon drug withdrawal, irrespective
of initial concentration or treatment duration. Quantitative PCR and
immunoblotting revealed no correlation between CES expression and
sensitivity to tosedostat. Cellular CES1 activity was also measured.
Benzil and Bis(4-nitrophenyl)phosphate (BNPP) were used to modulate
cellular CES1 activity. Assays of CES1 enzyme kinetics demonstrated that
following temporary exposure to the reversible CES inhibitor benzil,
there is a rebound in CES1 activity in AML cells. Consistent with this
observation, pre-treatment by benzil increased CES1 activity, especially
in MV4-11 cells. Moreover, reduced cell viability with tosedostat
treatment following benzil pre-treatment correlated with the induction of
CES1 activity in AML cell lines. Together, these data suggest that
enhanced tosedostat efficacy through induction of CES activity is a novel
therapeutic approach to treat AML.

