Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDK1 blockade overcomes intrinsic resistance to PI3K inhibition


Somatic mutations in PIK3CA, the gene encoding the isoform of PI3K
(p110), are frequent in breast cancer. These mutations lead to
constitutive activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTORC1 pathway and are a
potential therapeutic target. Despite the encouraging activity shown by
selective PI3K inhibitors in early clinical studies, many breast cancer
patients with PIK3CA-mutated tumors remain insensitive to these agents.We
have previously shown both in preclinical models and in patients
undergoing treatment with PI3K inhibitors that intrinsic resistance to
PI3K inhibition is associated with sustained mTORC1 activation despite
full AKT blockade. To elucidate how tumor cells can activate mTORC1
bypassing the AKT node, we performed a synthetic lethal RNAi screening
using a library against the human kinome and phosphatome. We found that
knockdown of phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) sensitized
resistant cell lines to PI3K blockade, preventing mTORC1 signaling. These
results were also validated by either shRNA-mediated PDK1 genetic
knockdown or using the selective PDK1 kinase inhibitor, GSK2334470. The
combination with PI3K inhibition abolished mTORC1 activity and resulted
in superior antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo.Mechanistically, the
combination of GSK2334470 with PI3K inhibition decreased the
phosphorylation of the transcription factor FOXO3 at its T32 residue,
causing its nuclear translocation, occupancy at the promoters of its
target genes, and increased transcription. Given that full suppression of
AKT activity was already achieved with PI3K inhibition alone, we
hypothesized that another kinase downstream of PDK1 is responsible for
FOXO3 phosphorylation and is inhibited upon PDK1 blockade. We
demonstrated that SGK1, an AGC kinase upstream of FOXO3 and downstream of
PDK1, is responsible for mediating resistance to PI3K inhibitors by
activating mTORC1 through the direct phosphorylation of the tumor
suppressor TSC2. Consistently, we found that SGK1 mRNA and protein levels
are higher in PIK3CA-mutant cells resistant to PI3K.Our results were
further corroborated through the characterization of the biochemical
properties of a first-in-class SGK1 kinase inhibitor. This compound, in
combination with a PI3K inhibitor, phenocopied the effects of PDK1
inhibition in all the models tested.Our findings uncover a parallel
signaling cascade triggered by PI3K pharmacological inhibition that
reconciles the sustained mTORC1 activation with lack of AKT enzymatic
activity. This offers a novel therapeutic approach for PIK3CA-mutant
breast tumors intrinsically resistant to PI3K inhibition.

