Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of DUSP4 as a tumor suppressor in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer remains one of the most lethal of all human
malignancies, with 48,960 expected new cases and 40,560 deaths predicted
in the USA in the year 2015. In order to develop novel strategies for the
management of pancreatic cancer, it is of utmost importance to intensify
our efforts to dissect the molecular mechanisms involved in the
pathophysiology of this fatal neoplasm. Dual-specificity phosphatase-4
(DUSP4), a family member of dual-specificity phosphatases, is capable of
dephosphorylating both phosphotyrosine and phosphoserine/phosphothreonine
residues and possesses activity against key signaling components of the
MAPK pathway that plays an important role in cancer growth. DUSP4 has
been shown to be widely expressed in different tissues and implicated in
cancer development, differentiation, apoptosis and inflammation. In a
recent study from our laboratory that was aimed at defining the molecular
targets of the anti-cancer plant-based alkaloid sanguinarine in
pancreatic cancer, we identified DUSP4 as a key protein modulated by
sanguinarine. Specifically, based on proteomics data and validation by
qRT-PCR and immunoblot analysis, we found that sanguinarine significantly
increases DUSP4 in BxPC-3 and MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells. Indeed,
an association of DUSP4 loss with cancer progression has been shown in
certain cancers. However, the role of DUSP4 in pancreatic cancer is not
known. This study was designed to determine the role and importance of
DUSP4 in pancreatic cancer. We determined the expression profile of DUSP4
in pancreatic cancer using immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue
microarray containing a variety of pancreatic cancers and normal
pancreatic tissues. The DUSP4-immunostaining was microscopically imaged
followed by quantification of DUSP4 protein by multispectral Vectra
system coupled with inForm software. We found a significant
downregulation of DUSP4 in human pancreatic cancer tissues, when compared
to normal pancreatic tissues. Further, to understand the importance of
DUSP4 in pancreatic cancer, we determined the effect of a force
overexpression of DUSP4 in MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells. We found
that DUSP4 overexpression in MIA PaCa-2 cells resulted in a significant
i) decrease in cell growth and proliferation, ii) clonogenic survival,
and iii) induction of apoptosis. These preliminary findings suggest a
potential tumor suppressive function of DUSP4 in pancreatic cancer.
Further detailed studies are ongoing in our laboratory to validate the
role and functional significance of DUSP4 in pancreatic cancer.

