Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor associated sialyltransferase ST6Gal-I promotes a cancer
stem cell phenotype and upregulates stem-related transcription factors


Altered glycosylation is a key hallmark of tumor cells; still, the role
of individual glycosyltransferases remains unclear. ST6Gal-I is a
tumor-associated sialyltransferase which catalyzes the addition of a
sialic acid sugar to substrate glycoproteins. Addition of the
negatively-charged sialic acid by ST6Gal-I has been shown to alter
receptor conformation, clustering, and surface retention, leading to
changes in downstream signaling. In this study we assayed ST6Gal-I by
immunohistochemistry and report the great majority of patient ovarian and
pancreatic tumors express this enzyme. In contrast, the normal epithelium
expresses minimal ST6Gal-I. Enzyme expression in ovarian cancers is
enriched during metastasis and correlates with worse progression-free and
overall survival. Recent evidence points to ST6Gal-I activity in
stem/progenitor cells. In light of this, we investigated whether ST6Gal-I
functionally promotes a cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotype, i.e. resistance
to chemotherapy, survival as tumorspheroids, and ability to initiate
tumors. We previously reported that ST6Gal-I activity confers resistance
to cisplatin; we now show its activity additionally confers resistance to
gemcitabine in pancreatic tumor cells. ST6Gal-I expressing cells are
enriched in patient derived xenografts (PDX) treated with gemcitabine
suggesting that these cells preferentially survive chemotherapy in vivo.
In addition to chemoresistance, ST6Gal-I promotes the growth of
pancreatic and ovarian cell lines in tumorspheroid culture. Moreover,
ST6Gal-I expressing primary tumor cells isolated from ovarian cancer
ascites or PDX tumors survive in tumorspheroid culture, whereas ST6Gal-I
negative cells do not. Conversely, forced expression of ST6Gal-I protects
tumor cells exposed to the ascites fluid milieu in vitro, while
non-ST6Gal-I expressing cells succumb to this inflammatory environment.
In a limiting dilution tumor initiating assay, ST6Gal-I expressing cells
have a higher tumor incidence and form larger tumors compared to cells
with ST6Gal-I knockdown. We next created a conditional mouse model with
forced ST6Gal-I expression in the intestinal tract and used AOM-DSS
chemically-induced carcinogenesis model to evaluate tumor formation.
Compared with wildtype mice, ST6Gal-I knock-in mice have a greater tumor
burden, evidenced by increased tumor number and area. As a novel
mechanistic link beteween ST6Gal-I and the CSC phenotype, direct
modulation of ST6Gal-I levels in tumor cells regulates the expression of
stem-related transcription factors, Sox9 and Slug, implicated in tumor
progression. The finding that a distinct glycosyltransferase governs the
expression of key transcription factors highlights the tumor glycome as a
driving factor in CSC behavior.

