Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel fusion transcripts identified by RNAseq cooperate with
somatic mutations in the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia


Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a highly heterogeneous disease and
somatic mutations and fusion genes have a crucial diagnostic, prognostic
and therapeutic role in AML. However, the leukemogenic potential of the
fusions, their cooperation with somatic mutations and their prognostic
role are still unknown.The aim of the study was to identify novel rare
gene fusions having a causative role in leukemogenesis and to identify
cooperative somatic mutations as potential targets for personalized
therapies in AML cases with rare and poorly described chromosomal
translocations.We performed RNAseq on bone marrow samples from 5 AML
patients (#59810, #20, #84, #21 and #32). The presence of gene fusions
was assessed with deFuse and Chimerascan. Putative fusion genes were
prioritized using Pegasus and Oncofuse to select biologically relevant
fusions. WES was performed on samples #59810, #20 and #21 and variants
were detected using the software Mutect and GATK.The CBF-MYH11 chimera
was identified in sample #84, with inv(16), thus confirming the
reliability of our analysis.Sample #59810 carried the fusion transcript
ZEB2-BCL11B (Driver Score, DS = 0.7), an in-frame fusion and a rare event
in AML associated with t(2;14). The fusion transcript showed 3 splicing
isoforms and ZEB2 and BCL11B transcripts were upregulated in patient's
blasts, compared with 53 AML samples with no chromosomal aberrations in
the 14q32 region. The WT1-CNOT2 chimera was also detected, which is a
novel out-of-frame fusion (DS = 0.008) related to t(11;12) translocation.
WES analysis showed SNVs in TET2 and BCOR genes.In sample #20 we
identified two different fusion transcripts: CPD-PXT1 (DS = 0.07), which
was the reciprocal fusion product of t(6;17) translocation, and
SAV1-GYPB, which was cryptic at cytogenetic analysis (DS = 0.8).
Interestingly, the latter fusion involved a tumour suppressor gene.
Moreover, mutations in BCOR and NRAS were detected by WES.RNAseq on
sample #21 identified a novel fusion event between chromosomes 19 and 7,
involving the genes OAZ and MAFK (DS = 0.9). The 3 partner gene is a
transcription factor, a functional class recurrently altered in AML. This
patient showed SNVs in CBL and SMC1A genes.Finally, no chimeras were
confirmed in sample #32 having a t(12;18) translocation.Our data suggest
that fusion events are frequent in AML and a number of them cannot be
detected by current cytogenetic analyses. Gene fusions cooperate with
somatic mutations in the genomic landscape driving AML pathogenesis and
its heterogeneity. Moreover, the results indicate that different
approaches, including WES, RNAseq bioinformatic and statistic tools need
to be integrated in order to identify potential targets for personalized
therapies.Acknowledgements: ELN, AIL, AIRC, progetto Regione-Universit
2010-12 (L. Bolondi), Fondazione del Monte di Bologna e Ravenna, FP7
NGS-PTL project.

