Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of putative cancer stem cell markers in fallopian tube
epithelium from women at increased risk of developing high-grade serous
ovarian cancer


Pre-neoplastic p53 signature containing lesions, termed serous tubal
intraepithelial carcinomas (STICs), have been identified in the fimbriae
of women predisposed to ovarian cancer and in patients with sporadic high
grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). These findings instigated the theory
that HGSOC originates from fallopian tube epithelium (FTE) and not from
ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), and has now become an accepted paradigm
for HGSOC genesis. However, only few studies have investigated the stem
cell niche in the human fallopian tube. Instead, most research on ovarian
cancer stem cells has focused on cells isolated from primary ovarian
tumors or cell lines.In this study we performed immunohistochemistry to
explore the presence of putative ovarian cancer stem cells in fallopian
tubes from women who had undergone a risk reducing salpingo-oophorectomy
(RRSO) due to a germline BRCA1/2 mutation and/or strong family history.
Sections of frozen tissue from 14 RRSO patients (10 BRCA1/2 mutation
carriers, 4 tested negative for BRCA1/2 mutations) were used in
immunohistochemistry for p53 and the proposed cancer stem cell markers
ALDH1, CD44, CD117, CD133, LGR5 and SOX2.Presence of a p53 signature (>12
consecutive cell nuclei in normal appearing FTE) was observed in 1 of 10
BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and none of the non-carriers. ALDH1 and CD44
positive staining of varying intensity was found in both FTE cells and
stromal cells within the fallopian tube mucosa in all cases. On the other
hand, no CD117 positive epithelial cells were observed in any of the
samples, though strongly stained CD117+ mast cells were present in all
sections. Most FTE cells were weakly positive for CD133 in all sections,
while only one case showed positive LGR5 staining of FTE cells. Finally,
SOX2 positive FTE cells were found in all samples. In most cases, the
fimbriated end of the fallopian tube harbored more SOX2 positive cells
than the more proximal end.This is an initial attempt at visualizing
proposed ovarian cancer stem cells in the fallopian tubes of women
predisposed to developing HGSOC. Further research is needed to validate
the significance of these findings, including investigating additional
markers, testing different antibodies and performing multiple labeling
experiments. Based on the currently prevailing theory that HGSOC
originates from STICs in the fimbriated end of the fallopian tube, we
find SOX2 to be the most promising candidate for further investigations,
since SOX2 was the only marker found to be differentially expressed
throughout the fallopian tube. Elucidating the cell of origin and
etiology of HGSOC has important implications for early detection and
preventive therapeutic approaches.

