Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induced Sprouty4 expression in breast invasive ductal carcinoma
cells downregulates ERK/MAPK activity and restores an epithelial-like
phenotype


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in U.S. women, with
approximately 25% of these cases being in situ disease. Sprouty proteins
are currently recognized as important regulators of ERK/MAPK signaling,
and have been studied in various cancer types. By employing RNA-seq,
previous studies from our laboratories determined specific gene
expression changes common to three models of ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS)MCF10.DCIS, SUM 102, and SUM 225when compared to MCF10A cells (a
model of non-transformed breast epithelium). All cell lines were grown in
three-dimensional (3D) reconstituted basement membrane overlay culture
because research has shown that the behavior of cancer cells in 3D
matrices is more reflective of an in vivo response when exposed to drugs
and radiotherapy than if they are cultured on plastic. Among the three
models of DCIS, 63 genes were consistently upregulated. We identified 244
promoters associated with these 63 genes and performed bioinformatic data
mining that revealed a high level of enrichment for a promoter framework
shared by three of these genes: one of which encoded for the protein
Sprouty4. We hypothesize that Sprouty4 is an endogenous inhibitor of
ERK/MAPK signaling in DCIS, and its loss or reduced expression is a
mechanism by which triple-negative lesions progress toward invasive
ductal carcinoma (IDC). Using immunohistochemistry we found that Sprouty4
was highly expressed in certain human premalignant breast tissue samples,
and that this expression was reduced in malignant triple-negative
samples. These results correspond with immunoblot data from our 3D
culture model of breast cancer progression in which Sprouty4 expression
was higher during DCIS than in the IDC stage. Efficient over-expression
of Sprouty4 reduced both ERK/MAPK activity as well as the aggressive
phenotype of MCF10.CA1d IDC cells. Immunofluorescence experiments
revealed data consistent with the relocation of E-cadherin back to the
cell surface and the restoration of adherens. To determine if these
effects were due to changes in ERK/MAPK signaling IDC cells were treated
with MEK162, an allosteric MEK inhibitor. Nanomolar concentrations of
drug produced a restoration of an epithelial-like phenotype similar to
Sprouty4 over-expression. From these data we conclude that Sprouty4 may
act to control ERK/MAPK signaling in a subset of DCIS, thus limiting the
progression of these premalignant breast cancers.

