Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemopreventive potential of silver nanoparticles against
UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis in mouse model


Solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation, particularly its UVB component, is an
established cause of human skin carcinogenesis due to its ability to
cause DNA damage in skin cells. Although several sunscreen formulations
have been developed and commercialized to limit or minimize UVB exposure
to skin cells, incidence of skin cancer has continued to increase
suggesting their limited or no efficacy in preventing UV-induced skin
cancer occurrence. Recently, we revealed the potential of silver
nanoparticles (AgNPs; 50 nm) against UVB radiation-induced DNA damage in
human keratinocytes (HaCaT). Here we performed preclinical evaluation of
chemopreventive efficacy of AgNPs against UVB-induced skin tumorigenesis
in SKH-1 hairless mouse model. The different concentrations (20 and 40
mg/kg) of AgNPs mixed with hydrophilic cream base were uniformly applied
topically onto the dorsal area of mouse skin prior to UVB-irradiation to
assess chemopreventive efficacy for several weeks. The UVB treatment
group showed tumor formation within 13 weeks, and had high incidence
(93.3%) rate by the end of the study (29 weeks). Interestingly, the
pretreatment of mice with AgNPs significantly increased the latency
period (6-9 weeks) of UVB-induced tumor formation. Moreover, overall
tumor incidence was found to be significantly decreased (50 and 78%; in
20 and 40 mg/kg respectively) as compared to AgNPs-untreated mice. Tumor
multiplicity and average tumor volume/tumor-bearing mouse were also
observed to be significantly reduced in AgNPs-treated mice. Additionally,
AgNPs treatment alone for 29 weeks did not induce any apparent signs of
toxicity and changes in the body weight suggesting the safety of AgNPs.
Altogether, these findings suggest that AgNPs are potential
chemopreventive agents against UVB radiation-induced skin carcinogenesis
and thus opening the ways for human applications.

