Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cis and trans quantitative trait loci for MGMT promoter
hypermethylation detected in lung exfoliated cells collected in sputum
from smokers


O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is a DNA repair enzyme that
protects cells from carcinogenic effects of alkylating agents; however,
MGMT is silenced by promoter hypermethylation during carcinogenesis.
Concomitant methylation of a panel of cancer-relevant genes including
MGMT detected in lung epithelial cells present in sputum predicts risk
for subsequent lung cancer incidence in moderate and heavy smokers. In
addition, MGMT methylation is also a prognostic biomarker for response of
glioblastoma patients to the alkylating agent temozolomide. A single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs16906252, G/A) in an enhancer in the MGMT
promoter was previously identified to be highly significantly associated
with risk for MGMT methylation in lung cancer and sputum from smokers.
The predisposition of the A allele for methylation in heterozygotes was
due to the reduced gene transcription in luciferase reporter assay. In
silico bioinformatics analysis suggested that rs16906252 was the causal
cis-acting methylation quantitative trait locus for MGMT. We are current
applying a cutting edge technology Hybridization Capture of
Chromatin-Associated Proteins for Proteomics to identify the
transcriptional factors whose binding was disrupted by rs16906252. To
further genetic investigations, a genome-wide association and replication
study was conducted in two smoker cohorts to identify novel loci for MGMT
methylation in sputum that were independent of the MGMT enhancer
polymorphism. Two novel trans-acting loci (15q15.2 and 17q24.3) that were
identified acted together with the enhancer SNP to empower risk
prediction for MGMT methylation. We found that the predisposition to MGMT
methylation arising from the 15q15.2 locus involved regulation of the
ubiquitin protein ligase E3 component UBR1. UBR1 attenuation reduced
turnover of MGMT protein and increased repair of O6-methylguanine in
nitrosomethylurea-treated human bronchial epithelial cells, while also
reducing MGMT promoter activity and abolishing MGMT induction. Overall,
our results substantiate reduced gene transcription as a major mechanism
for predisposition to MGMT methylation in the lungs of smokers, and
support the importance of UBR1 in regulating MGMT homeostasis and DNA
repair of alkylated DNA adducts in cells. In addition, genetic
polymorphisms that affect DNA methylation of the DNA repair gene MGMT
have strong clinical relevance in smokers, not only for cancer risk
assessment but also for stratification of lung cancer patients for
alkylating agent chemotherapy. (Supported by NIH grant R01 CA097356 and
NIH/NCI grant P30 CA118100).

