Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Domestic livestock exposure and lung cancer risk among non-smoking
women in Xuanwei, China


Background: Lung cancer rates of women in Xuanwei and Fuyuan, rural
counties located in the Yunnan Province, are among the highest in China,
even though most women there are non-smokers. The unusually high lung
cancer rates are mainly attributed to smoky (i.e. bituminous) coal
exposures. Many households there and in other rural parts of China have
raised animals such as pigs, cows, horses, chickens and ducks in close
proximity to their homes. It is hypothesized that contact with animals
increases the risk of infection with potentially carcinogenic pathogens.
However, findings on the association between livestock and poultry
exposures and lung cancer risk, mostly from occupational studies, have
been inconsistent.Objective: To investigate the association between
livestock and poultry exposures and lung cancer risk in a general
population of non-smoking women who lived in close proximity to livestock
and poultry in a rural area in China.Methods: A hospital-based
case-control study among non-smoking women was conducted in Xuanwei and
Fuyuan counties in China between March 2006 and July 2013. A total of
1,074 lung cancer cases and 977 hospital-based cancer-free controls were
enrolled. Exposure to livestock and poultry, including the animal type
(pigs, cows/horses, chickens, ducks) and total number of years an
individual was exposed to each animal type, was obtained by
questionnaire. Reference groups for the analysis were either
never-exposed, or never-exposed combined with those with less than the
median years of exposure, depending on the prevalence of exposure to each
animal. Logistic regression was used to estimate the odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of the association between livestock
and poultry exposures and lung cancer risk with adjustment for potential
confounders, such as lifetime amount of smoky coal used and passive
smoking.Results: Individuals with above the median number of years of
exposure to pigs (OR = 1.61, 95% CI = 1.19-2.17) and chickens (OR = 1.49,
95% CI = 1.12-1.99) had increased lung cancer risk, compared to those who
had less than the median years of exposure. Compared to those who were
never exposed, the risk of lung cancer increased with longer duration of
exposure to cows/horses (Background: Lung cancer rates of women in
Xuanwei and Fuyuan, rural counties located in the Yunnan Province, are
among the highest in China, even though most women there are non-smokers.
The unusually high lung cancer rates are mainly attributed to smoky (i.e.
bituminous) coal exposures. Many households there and in other rural
parts of China have raised animals such as pigs, cows, horses, chickens
and ducks in close proximity to their homes. It is hypothesized that
contact with animals increases the risk of infection with potentially
carcinogenic pathogens. However, findings on the association between
livestock and poultry exposures and lung cancer risk, mostly from
occupational studies, have been inconsistent.Objective: To investigate
the association between livestock and poultry exposures and lung cancer
risk in a general population of non-smoking women who lived in close
proximity to livestock and poultry in a rural area in China.Methods: A
hospital-based case-control study among non-smoking women was conducted
in Xuanwei and Fuyuan counties in China between March 2006 and July 2013.
A total of 1,074 lung cancer cases and 977 hospital-based cancer-free
controls were enrolled. Exposure to livestock and poultry, including the
animal type (pigs, cows/horses, chickens, ducks) and total number of
years an individual was exposed to each animal type, was obtained by
questionnaire. Reference groups for the analysis were either
never-exposed, or never-exposed combined with those with less than the
median years of exposure, depending on the prevalence of exposure to each
animal. Logistic regression was used to estimate the odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of the association between livestock
and poultry exposures and lung cancer risk with adjustment for potential
confounders, such as lifetime amount of smoky coal used and passive
smoking.Results: Individuals with above the median number of years of
exposure to pigs (OR = 1.61, 95% CI = 1.19-2.17) and chickens (OR = 1.49,
95% CI = 1.12-1.99) had increased lung cancer risk, compared to those who
had less than the median years of exposure. Compared to those who were
never exposed, the risk of lung cancer increased with longer duration of
exposure to cows/horses (<median years of exposure: OR = 1.33, 95% CI =
1.00-1.77; median years of exposure: OR = 1.38, 95% CI = 1.03-1.86). The
significant associations for pigs and cows/horses persisted after
adjusting for other animal exposures in the same model.Conclusions:
Exposure to certain animals was significantly associated with increased
lung cancer risk, suggesting that infectious agents may play a role in
the etiology of lung cancer among non-smoking women in this region.
However, due to the fact that this study was conducted in an area with a
high risk of lung cancer due to the use of solid fuels for heating and
cooking, we cannot rule out residual confounding.

