Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of resistance to IGFR-targeted therapy in pediatric
sarcomas


Background: Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGFR) signaling
promotes tumorigenic properties which makes targeting IGFR an attractive
therapeutic target. IGF signaling has been linked to proliferation,
survival, angiogenesis, metastasis and resistance to anticancer
therapies, and contributes to pediatric malignancies including Ewing
sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma. Recently, monoclonal antibodies targeting
IGFR have shown promise in a limited number of sarcoma patients. A
substantial proportion of patients demonstrate intrinsic resistance, and
those that do respond will often lose clinical benefit (acquired
resistance). Intrinsic and acquired resistance ultimately results in
failure to respond to treatment and continued growth of the tumor.
Understanding these resistance mechanisms will identify combinations of
targeted therapy to optimize therapeutic efficiency of this targeted
agent.Methods: To test intrinsic and acquired mechanisms of resistance,
we utilized Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) Arrays to analyze the
phosphorylation status of 49 RTKs. For intrinsic resistance, we used a
panel of Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) cell lines that are unresponsive to TZ1, a
monoclonal antibody that targets IGFR. For acquired resistance, we
developed a TZ1 resistant rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cell line from TZ1
sensitive RH41 cells. The cell lines were treated with TZ1, an anti-IGFR
monoclonal antibody. Signaling changes were assessed by comparing
phosphorylation status of the RTKs in the untreated versus treated cells
in the inherent resistance model and in the parental versus resistant
cells in the acquired resistance model. Results: TZ-1 treatment of the
EWS cell lines with intrinsic resistance decreased pIGFR, but these cells
were characterized by expression of multiple phosphorylated RTKs. In the
Rh41 acquired resistance model, increased activation of signaling
pathways was detected in the resistance cells including: AXL, PDGFR,
FGFR4 and ALK. Treatment of parental Rh41 cells with TZ1 also rapidly
induced several activated RTKs. In TZ1-resistant Rh41 cells combined
treatment of TZ1 with the PDGFR inhibitor, crenolanib, and the pan-FGFR
inhibitor LY2874455 resulted in significant decrease in cellular
proliferation.Conclusions: Intrinsic resistance to TZ1 in EWS cell lines
appears to be due to redundancy through multiple alternative activated
RTKs. Systematic knockdown to determine which activated RTKs confer
resistance is being undertaken. In Rh41 RMS cells acquired resistance to
TZ1 is characterized by induction of several alternative activated RTKs,
some of which are induced rapidly after TZ1 exposure. Combined treatment
with TZ1 and drugs targeting PDGFR and FGFR was effective at overcoming
resistance. These results suggest that identification of signaling
pathways that compensate for IGFR inhibition can lead to effective potent
multi-target combination therapy. Supported by USPHS Grant CA165995.

