Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer pulmonary metastasis treatment with
lung-selective delivery of PAN-class I PI3K inhibitors


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer death in
the US, and its frequency is increasing worldwide. Phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling is an important therapeutic target that is
currently being evaluated in multiple clinical trials. The purpose of
this study was to: i) determine expression of pAkt (Ser473), Akt1 and
Akt2 in primary and metastatic CRCs, and ii) evaluate lung-selective
delivery of PI3K inhibitors as a novel therapeutic approach against CRC
lung metastasis. METHODS. i) To determine the expression of PI3K/Akt
pathway components, we obtained primary CRCs (n = 12) and CRC lung
metastases (n = 10). Akt1, Akt2 and pAkt (S473) expression was analyzed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and blindly scored by a pathologist. ii) To
confirm lung-selective nanoparticle accumulation, we used two methods.
First, polymeric nanoparticles were constructed and loaded with
fluorescent dye (Alexa547). IVIS Spectrum imaging and confocal imaging of
frozen tissue sections was used to determine distribution of
fluorescently-labeled nanoparticles after intravenous administration (50
g/g; 300 l). Second, polymeric nanoparticles were loaded with either
wortmannin, PX866, BEZ235, PIK-90, ZSTK474 or GDC-094 and administered
intravenously. Western blot analysis of protein extracts from lung,
liver, spleen and kidney for pAkt (Ser473) expression was used to
determine PI3K pathway inhibition. iii) The anti-metastatic potential of
PI3K drug-loaded lung-selective nanoparticles was evaluated in a
preclinical model of CRC lung metastasis. RESULTS. i) We found strong
Akt2 and pAkt (S473) expression in all primary and metastatic lung CRC
patient samples. ii) We confirmed lung-selective accumulation of
fluorescent nanoparticles and absence of fluorescent nanoparticle
accumulation in liver, spleen and kidney. Lung-selective drug delivery
was confirmed by western blot analysis of PI3K pathway inhibition in
protein extracts from lung, liver, spleen and kidney after a single (10
g/g; 300 l) intravenous administration of drug-loaded nanoparticles. PI3K
pathway inhibition was observed only in lung tissue samples. iii) Mice
with established lung metastases were treated with PI3K drug-loaded
nanoparticles daily (10 g/g; 300 l). Treatment in vivo with wortmannin
and PX866 showed marked suppression of CRC lung metastatic growth.
BEZ235, PIK-90, ZSTK474 or GDC-0941 had no significant effect on growth
in metastatic CRC to the lung when delivered by nanoparticles.
CONCLUSIONS. We developed a safe and efficient lung selective drug
nanocarrier and evaluated lung selective PI3K inhibition as a viable
treatment strategy. Treatment of CRC lung metastasis with pan-PI3K-loaded
nanoparticles demonstrated a marked suppression of metastatic lung
growth, and suggests that lung selective PI3K inhibition is a viable
treatment strategy for CRC lung metastasis.

