Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATAD2 mediates DNA replication in cancer


ATAD2 (ATPase family AAA domain-containing protein 2) is an epigenetic
regulator which associates with chromatin through its Bromodomain
specialized in Acetyl-Lys binding of histones. ATAD2 was also shown to
directly associate with multiple transcription factors such as ER, AR,
E2F and MYC, and is believed to function as an oncogenic transcription
factor in breast cancer.Here, we propose that ATAD2 facilitates DNA
replication. ATAD2 is specifically expressed in S and G2 phase during
which it co-localizes with newly synthesized DNA. We found ATAD2 on
nascent chromatin together with newly synthesized histone H4 acetylated
on K12 and Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA), a central protein
coupling replication with chromatin restoration, but not on
post-replicative chromatin. In line with these observations depletion of
ATAD2 by siRNA led to reduced DNA replication, perturbed loading of PCNA
onto chromatin and inhibition of cell proliferation. Interestingly, a
brief cycloheximide treatment of the cells to prevent the deposition of
newly synthesized histones (e.g. H4K5,12diac) abrogated the recruitment
of ATAD2 to nascent chromatin suggesting that ATAD2 might recognize and
interact with these histone marks. Indeed, extensive biochemical and
biophysical analyses involving TR-FRET, MST (MicroScale Thermophresis),
Biocore, and NMR revealed that the bromodomain of ATAD2 preferentially
interacts with these marks characteristic of newly synthesized histones.
Consequently, overexpression of ATAD2 mutants unable to interact with
these marks impaired DNA replication and recruitment of PCNA onto
chromatin. Taken together, our data suggest that ATAD2 is essential for
DNA replication and thus predicts that it is expressed in cells
undergoing S phase. To further strengthen this hypothesis we compared the
expression of ATAD2 with the proliferation marker Ki67, and the late S
and G2/M marker TOP2A, in various cancer types such as colorectal,
gastric, lung, prostate and breast cancers by immunohistochemistry.
Indeed ATAD2 expression was restricted to Ki67 and TOP2A expressing areas
of tumors, independent of cancer type. Moreover, aggressive tumors, such
as triple negative breast cancer and metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer, showed more intense and abundant expression of ATAD2
whereas slow-growing tumors showed low expression of ATAD2. This research
identifies a role for ATAD2 in replication, providing mechanistic and
translational support for therapeutic development in cancer.

