Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of TLR/IRAK pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma
augmented therapeutic responses


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most lethal cancer
worldwide. Frequent relapse and drug resistance accounts for the poor
prognosis, which could be attributed by the presence of cancer stem cells
(CSCs), a subpopulation that harbor the properties of self-renewal,
clonal tumor initiation and long-term repopulation capacity. Toll like
receptors (TLRs) are widely expressed on immune cells and
TLR/Interleukin-1 receptor associated kinase (IRAK) pathway was
originally best known for their role in the induction of innate immune
responses, but it was recently found to be frequently up-regulated in
various cancers, although its role in cancer development remains largely
unexplored.By RNA sequencing analysis of 16 pairs of HCC clinical
samples, we found IRAK1 to be significantly overexpressed in HCC among
all members of IRAK family. By quantitative PCR and western blot
analyses, overexpression of IRAK1 at both mRNA and protein level was
confirmed, which correlated with advanced tumor stage (p = 0.04). By
lentiviral-based over-expression and knockdown approaches, we
demonstrated that IRAK1 promoted cell proliferation and invasiveness.
Interestingly, IRAK1 regulated CSC properties including tumorigenicity,
self-renewal, drug resistance and expression of liver CSC markers
including CD24 and CD47. To further examine the therapeutic potentials of
targeting IRAK1 in HCC, we treated HCC cells with IRAK1/4 inhibitor.
Suppression of IRAK1 at 10M not only consistently inhibited CSC
properties, but also augmented the effect of sorafenib, a molecularly
targeted drug for treatment of advanced HCC. The cancer-promoting and
drug desensitization effect of IRAK1 could be partly explained by
activation of NF-B signaling pathway as well as down-regulation of
apoptotic cascade.Conclusion:Overexpression of IRAK1 in HCC promotes
cancer progression by enhancing proliferation and invasiveness;
Importantly, IRAK1 may promote cancer stemness and confers resistance to
sorafenib. All in all, targeting IRAK1 with specific small molecule
inhibitor alone or in combination with other drugs may be a novel
therapeutic regimen for treatment of HCC.

