Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenografts as validation material for NGS assays:
Analysis of genetic homogeneity


Full process controls and validation materials for next generation
sequencing (NGS)-based molecular diagnostics in Oncology that mimic a
biopsy sample and are renewable and scalable have been elusive.
Patient-derived Xenografts (PDXs), which are similar in morphology and
somatic mutations to original tumors, may present a solution to this
pressing need.In order to evaluate the abilities of PDXs to serve as full
process controls and validation materials, we had PDXs that contained
established driver mutations KRAS G12C analyzed by clinical laboratories
using a variety of different NGS-based assays. The resulting data was
analyzed for genetic homogeneity as well as for the presence of
mouse-derived variants.PDXs were found to be generally compatible with
NGS-based assays and similar variant frequencies of driver mutations were
reported. High concordance was also observed in variant frequencies of
PDXs at passage 5 that were derived from the same tumor but grown in
different mice. For example, the observed differences in over 90% of
variants and all driver mutations were not statistically significant.In
amplicon-based assays, which represent the majority of current assays
that look at mutational hotspots, mouse-derived variants were rare.
Typically, variant data was usable without any further processing. In
hybrid/capture-based assays, mouse-derived variants were common because
of the lower binding stringency used by these assays. Without further
processing, this manifested in slightly lowered variant frequencies for
driver mutations - where wild-type reference sequences are often
conserved between species and thus inflate the number of reference
sequences - and greatly elevated numbers of total variants. However, by
processing the data at the FASTQ stage using in-house developed software,
it was possible to effectively remove mouse-derived variants in a manner
that would be compatible with patient testing as well.In conclusion, we
show that PDXs are compatible with NGS-based assays and can be used to
control the full process from the point where the Pathologist first fixes
the tissue. Those containing driver mutations that have been previously
characterized in cancer also enable laboratories to control and validate
their assays by showing that they can consistently detect these mutations.

