Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Harnessing system xCT- to target mutant p53 cancer cells


p53, a critical tumour suppressor is mutated in over half of all human
cancers. The loss of wild-type p53 activity together with oncogenic
gain-of-function, secondary to aberrant accumulation of mutant p53
protein frequently results in aggressive tumour phenotype, resistance to
conventional therapies and poor survival. Therefore, effective
therapeutic strategies to target mutant p53 cancer cells remain an urgent
and unmet medical need. Here we show that mutant p53 accumulation across
multiple tumour types represses the transcription of SLC7A11, a key
component of system xCT-, resulting in reduced cystine uptake, lowering
endogenous glutathione stores and predisposing cells to oxidative damage.
Notably, genetic knockdown or pharmacological inhibition (erastin and
sulfasalazine) of system xCT- preferentially induces apoptosis in cancer
cells with mutant p53 accumulation. Moreover, we found that APR-246
(PRIMA-1met), a first-in-class reactivator of mutant p53 currently in
early clinical trials, depletes cellular glutathione and induces
significantly higher amounts of reactive oxygen species in mutant p53
cancer cells compared with normal cells. This leads to lipid peroxidation
of mitochondrial membranes and the release of matrix contents,
culminating in apoptotic cell death. Conversely, APR-246-induced
cytotoxicity could be rescued by cysteine or glutathione replacement, or
with lipophilic antioxidants. In extension, we identified and
functionally validated SLC7A11 expression as a specific predictive
biomarker for APR-246. Importantly, we demonstrate that antagonising
system xCT- activity in combination with APR-246 selectively and
synergistically inhibit mutant p53 cancer cells. Together, our findings
propose that accumulation of mutant p53 protein in cancer cells, through
its repressive effects on SLC7A11 expression, creates an Achilles heel
that can be targeted by further perturbations of the glutathione pathway.

