Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A translational investigation of piRNAs in glioblastoma multiforme


Background: PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are highly abundant small
noncoding RNAs that partner with PIWI proteins to protect germline
tissues from destabilizing transposon activity. While aberrant expression
of PIWI proteins has been linked with poor outcomes for many cancer
types, far less is known about the expression or function of piRNAs in a
cancer context. Here we provide evidence supporting a novel role of
piRNAs in gliomagenesis that may be leveraged for therapeutic
benefit.Methods: In order to characterize piRNA expression patterns in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), we performed array-based piRNA expression
profiling in seven pairs of human normal and tumor tissue specimens with
validation by qPCR. In vitro (cellular proliferation, colony formation,
cell cycle, apoptosis, transcriptional profiling) and in vivo (orthotopic
xenograft mouse model) assays were performed to characterize the
phenotypic impact of differentially expressed piRNAs using cell line
models of GBM. For all functional experiments, synthetic piRNA mimics or
negative control oligos were transiently delivered into cells via
Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent.Results: piRNA profiling
revealed expression of over 350 piRNAs in both normal and tumor brain
tissues including several with dysregulated expression in GBM tissue.
Individual transfection of four down-regulated piRNA mimics revealed
antiproliferative effects on glioma cells, consistent with
tumor-suppressive roles. Notably, two other piRNAs that were expressed at
equivalent levels in tumor and normal tissues did not affect cell
proliferation when delivered into glioma cells, indicating specificity of
piRNA functionality. Upregulation of the most underexpressed piRNA
(10-fold lower expression in GBM tissue) was found to induce cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis and to alter transcriptional levels of several genes
involved in cell stress and survival pathways in glioma cell lines, yet
it did not affect normal astrocyte proliferation. Finally, the volume of
intracranial mouse xenograft tumors was significantly reduced for
approximately two weeks after pre-implantation cell transfection with the
piRNA as compared to negative control RNA, and median survival was
extended by two days for piRNA-treated mice (n = 9/treatment
group).Conclusions: Although piRNAs have not traditionally been thought
to be expressed in healthy somatic tissues, our results are consistent
with recent studies that have detected expression of a similar number of
piRNAs in other normal tissues. Our results show that a subset of these
piRNAs exhibit dysregulated expression in GBM and have cancer-relevant
phenotypic properties in glioma cell line and mouse models. Taken
together, our study reveals a previously unidentified functional role for
piRNAs as tumor suppressors in gliomagenesis, and suggests that
restoration of normal piRNA levels may be a viable GBM therapy.

