Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel insights into the cellular function and gene regulation of a
master mutator, APOBEC3B


Unequivocally, cumulative mutations are required for the development of
cancer and many sources of mutagenic activity contribute to
tumorigenesis. Recent evidence has implicated that a member of cytidine
deaminase family, APOBEC3B (Apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme,
catalytic polypeptide-like 3B or A3B) is enriched in the genomes of many
human cancers such as cervical, bladder, lung, head and neck and breast
cancers (Burns et al., Nature, 2013). APOBEC3B deaminate cytosines in the
host genome to generate C-T mutations. Here we report for the first time
that APOBEC3B is overexpressed with adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC), a
very aggressive and lethal malignancy. We found that APOBEC3B is
significantly overexpressed in primary and metastatic ACC as compared to
normal adrenal and cortical adenomas by qPCR, immunofluorescence. We
observed that H2AX, a marker of DNA double-strand breaks co-localizes
with the expression of APOBEC3B in patients with primary and metastatic
ACC. Also ACC tumor samples with high APOBEC3B expression had high
chromosomal gain/loss particularly in chromosome 4 and 8 compared to
tumor samples with low APOBEC3B expression. To identify the cellular
function of APOBEC3B, we performed transient knock-down studies in three
ACC cell lines and found that it reduces cellular proliferation and
induces cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, we observed that knockdown of
APOBEC3B inhibits MAPK signaling by downregulating phospho ERK1/2 levels.
Interestingly, we found that tumors with high APOBEC3B expression levels
had twice as many TP53 inactivating mutations as compared to tumors with
low levels of APOBEC3B. In order to understand the regulation of APOBEC3B
expression, we analyzed the methylation status, copy number variation and
potential targeting miRNAs of APOBEC3B from genome wide array platform
but found no associations in human ACC samples. Therefore, we did a
functional, knockdown screen of 90 cancer-associated transcription
factors and found that GATA3 showed positive regulation of APOBEC3B. Our
data provide novel insights into the function and regulation of APOBEC3B
expression beyond its known mutagenic ability.

