Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Normal tissue and data resources for cancer research from the GTEx
program


The NIH Common Fund's Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project aims to
study gene expression and regulation across multiple human tissues from
approximately 1000 healthy normal postmortem donors. GTEx will provide
valuable insights into gene regulation and its tissue specificity, to
identify correlations between genetic variations and variations in gene
expression levels as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), and to
help understand inherited susceptibility to disease.Initiated in 2010,
the GTEx program has generated a large volume of data associated with
each donor, including clinical and histopathological, as well as
genotyping and gene expression data from whole genome sequencing, whole
exome sequencing, expression array, and RNAseq data. The program has
published research results in multiple scientific journals over the past
year.The following public resources are available from the GTEx
program:1. GTEx Portal: an open access database of GTEx expression data
and analysis results: http://www.gtexportal.org2. Database of Genotypes
and Phenotypes (dbGaP): controlled access of comprehensive GTEx clinical
data and raw sequencing data: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap3. Access to
residual GTEx biospecimens for research:
http://www.gtexportal.org/home/samplesPage4. SOPs and best practices from
GTEx biospecimen collections:
http://biospecimens.cancer.gov/resources/sops/library.asp5. GTEx
histological image viewer:
http://biospecimens.cancer.gov/resources/tissue_image_library.asp6. GTEx
donors families website: a lay description of the GTEx project tailored
to the GTEx donors families: http://www.genome.gov/gtexGTEx data can be
used in combination with other data sets such as The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to further explore the
genetic causes and biology of cancer. The eQTL data from multiple tissues
will help prioritize candidate genes within GWAS-associated loci; allow
evaluation of tissue specificity of associated loci, and pinpoint target
tissues for disease studies. Researchers are using GTEx resources to:
study cancer heterogeneity by subtracting normal tissue expression;
identify mutations in protein-truncating variants which may cause cancer;
and explore gene activity from multiple donors across multiple tissue
types to better understand the age/gender bias in cancer and other
diseases.

