Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of retinoblastoma protein dysregulates HIF1-mediated genetic
programs, and promotes tumor cell invasiveness and neuroendocrine
differentiation in prostate cancer cells


Loss of tumour suppressor proteins, such as the retinoblastoma protein
(Rb), results in tumour progression and metastasis. Metastasis is
facilitated by low oxygen availability within the tumour that is detected
by hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs). The HIF1 complex, HIF1 and its
dimerization partner the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT), is the master regulator of the hypoxic response. Previously, we
demonstrated that Rb represses the transcriptional response to hypoxia by
virtue of its association with HIF1. In this report, we further
characterized the role of Rb in HIF1-regulated genetic programs by stably
ablating Rb expression with retrovirally-introduced short hairpin RNA in
LNCaP and 22rV1 human prostate cancer cells. DNA microarray analysis
revealed that Rb regulates specific chromosomal gene clusters and loss of
Rb in conjunction with hypoxia leads to dysregulation of HIF1-regulated
genetic programs that promote cell invasion and neuroendocrine
differentiation. Gene ontology analysis of the hypoxia-inducible genes
sensitive to loss of Rb revealed that a significant portion of these
genes are involved in neuroendocrine differentiation (NED), specifically
ENO2, KISS1R and HTR5A. ENO2 is the bonafide marker of neuroendocrine
differentiation and it's presence is a signature of late stage castrate
resistant prostate cancer. Furthermore, we have functional evidence
KISS1R is linked to intracellular calcium mobilization in 22RV1 cells. We
have demonstrated that increased expression of HIF-regulated genes in
response to loss of Rb activates Akt and ERK signaling pathways and
promotes neuroendocrine differentiation and invasion. Inhibition of these
signaling pathways significantly decreased actin polymerization in LNCaP
cells. For the first time, we have established a direct link between
hypoxic tumour environments, Rb inactivation and progression to late
stage metastatic neuroendocrine prostate cancer. Understanding the
molecular pathways responsible for progression of benign prostate tumours
to metastasized and lethal forms will aid in the development of more
effective prostate cancer therapies.

