Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of Plk3 expression by nickel may contribute to lung
carcinogenesis


Exposure to nickel (Ni) compounds is known to induce human lung
malignancies. Research shows that Ni induces lung cancer mainly through
epigenetic and metabolic pathways. Polo-like kinase 3 (Plk3) is a
multifunctional protein kinase that involves in tumor initiation and
progression. Plk3/ mice tend to develop highly vascularized lung tumors
at an advanced age. Reduced expression of Plk3 was reported in human lung
cancers. In this study, we examined the effect of Ni on Plk3 expression
in A549 lung carcinoma cells. Western blot showed that NiCl2 reduced the
Plk3 protein level in a time- and dose-dependent manner. We then treated
A549 cells with cycloheximide for various times to examine the effect of
NiCl2 on the half-life of Plk3 protein. We observed a shortened half-life
of Plk3 in the presence of NiCl2. A reduced level of Plk3 protein was
also found in hypoxia-treated A549 cells. In addition, MG132, a specific
proteasome inhibitor, could partially reverse the effect of NiCl2 or
hypoxia on the Plk3 protein level. Our cell fractionation experiments
showed that majority of the endogenous Plk3 protein is located in the
cytoplasm where degradation of Plk3 likely occurs. Transfection of A549
cells with FLAG-tagged ubiquitin (FLAG-Ub) followed by treatment with
NiCl2 and/or MG132, immunoprecipitation (IP) with an anti-FLAG antibody,
and Western blot with an anti-Plk3 antibody showed that Plk3 was
poly-ubiquitinated and that the ubiquitination was significantly enhanced
by NiCl2 and/or MG132 treatments. The elevated ubiquitination of Plk3 in
response to NiCl2 was further confirmed in 293T cells with
co-transfection of Plk3 and FLAG-Ub. Furthermore, overexpression of
USP28, a deubiquitinase known to be inhibited by Ni or hypoxia, partially
restored the protein level of Plk3 suppressed by NiCl2. Moreover,
real-time PCR analysis showed that NiCl2 also reduced the Plk3 mRNA
level, in a time- and dose-dependent pattern. Taken together, our data
show that NiCl2 suppresses Plk3 expressions by lowering the Plk3 mRNA
level and promoting proteasome-mediated degradation of the Plk3 protein.
Given the potential role of Plk3 as a tumor suppressor in the lung,
suppression of Plk3 expression likely contributes to Ni-induced lung
carcinogenesis and tumor progression.

