Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRD4 degradation by PROTACs represents a more effective
therapeutic strategy than BRD4 inhibitors in ovarian cancer


BRD4, a member of the bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) family
of chromatin readers, localizes to super-enhancer regions of DNA, and
turns on the expression of a number of oncogenes. Therefore, it has
attracted considerable interest as a potential drug target in a variety
of cancers, and several inhibitors that block its binding to acetylated
histones have been discovered. The BRD4 genomic region is amplified in
approximately 17% of ovarian serous adenocarcinomas, and a recent shRNA
screen identified it as a bona fide target in high-grade serous ovarian
carcinoma (HGSOC). BRD4 inhibitors were shown in the same study to be
efficacious in cell culture and PDX models of HGSOC. However, the
inhibitor paradigm of drug discovery has several limitations, for
example, the requirement of high target occupancy for activity, and the
inability to block potentially critical scaffolding functions of the drug
target. To circumvent these limitations, we have designed small molecule
BRD4 degraders based on our PROTAC (PROteolysis TArgeting Chimera)
platform, and assessed their activity across a panel of ovarian carcinoma
cell lines.BRD4 PROTACs, containing a BRD4 ligand connected to a VHL E3
ubiquitin ligase binding moiety, successfully promote proteasome-mediated
degradation of BRD4 at sub- to low-nM concentrations in a number of
ovarian cancer cell lines. Furthermore, this BRD4 degradation results in
a very potent anti-proliferative effect in the cells. All the cell lines
tested showed modest anti-proliferative effects when treated with BRD4
inhibitors (ED50 0.5 M-1M). In contrast, when treated with BRD4 PROTACs
the cell lines separated into three profoundly different groups (most
sensitive, moderately sensitive, least sensitive), with a difference of
several orders of magnitude (ED50 0.03nM-500nM). Thus BRD4 PROTACs are up
to 10,000-fold more potent than BRD4 inhibitors in the most sensitive
cell lines. Moreover, the ED50 curves closely track with BRD4
degradation, and result in a much more profound apoptotic response than
BRD4 inhibition. In addition, we have also shown that the
anti-proliferative effect of BRD4 PROTACs is decoupled from their effect
on the levels of cMYC. Finally, we have carried out deep RNA sequencing
in five cell lines of variable sensitivity to BRD4 PROTACs in order to
thoroughly define the molecular subtype of the malignancies represented
and have identified gene signatures that correlate with efficacy of BRD4
PROTACs and BRD4 inhibitors in these cells.In summary, PROTACs designed
to target BRD4 for proteasomal degradation are highly potent in ovarian
cancer cells, and elicit a powerful pro-apoptotic response in the same
setting. The cells can be grouped by their level of sensitivity to
PROTAC-mediated BRD4 degradation, and carry gene expression biomarkers
which we hope will enable a patient selection strategy as BRD4 PROTACs
are advanced into the clinic.

