Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced alternative splicing as detected in total and
polysome-bound mRNA in glioblastoma stem-like cells


The vast majority of human genes undergo alternative splicing, which is
dependent on tissue type, developmental stage, and environmental context.
Given that alternative splicing regulates gene expression and is a major
source of diversity within the proteome, we used RNAseq to determine the
effects of ionizing radiation on the generation of alternative
transcripts in the human glioblastoma stem-like cell line NSC11. For
these studies, total cellular mRNA, reflecting the transcriptome, and
polysome-bound mRNA, reflecting the translatome, were collected from
control and irradiated (2Gy, 1h) NSC11 cells and subjected to RNAseq to
identify all transcripts; SpliceSeq was then used to visualize and
quantitate splice variations induced by radiation. We found that after
irradiation 122 genes were differentially spliced in the transcriptome,
which indicates that radiation induces alternative splicing, while 357
were differentially spliced in the translatome suggesting that radiation
also increases the translation of specific alternative transcripts.
However, 33 genes were in common between the transcriptome and
translatome suggesting that radiation increases the level and translation
of these alternative transcripts. IPA analyses of the radiation-induced
alternative transcripts in the translatome identified DNA Double-Strand
Break Repair by Homologous Recombination, Ceramide Degradation, and
Sphingosine and Sphingosine-1-phospahate Metabolism as the top 3
canonical pathways enriched in this dataset. The top 3 molecular and
cellular functions in this analysis were Cellular Assembly and
Organization, DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair, and Cell Cycle.
The same analysis of alternative transcripts in the transcriptome did not
show an enhancement of DNA damage and repair networks after radiation,
suggesting that it is the polysome loading of these transcripts that is
changed after irradiation. Further analyses of alternative transcripts in
the translatome using EnrichR demonstrated that the top 3 pathways,
analyzed using the Reactome 2015 curated pathway database, were
Homologous Recombination Repair of Replication-Independent Double-Strand
Breaks, Homologous Recombination Repair, and Double-Strand Break Repair.
Finally, GeneCodis was used to analyze the biological processes enhanced
in the radiation-induced translatome. The top 3 biological processes were
Regulation of Transcription, DNA-Dependent, Negative Regulation of
Transcription, DNA-Dependent, and Double-Strand Break Repair. These
results indicate that radiation affects alternative splicing at both the
level of mRNA abundance and translation and suggest that these processes
may play a role in radiation-induced translational control of gene
expression.

