Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of VAV-interacting Kruppel-like factor (VIK) in
resistance to palbociclib in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer


Background: The cyclin D-CDK4/6-Rb pathway, regulating the G1/S phase
transition of the cell cycle, is frequently dysregulated in estrogen
receptor (ER) positive breast cancer, and has been connected with
endocrine resistance. Combined treatment of palbociclib, a highly
selective CDK4/6 inhibitor, with endocrine therapy has led to a
substantial improvement in outcome of patients with ER positive
metastatic breast cancer. Increasing clinical use means acquired
resistance to palbociclib is emerging as a new major clinical challenge,
understanding of resistance mechanisms will be crucial. VAV interacting
Kruppel-like factor (VIK) is a potential novel transcription factor known
to be involved in cell cycle regulation, interacting with CDK4.
Previously our lab reported a series of breast cancer patient tumour
samples where VIK methylation was associated with an increased risk of
recurrence and decreased survival in tamoxifen-treated patients,
indicating a role for VIK in ER positive breast cancer.Results:
Methylation analysis of the VIK promoter region by pyrosequencing
revealed dense methylation of the CpG island located in the 5 regulatory
sequences of the gene, in 8 out of 20 breast cancer cells lines.
Methylation above 30% correlated with absent mRNA expression, confirming
methylation transcriptionally silences VIK. Subsequently, VIK was knocked
down in the ER positive, VIK unmethylated breast cancer cell lines T47D
and SUM44. Knockdown resulted in significant cell death due to induction
of apoptosis as measured by Annexin V staining and increased levels of
cleaved PARP. The knockdown of VIK altered expression of regulatory cell
cycle proteins decreasing levels of Rb, pRb, cyclin D and CDK4, whilst
upregulating cyclin E. Treatment with the CDK4/6 inhibitor, palbociclib,
in cells with reduced VIK expression resulted in decreased sensitivity to
the drug. There was a shift in IC50 value towards resistance from 100nM
to 500nM in T47D cells and 80nM to 1.2M in SUM44 cells. In a model of
acquired resistance, T47D cells were cultured long-term with palbociclib
generating resistant clones with increased IC50 value 10 fold higher than
sensitive cells. VIK was significantly down regulated in all resistant
clones to barely detectable mRNA levels, indicating an important role for
VIK in resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition.Conclusions: VIK is a novel
epigenetically regulated gene in breast cancer, playing a key role in the
regulation of the G1/S phase transition in the cell cycle. VIK plays an
important role in development of resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors in
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.

