Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MEK1/2 inhibitor selumetinib (AZD6244; ARRY-142886) appears as
an efficient targeted therapy when used in an adjuvant setting in
patient-derived xenografts of uveal melanoma


Uveal melanomas (UM) constitute the most common primary intraocular
tumors in adults and are characterized by a constitutive activation of
the MAPK pathway due to mutations of the GTPase genes GNAQ or GNA11 in
almost 80% of cases. The most commonly used treatments for UM are
alkylating agents such as dacarbazine (DTIC) and temozolomide (TMZ). The
MEK1/2 inhibitor selumetinib (AZD6244; ARRY-142886) has shown clinical
activity compared to DTIC/TMZ in a recent Phase II clinical trial and has
recently completed a Phase III clinical trial in combination with DTIC
(NCT01974752). In parallel with this trial we sought to evaluate the
efficacy of DTIC + selumetinib in UM patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs).Three models were included in the study (MP34, MP55, and MM26),
all bearing a GNAQ or GNA11 mutation. Selumetinib was administered orally
at 25 mg/kg/day, 5 days a week, and DTIC at a dose of 40 mg/kg/day on
Days 1 to 5 every 4 weeks.A significant tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of
54% was observed in the MP34 model but not in the two remaining PDXs. In
one model, MM26, DTIC induced a strong TGI of about 99% with 6/9 complete
remissions (CRs). The combination of selumetinib + DTIC did not
significantly increase efficacy compared to monotherapy in any of the
models; in the MM26 PDX, the combination induced a similar TGI (99%) and
CR rate (5/9) as DTIC alone. In this experiment, after two courses of
DTIC + selumetinib, selumetinib was continued alone, showing a
significant increased growth delay (pUveal melanomas (UM) constitute the
most common primary intraocular tumors in adults and are characterized by
a constitutive activation of the MAPK pathway due to mutations of the
GTPase genes GNAQ or GNA11 in almost 80% of cases. The most commonly used
treatments for UM are alkylating agents such as dacarbazine (DTIC) and
temozolomide (TMZ). The MEK1/2 inhibitor selumetinib (AZD6244;
ARRY-142886) has shown clinical activity compared to DTIC/TMZ in a recent
Phase II clinical trial and has recently completed a Phase III clinical
trial in combination with DTIC (NCT01974752). In parallel with this trial
we sought to evaluate the efficacy of DTIC + selumetinib in UM
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs).Three models were included in the study
(MP34, MP55, and MM26), all bearing a GNAQ or GNA11 mutation. Selumetinib
was administered orally at 25 mg/kg/day, 5 days a week, and DTIC at a
dose of 40 mg/kg/day on Days 1 to 5 every 4 weeks.A significant tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) of 54% was observed in the MP34 model but not in
the two remaining PDXs. In one model, MM26, DTIC induced a strong TGI of
about 99% with 6/9 complete remissions (CRs). The combination of
selumetinib + DTIC did not significantly increase efficacy compared to
monotherapy in any of the models; in the MM26 PDX, the combination
induced a similar TGI (99%) and CR rate (5/9) as DTIC alone. In this
experiment, after two courses of DTIC + selumetinib, selumetinib was
continued alone, showing a significant increased growth delay (p<10-3 at
Day 113), compared with DTIC alone. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics,
and molecular studies on the three UM PDXs are ongoing.In conclusion, we
have observed that response of UM PDX models to DTIC was not increased
when combined with selumetinib; these results are similar to those seen
in the Phase III study of this drug combination. The observation that MEK
inhibition was effective in delaying progression in the DTIC-sensitive
PDX and published clinical studies demonstrating MEK inhibitor
monotherapy activity indicate that MEK inhibition may have value as a
treatment for UM; perhaps in the adjuvant setting in two specific
clinical situations, i.e. patients with irradiated or enucleated
high-risk primary intraocular or surgically resected metastatic UM.

