Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin in combination with gemcitabine reduced viability,
growth and metastasis of the murine osteosarcoma cell line LM8 in vitro
and in vivo


IntroductionRapamycin is an mTOR inhibitor with anti-tumor activity in
several human cancers. However, the efficacy of this compound in
osteosarcoma has not been fully elucidated. It acts downstream in the
PI3K pathway and impedes cell growth, cell proliferation, cell motility,
cell survival, protein synthesis and transcription. Here, we assessed the
anti-tumor activity of rapamycin. We had previously reported that
gemcitabine reduced viability, growth and metastasis of osteosarcoma cell
lines. In this study, we investigated whether gemcitabine could enhance
the anti-tumor effects of rapamycin in the murine osteosarcoma cell line
LM8 in vitro and in vivo.ResultsIn the LM8 cell line, rapamycin
synergized with gemcitabine to reduce cell proliferation as determined by
the WST assay and to induce apoptosis as analyzed by flow cytometry using
the annexin V and 7AAD staining method. Rapamycin at doses >10 M showed
significant cytotoxicity. By combining with gemcitabine, the amount of
rapamycin required for apoptosis was reduced to 1 M. Autophagy was
evaluated with the Cyto-ID Autophagy detection kit. Not only rapamycin
but also gemcitabine induced autophagy in the LM8 cell line. However, no
synergistic effects were observed. Cell mobility was evaluated by
migration assay using a trans-well system (LM8 cells in the upper layer
and conditioned medium in the lower chamber). Rapamycin synergized with
gemcitabine to reduce LM8 cell mobility.In C3H mice inoculated
subcutaneously with LM8, we observed frequent metastasis to the lung.
Treatment of the mice with rapamycin reduced the size of the primary
tumor; elevated levels of apoptosis were observed. Moreover, rapamycin in
combination with gemcitabine had additive effects on the primary tumor
and almost no metastatic lesions in the lung were seen. Consequently,
combination therapy prolonged the overall survival of tumor-bearing
mice.ConclusionsRapamycin synergized with gemcitabine to reduce cell
proliferation, and to induce apoptosis, autophagy and cell mobility of
the LM8 murine osteosarcoma cell line in vitro. Rapamycin in combination
with gemcitabine exhibited synergistic antitumor effects. The combination
prolonged overall survival and reduced the number of lung metastases in
osteosarcoma-bearing mice. Rapamycin has been used to treat osteosarcoma
in clinical trials and gemcitabine combined with docetaxel chemotherapy
has shown good clinical results. Rapamycin combined with gemcitabine
chemotherapy might be a novel and promising therapeutic approach to the
treatment of osteosarcoma.

