Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing tumor-localized, combination immunotherapies


Building on the recent clinical successes of checkpoint inhibitor
antibodies, the field of cancer immunotherapy is now focussing on
combination treatment regimens to further improve efficacy benefits to
patients. However, combining such systemically dosed agents is associated
with a number of challenges including enhanced side effect profiles and
high costs. One strategy being explored to overcome such issues is to
dose the therapeutics directly into the tumor rather than systemically
but many tumors will not be accessible for this type of treatment. We
have developed a broadly applicable vector platform system, based on the
potent chimeric oncolytic group B adenovirus enadenotucirev (EnAd), for
directing the efficient local production of a combination of
immunotherapeutic agents selectively within the tumor. The versatility
and fidelity of the platform has been exemplified by encoding up to three
separate biomolecules in the same virus, including antibodies, cytokines,
chemokines and tumor-associated antigens, without altering other virus
properties. A systemic clinical dosing regimen has been established for
EnAd, with data directly demonstrating selective virus delivery to and
protein production from colorectal and other tumor types. The advantage
of this approach is that immunotherapeutics encoded in the virus can be
produced locally, both in tumors that are not directly injectable and in
metastases, while minimising systemic off-target effects.A candidate
virus NG-345 has been designed to produce a combination of three secreted
immunomodulatory agents (human IFN, MIP1 and Flt3L) aimed at enhancing
the recruitment and activation of immune cells into tumor cell nests. We
have shown that NG-345 retains the full oncolytic properties (potency and
selectivity) of the parental EnAd virus, with infected human tumor cells
producing high levels of all three cytokine/chemokines in the culture
supernatants. Functional activity of individual encoded agents has also
been demonstrated using relevant cell-based assays. EnAd is highly
human-tumor selective and does not replicate, produce infectious progeny
or express endogenously regulated transgenes in non-human cells. In vivo
evaluation of immuno-modulatory activities of armed viruses is therefore
challenging and requires the application of multiple approaches that can
collectively provide informative data. In particular, studies are
focusing on using surrogate candidate viruses expressing murine gene
homologs in human tumor xenografts in immunodeficient mice with or
without a reconstituted immune system.

