Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Origanum majorana organic extract induces senescence and
autophagic cell death in breast cancer cells through influencing
mitochondrial metabolism


Excess 17 estradiol (E2) is a risk factor of breast cancer. Previously,
we have reported that E2 through influencing mitochondria by unknown
mechanism contribute to the estrogen induced breast carcinogenesis. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the mitotoxic and cytotoxic effects of
normal O. Majorana organic extract (OME) as well as PEGylated
nanoconjugate of OME with triphenylphosphonium (P-OME) against human
breast epithelial and cancer cell lines. Origanum majorana, commonly
known as marjoram, is a perennial herb, which is widely used in the
Middle East as a spice. It has been shown to possess extensive range of
biological activity, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and
anti-tumor growth effects. Interestingly, the anticancer potential of O.
Majorana against breast cancer remains largely unexplored. Here, we
investigated the anticancer effect of O. Majorana on three breast cell
lines. We also used triphenylphosphonium (TPP) cation to check whether an
imbalance in mitochondrial bioenergetics, in part, may be responsible for
estrogen induced growth of breast cancer. Determination of cell density
(cell survival) by SRB and mitochondrial metabolic activity by MTT assays
showed that both OME and P-OME reduced growth of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7
cells, but no effect on normal breast epithelial MCF-10A cells. OME and
TPP blocked E2-induced increases of cell survival, metabolic activity and
proliferation of breast cancer MCF-7 cells. E2 treatment increased
MitoTracker Red 580 labeling, indicating E2 treatment increased MCF7
cells mitochondrial mass. We observed a several fold increase in
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) DNA binding activity as early
as 3 hrs in treated MCF7 cells. DNA synthesis was inhibited in E2-exposed
MCF7 cells by the silencing of TFAM. To discern whether a decrease in ATP
production may be responsible for the E2-induced growth signaling, we
measured the ATP present in the MCF7 cells. Our data showed that the ATP
levels in E2 treated cells were very similar to control cells. E2
treatment of MCF-7 cells increased mRNA and protein levels of BNIP3
involved in mitophagy/autophagy. Together these data suggest that a
carcinogenic concentration of E2 may modify mitochondrial dynamics,
mitophagy, biogenesis and metabolism. In summary, our results
demonstrated for the first time that OME was able to inhibit
estrogen-induced growth of MCF-7 cells in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner. Our results also demonstrated that P-OME
nanoconjugate compared to OME was far more effective in exerting its
cytotoxic effect through the induction of growth arrest, mitochondrial
metabolic activity, senescence, apoptosis and autophagic cell death in
the highly metastatic triple negative MDA-MB-231 cells. Our findings
offer a new perspective on the utility of O. Majorana plant extract to be
developed as a new alternative medicinal therapy against breast tumors.

