Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MT-3724, an engineered toxin body targeting CD20 for non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma


Molecular Templates has developed engineered toxin bodies (ETBs), potent
recombinant immunotoxins that combine the specificity of an antibody
fragment with the powerful direct cytotoxicity of the Shiga-like toxin A
subunit to specifically destroy target expressing cells. The use of other
immunotoxins and antibody-drug conjugates is limited to targets with
tumor-specific cell surface expression that efficiently internalize. The
ETB scaffold has been designed to overcome this limitation and promote
forced internalization of ETBs, a property that expands the potential
targets to receptors with poor internalization kinetics. An additional
benefit to ETBs is the mechanism of action (MOA) which is unique to that
of other oncology treatments.CD20, a receptor that does not undergo rapid
internalization, is a well characterized target for agents used to treat
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Thus, successful CD20-targeted clinical
strategies include monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and radiolabeled mAbs
that act on the cell surface. Molecular Templates lead compound, MT-3724,
is a CD20-targeted ETB that has been engineered to force the rapid
internalization of the immunotoxin after binding to CD20. MT-3724 has
potent direct cell kill activity on CD20 positive lymphoma cells and is
the first immunotoxin to CD20 to enter the clinic. The on-going phase I
study being conducted at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, and New York University Langone Medical Center
has shown promising safety and efficacy in highly refractory NHL
patients.Once MT-3724 is delivered to appropriate cells, the Shiga toxin
A subunit inhibits protein synthesis and promotes apoptosis of tumor
cells. The difference in MOA allows for activity in the refractory
setting, where resistance to other treatments has emerged, and may also
allow for combination therapy. Pre-clinical studies with immunomodulatory
drugs (IMiDs), PI3K and Bcl-2 inhibitors that are used in treatment of
NHL have shown promising results when combined with MT-3724. MT-3724 is a
promising novel agent in the treatment of NHL and other CD20 positive
hematological malignancies. Data around the internalization kinetics,
enzymatic activity, and combination with other agents will be presented.

