Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retinoid sensitizes Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) -related apoptosis
inducing ligand -induced cytotoxic effect in breast cancer by
upregulating cell surface receptor Death Receptor-4 expression


Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) -related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL,
also called APO-2L) is a member of the TNF super family which is known to
induce apoptosis selectively in tumor cells, whereas its cytotoxicity to
non-transformed cells turned out as low to moderate. The potential of
TRAIL as a pharmacotherapeutic agent against cancer is therefore widely
pre-clinically and clinically investigated. However, the test results
from a wide range of in vitro models revealed that a great portion of
tumor cell cultures displayed inherent or acquired resistances towards
TRAIL-mediated cell death. Mechanisms underlying these resistances
comprise, among others, downregulation of cell surface receptors of
TRAIL, namely Death Receptors (e.g. DR4, DR5). Hence, enhancing the DRs
expression by application of TRAIL in combination with other
therapeutics, is one of the diverse approaches to augment the
TRAIL-sensitivity and overcome the resistance.The term Retinoids
comprises different polyisoprenoids of the Vitamin-A-group. The
derivatives all-trans- and 9-cis retinoic acid (ATRA and 9-cis-RA)
function as activators of transcription initiating nuclear hormone
receptors and hereby regulate key components of carcinogenesis like
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Furthermore, Retinoids have
proven potential in the secondary prevention of breast cancer. In this
study, we investigated whether the combination of TRAIL with Retinoids
could be a new therapeutic approach for breast cancer treatment. Our
results indicate that simultaneous incubation with TRAIL and ATRA
resulted in a synergistic inhibition of proliferation in the
Retinoids-sensitive breast cancer cells. This synergistic combination
effect on cell proliferation correlated with augmented cell apoptosis as
detected with different methods. Immunoblotting assays revealed that the
apoptosis-regulaing factors for both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic
pathways including Bcl-2 family members, Bid, survivin, and diverse
caspases were involved in the combination treatment-triggered apoptosis
folowing the Apo2L/TRAIL activation. Analysis of cell surface DRs
expression by flow cytometry demonstrated that ATRA contributed to the
enhancement of TRAIL-sensitivity most possibly by increasing the TRAIL
receptor DR4 but not DR5 expression and thus leading to more strong
apoptotic effect when cells were upon TRAIL treatment.Taken together, we
demonstrated for first time that Retinoid derivatives can be used to
enhance the cytotoxic effect of TRAIL in some sub-entities of breast
cancer by upregulating the DR4 cell surface expression. Our study
provides a rationale for future clinical trials.

