Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stage IV colorectal cancer sub-site and patterns of distant
metastases


Approximately 20% of individuals diagnosed with colorectal cancer (CRC)
in the United States are found to have distant metastases at the time of
their diagnosis, indicating an extremely poor prognosis. Although it is
well known that primary CRC typically metastasizes to the liver and/or
lungs, little is known regarding which factors might explain the anatomic
pattern of CRC metastatic spread. Using population-based registry data
from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) cancer
registry of the Seattle-Puget Sound region, we assessed the relationship
between primary CRC sub-site and the presence of synchronous metastases
in the liver, lungs, and both the liver and lungs. All individuals with
stage IV CRC who were diagnosed between 2010-2014 in the 13-county
catchment area and who also had complete data on site of metastasis at
diagnosis were included in analyses (N = 1287). In total, 703 (55%)
patients had distant metastases confined to the liver at the time of
diagnosis, 78 (6%) had lung-only metastases, 190 (15%) had metastases in
both the liver and lungs but not at other sites, and 316 (25%) exhibited
different patterns of metastatic spread, including to the bone, brain,
and other anatomic sites. Using multiple logistic regression models, we
compared individuals with different patterns of metastatic spread at
diagnosis with respect to primary CRC site and with separate models
comparing cases with liver-only metastases to all other metastatic cases,
comparing cases with lung-only metastases to all other metastatic cases,
and comparing cases with metastases to both the liver and lungs to all
other metastatic CRC cases. All models were adjusted for age at diagnosis
and sex, as well as for depth of primary tumor growth within the
colorectum (T-stage) and extent of cancer spread to lymph nodes
(N-stage). The odds of having a primary CRC tumor in the rectum, versus
proximal colon, were significantly lower among patients with liver-only
synchronous metastases relative to those with other patterns of
metastatic spread at diagnosis [odds ratio (OR): 0.62, 95% confidence
interval (CI): 0.46 - 0.82]. Conversely, the odds of having a primary CRC
located in the rectum were significantly higher among those with
metastatic disease confined to the lungs (OR: 2.48, 95% CI: 1.38 - 4.47)
and those with metastases to the liver and lungs (OR: 1.97, 95% CI: 1.29
- 3.01). Our findings suggest that a patient's site of primary CRC may be
informative with respect to possible pattern of metastatic spread.

