Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-4 / IL-13 mediated cell-to-cell fusion in prostate cancer
progress


Poorly understood interactions between prostate cancer (PCa) cells and
their microenvironment direct the epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) during disease progression. Cell-to-cell fusion, such as cell
fusion in muscles and placenta, is one of the ways in which cells can
drastically change their properties. Cell fusion has been proposed to
promote tumor cell diversity and the ability to metastasize. Metastatic
disease has been also suggested to depend on the interleukin 4 (IL-4)
signaling. Patients with hormone-refractory PCa have elevated levels of
IL-4 and it has been proposed that targeting IL4 -receptor interactions
limits metastatic disease. Here, to mimic conditions at the interphase
between rhabdosphincter myofibers and apical anterior regions of
prostatic gland we explored interactions of PC3 cells (human PCa cell
line) with skeletal muscle cells. Co-culturing of these cells resulted in
an elevated concentration of related cytokines IL-4 and/or IL-13 in the
tissue culture medium from the co-cultured cells but not from muscle
cells cultured on their own. The co-culturing (i); the application of the
conditioned medium from the co-cultured cells (ii); and treating PC3
cells with recombinant IL-4 (iii) resulted in a robust fusion between PC3
cells, in a significant increase in the percentage of PC3 cells
expressing stem cell marker CD133, in the drug resistance, in an increase
of the expression of mesenchymal-characteristic markers pAKT, MMP9,
desmin, and in the loss of E-cadherin that is another marker for EMT. The
described effects required co-culturing of the PC3 cells and muscle
cells. Moreover, the co-culturing and recombinant IL-4 application also
upregulated the expression of the two proteins - annexin A5 and syncytin
that play important role in several cell-cell fusion processes.
Significantly, application of either (i) IL-4-neutralizing antibodies or
(ii) peptide inhibitors of syncytin; and (iii) lowering annexin A5
expression suppressed cell proliferation and fusion. Our findings
substantiate a hypothesis that IL-4 and IL-13 in the microenvironment of
PCa cells promote the EMT and raise metastatic potential of PCa cells by
their fusion mediated by upregulated syncytin- and annexin A5.

