Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of aerobic exercise on the tumor microenvironment


Intratumoral hypoxia (pO2 Intratumoral hypoxia (pO2 < 10mmHg) is
associated with aggressive tumor progression, radiation resistance,
suppression of the immune anti-tumor response and poor patient outcome.
It is often found in solid tumors, and can constitute a major obstacle to
anticancer therapy. The primary cause of abnormal oxygen tensions in
tumors is the aberrant tumor vasculature, characterized by tortuous,
leaky and immature vessels. A number of intervention strategies designed
to overcome tumor hypoxia and improve patient outcome have been
investigated including high oxygen content breathing and the use of
bioreductive prodrugs, but these have had only moderate success in the
clinic.The goal of the present investigations was to determine whether
aerobic exercise could be applied to improve tumor perfusion, oxygenation
and the immune anti-tumor response in breast cancer and fibrosarcoma
models. Such modulation of the tumor physiology and host environment
would be expected to lead to enhanced antitumor efficacy when combined
with radiotherapy or chemotherapy.The effects of mild and moderate
intensity treadmill running were studied in mice bearing syngeneic murine
mammary carcinomas (4T1 and EMT6) or fibrosarcomas (KHT). The exercise
intensities were determined by measuring the anaerobic threshold, which
was assessed by measuring the steady rise in blood lactate during an
exercise bout. Mice were orthotopically injected with tumor cells and
exercise commenced when tumors reached a size of 500 mm3 (single) or 200
mm3 (repeated bouts). Once size was attained, mice were exposed to either
mild (12 m/min) or moderate (18 m/min) intensity exercise. Controls for
each treatment consisted of sedentary mice exposed to a stationary
treadmill for the equivalent amount of time. At the end of the exercise
period tumors were analyzed by histology to assess for physiological
changes. Specifically, blood was collected and tumors were harvested,
sectioned and evaluated by immunofluorescence. The detection of open
blood vessels (Hoechst-33342) was used as an indirect indicator of
perfusion and while the hypoxia marker (EF5) was used to determine the
level of tumor hypoxia. Both markers were quantified using a Chalkley
counter and ImageJ NIH software. In addition, the evaluation of tumor
infiltrating immune cells after exercise compared to rest is under active
investigation by histological analysis. Furthermore, plasma samples from
exercised mice are being tested for immune related cytokines, chemokines
and growth factors and compared to those from sedentary controls.Results
to date indicate no difference in tumor growth rate between sedentary and
exercising mice. Mild daily bouts of aerobic exercise do not affect the
total number of tumor blood vessels but do increase the number of blood
vessels that are actively perfused. These findings suggest that exercise
may have potential utility in overcoming the aberrant microenvironmental
conditions associated in solid tumors with therapeutic resistance.

