Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison of cfDNA isolation kits: isolation and quantification
of cell-free DNA in plasma


Introduction: In oncology, circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has emerged
as a new and sensitive biomarker. However, the low concentrations of
cfDNA, especially in early stages of disease, make it a challenging
analyte for extraction, consequently high isolation efficiency is
essential.In this study we compared the isolation efficiency of one of
the most commonly used DNA isolation kits, namely the QIAamp circulating
nucleic acid kit (QIA - Qiagen), with four newly launched cfDNA isolation
kits.Material & Methods: The QIA kit was compared with the PME
free-circulating DNA Extraction Kit (PME - Analytik Jenna), the Maxwell
RSC ccfDNA Plasma Kit (RSC - Promega), the NEXTprep-MagTM cfDNA Isolation
Kit (NpM - BiooScientific), and the EpiQuickTM Circulating Cell-Free DNA
Isolation Kit (EQ - Epigentek).CfDNA was extracted from 10 plasma samples
of patients treated at the Antwerp University Hospital (UZA); including
two patients with benign pancreatic cysts, three early stage pancreatic
cancer patients, and four pancreatic cancer patients with metastasized
disease, of which one had a second blood sample taken during follow up.
Only the patients with metastasized disease were KRAS mutated.To
determine the isolation efficiency of the different kits, the QX200TM
Droplet DigitalTM PCR system (ddPCR - Bio Rad) was used. All samples were
screened with the ddPCRTM KRAS Screening Multiplex kit (Bio Rad) for the
presence of seven KRAS mutations and a specific wild type sequence, which
results in the KRAS mutated cfDNA fraction and the quantification of the
total cfDNA.Results: The QIA and the RSC kits displayed similar isolation
efficiencies of both KRAS mutated and non-mutated cfDNA; with the
detection of the KRAS mutated fraction ranging from approximately 1% to
40% and on average a yield of 76,7 and 83,1 copies/l, respectively. On
the other hand, the PME kit could not detect any KRAS mutations and in
four cases there was not enough cfDNA isolated to be detected with ddPCR.
DdPCR of cfDNA isolated with the NpM and EQ kits did not generate any
positive signals. qPCR was performed on cfDNA isolated with both kits
with control primers of the NpM kit. All samples of the NpM kit and three
of the samples of the EQ kit were shown to contain cfDNA of at least 180
bp; which leads to the conclusion that ddPCR can't be used as a
downstream procedure for the NpM and EQ kits.Conclusion: The RSC kit
enables the isolation of a sufficient quantity of cfDNA similar to the
yield generated with the QIA kit, and both kits have a higher isolation
efficiency than the PME kit. This study presents two highly efficient
isolation kits, of which the RSC kit has the advantage of a fully
automated, magnetic beads based protocol over the labor intensive and
time consuming QIA kit. We also concluded that ddPCR as a downstream
procedure is not feasible with the NpM and EQ kits. However, an improved
version of the NpM kit has recently been produced and will also be
included in this comparison study.

