Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shangri-Docs: a browser based tool for document exploration and
automatic knowledge extraction from unstructured biomedical text


Biomedical information is available to research and development
scientists as unstructured text in the form of scientific manuscripts and
reports published in the literature and elsewhere. Scientists focused on
specific research programs are burdened with surveying vast numbers of
publications and reports to acquire information relevant to their
efforts. Employing technology as a research aid provides a mechanism to
cope with information overload that characterizes the R&D environment.
Text mining can extract knowledge from large corpora of biomedical text
and make it available to support scientific research and knowledge
collections [1, 2] and intelligent PDF reader tools able to search
content and find related articles [3] are available; however, such reader
tools are typically desktop applications limited to specific platforms
and data sources so they cannot easily support broad based integrated
scientific search needs for a dispersed R&D organization with a wide
variety of content needs.Our team has developed a web-browser based
document reader with a built-in exploration tool and automatic concept
extraction from biomedical text content. This provides R&D scientists
with a simple tool to aid finding, reading, and exploring documents
relevant to focused research objectives. The tool, Shangri-Docs, combines
a document reader with automatic concept extraction and highlighting of
relevant terms based on carefully selected ontologies combined with our
custom corporate enterprise taxonomy. Shangri-Docs provides the ability
to evaluate a wide variety of document formats (e.g. PDF, Word, PPT,
text, etc.) and exploits the linked nature of the Web and personal
content by performing searches on content from public sites (e.g.
Wikipedia, PubMed) and privately cataloged databases
simultaneously.Shangri-Docs incorporates Apache cTAKES (clinical Text
Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System) [4] and Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) to automatically identify and highlight terms and
concepts, such as specific pathology, disease, drug, and biological terms
mentioned in the text. cTAKES was originally designed specifically to
extract information from clinical medical records. We have extended
cTAKES automatic knowledge extraction process to include the R&D
biomedical research domain by improving the ontology guided information
extraction process. Shangri-Docs could be adapted to other science fields
and further customized across our R&D scientific community via our open
source, cloud-based, data management system.[1] Funk, et.al., BMC
Bioinformatics 2014, 15:59 doi:10.1186/1471-2105-15-59[2] Kang et al.,
BMC Bioinformatics 2014, 15:64 doi:10.1186/1471-2105-15-64[3] Utopia
Documents, http://utopiadocs.com[4] Apache cTAKES,
http://ctakes.apache.org

