Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC201 induces cell death in androgen receptor positive prostate
cancer cells and shows synergistic effect with anti-prostate cancer drugs


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of
cancer related death among men in the United States. Current therapy for
advanced prostate cancer is mainly based on androgen deprivation, though
in many cases tumors become androgen-independent and resistant to
available treatments. Thus, accessing novel therapies for prostate cancer
and resistant tumors remains an important goal in the field. ONC201 is a
first-in-class small molecule anti-cancer drug, shown to selectively
induce cell death in most cancer cells tested in contrast to matched
normal cells. In this study we investigated the single-agent and
combination efficacy of ONC201 on a panel of prostate cancer cell lines
with varied androgen receptor (AR) and receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
expression status. Our preliminary data suggests that the pro-apoptotic
effects of ONC201 correlate with expression of androgen receptor and
other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Specifically, high AR and low RTK
(c-MET, EGFR, HER2 and IGFR) expression demonstrated higher sensitivity
to ONC201 as compared to low AR and high RTK expression as evaluated by
cell viability using the Cell-Titer Glo assay. We further modeled these
findings in ONC201-sensitive 22Rv1 and ONC201-resistant DU145 cell lines.
ONC201 induced robust apoptosis (cleaved PARP) in ONC201-sensitive 22Rv1
cells as compared to ONC201-resistant DU145 cells In addition,
ONC201-sensitive 22RV1 cells showed abrogation of total AR expression 72
hours following treatment with ONC201. Thus, AR and RTK status seem to be
emerging efficacy markers for response of ONC201 in prostate cancer
cells. We are further investigating the involvement of ONC201 in the
signal transduction pathway of AR and other RTKs in prostate cancer.
Lastly, our initial screening for treatment of cells with a combination
of ONC201 and FDA-approved therapies for prostate cancer showed
synergistic potential of ONC201 with everolimus and docetaxel in both
AR-dependent and independent cells. As expected, synergism of
anti-androgen MDV3100 (enzalutamide) with ONC201 was restricted to AR
positive prostate cancer cell lines. Our results indicate that ONC201 has
therapeutic potential both as a single agent and in combination therapy
for prostate cancer. Our long-term goal is to integrate our pre-clinical
studies and translate the findings to single agent/combination trials of
ONC201 for prostate cancer patients.

