Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytokines and adipokines in breastmilk of black and white women


Introduction: Giving birth may be associated with a transient increase in
breast cancer risk post-delivery and with elevated risk of basal breast
cancers, especially in the absence of breastfeeding, whereas parity is
related to lower risk of postmenopausal ER-positive tumors. Black women
develop more early-onset and basal breast cancers than White women, but
factors contributing to this disparity are poorly understood.
Accordingly, we compared levels of 15 proteins with hypothesized roles in
breast cancer risk in breastmilk from healthy Black and White
women.Methods: We tested breastmilk donated by 130 Black and 162 White
women, annotated with breast cancer risk factor questionnaire data.
Following pilot testing using the MesoScale Discovery system (Rockville,
MD), the following analytes were measured in breastmilk, adjusted for
total protein concentration: interferon-, IL1-, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-, FLT-1,
TIE-2, PlGF, VEGFC, VEGFD, adiponectin, leptin, and FAS-L. M30-apoptosis
and Bradford protein were measured with Molecular Devices VersaMax reader
(Sunnyvale, CA). Univariate associations of race with women's
characteristics were computed using chi square tests and t-tests.
Multivariable logistic regression models with a random effect to account
for plate effects were used to assess the associations (odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)) of analyte levels with: race, family
history of breast cancer, smoking, baby's age in days, body mass index at
time of sample donation, age, menarche, age at first birth, return of
menses, parity, and over-the-counter pain medication.Results: Of the 15
analytes measured, all but VEGFC and TIE2 were detectable and reliably
measured. Black women compared to White women had higher BMI (p = 0.05)
and higher parity (p = 0.02), and were younger age at menarche (p =
0.005) and younger age at first birth (p = 0.01). White women had higher
levels of smoking (p = 0.01) and more frequently had a first degree
relative with breast cancer (p = 0.03). Compared with White women, Black
women had significantly higher levels of IL1- (OR 1.77, 95% CI 1.13 -
2.77, p = 0.01) adjusting for the baby's age in days. Black women had
significantly higher levels of leptin (OR 2.01, 95% CI 1.28 - 3.15, p =
0.002) and leptin/adiponectin ratio (OR 2.36, 95% CI 1.49 - 3.72, p =
0.0004), even after adjusting for body mass index.Discussion: Preliminary
data demonstrate differences in levels of putative markers of breast
cancer risk between White and Black women, including IL1-, leptin and the
leptin/adiponectin ratio. These data suggest that further analyses of
biomarkers in breastmilk may be useful for understanding breast cancer
risk and to identify possible factors that may be associated with racial
disparities in early onset and basal breast cancers.

