Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deadly fuel: Fibroblasts mediate cancer cell death through
tunneling nanotubes in response to ionizing radiation


Despite surgery or chemo radiotherapy the five-year survival rate of
esophageal carcinoma (eSCC) patients remains around 15% indicating the
need for new therapy regimes. Recently the role of the tumor
microenvironment has been recognized as an important determinant of
radiation responses. Here we investigate the influence of stromal
fibroblasts (hF) on radiation induced tumor cell death.To evaluate
functional consequences of ionizing radiation hF and eSCC cells were
either cultured separately and irradiated (2Gy) or co-cultured after
irradiation to investigate radiation dependent tumor-stroma interactions.
Subsequently cells were monitored by time-lapse microscopy and cell death
was assessed visually as well as by PARP cleavage, live cell staining
with Hoechst33342/propidium iodide and quantification of sub-G1 cell
cycle. The rate of cell death was barely altered in monocultures. Of note
significantly increased cell death of eSCC was observed in co-culture
with irradiated hF compared to co-cultures with mock-irradiated
fibroblasts (16.104.25 fold of control). Microscopic evaluation of
co-cultures revealed that hF and cancer cells are connected via
tunnelling nanotubes (TNT). Furthermore, TNT formation was found to be
dependent on the extracellular matrix component hyaluronan. eSCC cell
death was prevented by pharmacological inhibition of TNT formation by
cytochalasin B as well as inhibition of hyaluronan by 4-MU. As TNTs are
known to mediate intercellular protein or mitochondrial transfer we
investigated which stromal proteins are shuttled into eSCC cells by
trans-SILAC experiments. For this purpose the proteome of fibroblasts was
labeled with heavy amino acids. After co-culturing hF and eSCC were
separated by FACS-sorting and labeled stromal proteins were identified in
the cancer cells by mass spectrometry. Four consistently shuttled
proteins were identified in the cancer cells, which were exclusively
transferred after irradiation of both cell lines. Knock-down experiments
of these proteins in hF were performed and SHANK1, which is not expressed
in eSCC cells, was found to be responsible for the hF induced cell death
of eSCC cells in response to radiation.In conclusion, by usage of a novel
trans-SILAC approach, we provide evidence that in response to ionizing
radiation stromal hF transfer SHANK1 to eSCC cells, thereby inducing
cellular death. SHANK1 might therefore serve as potential new
pharmacological target to sensitize cancer cells to radiation therapy.

