Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventing and treating hepatic metastatic colon and pancreatic
cancers by targeting cell metabolism


One fundamental change in cancer cells in oncogenesis is the alteration
of glucose metabolism. With few exceptions, cancer cells exhibit aerobic
glycolysis. A majority of pyruvate derived from glycolysis is converted
to lactate instead of entering mitochondria for oxidative
phosphorylation. This feature of cancer cells is also referred as the
Warburg effect. The functional significance of the inefficient metabolic
mode to cancer cells is becoming clear. In essence, reduction in the flux
of pyruvate into mitochondria prevents complete oxidation of glucose.
This increases production of NADPH and metabolic intermediates required
for biosynthesis of macromolecules essential for cell proliferation.
Pyruvate flux into mitochondria can be dramatically enhanced through
mitochondrial uncoupling, a process that allows protons cross the
mitochondrial inner membrane without producing ATP. As a result,
mitochondrial uncoupler promotes futile oxidation of acetyl-CoA, leading
to complete glucose oxidation. Therefore, safe mitochondrial uncouplers
could be potent anti-cancer agents by antagonizing the function of the
Warburg effect. Here we tested this novel cancer chemotherapeutic
strategy with niclosamide ethanolamine (NEN), a well-characterized
mitochondrial uncoupler with an excellent safety profile, and one of its
derivative (OXY-1) in culture cell models and a mouse model.Mouse colon
cancer cells (MC38) and mouse pancreatic cells (Panc02) were treated with
NEN and OXY-1. At effective mitochondrial uncoupling concentrations, NEN
and OXY-1 reduced cells viability, induced cell cycle arrest, and reduced
clonegenicity. Moreover, NEN and OXY-1 also inhibited cell migration.
These effects were associated with the activation of AMPK and reduction
of NADPH/NADP ratio. We further examined the anti- cancer effect of NEN
and OXY-1 on a metastatic cancer mouse model. First, we tested if the
uncouplers are effective in inhibiting cancer growth. The MC38 or Panc02
cells were injected into the liver of NOD mice. Oral treatment of OXY-1
(800 ppm in food) significantly reduced tumor size and tumor incidence in
mouse liver. We then tested if these drugs could inhibit tumor
metastasis. MC38 or Panc02 cells were intrasplenically injected into the
mice and the tumor metastasis to liver was analyzed. Oral NEN (2000 ppm
in food) or OXY-1 (800 ppm in food) either totally prevented tumor
metastasis to liver or drastically reduced metastatic tumor numbers and
tumor volume. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that the safe
and mild mitochondrial uncouplers NEN and OXY-1 could be effective in
preventing and treating hepatic metastasis of colon and pancreatic
cancers. Our results may provide a new and attractive way for preventing
and treating these incurable tumors.

