Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival prognosis of MGUS patients by clinical and risk subgroup:
a result from a nationally representative prospective cohort


Introduction:Monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) is a
premalignant disorder preceding multiple myeloma that is present in 2.4%
of the general population ages 50 years or older. MGUS can be categorized
into conventional MGUS that includes IgM MGUS and non-IgM MGUS, and light
chain MGUS (defined as those with abnormal free light chain ratio with
complete lack of immunoglobulin heavy chain expression on
immunofixation). Our objective was to investigate the prognosis of MGUS
patients by clinical subgroup and risk stratification suggested by Mayo
Clinic.Methods:Data is obtained from National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) III and NHANES 1999-2004, a nationally
representative health survey with follow-up mortality data updated in
December 2011. Subjects who were diagnosed with MGUS were included in the
study. They were divided into three groups; IgM MGUS, non-IgM MGUS, and
light chain MGUS (LC-MGUS). Median overall survival of three groups was
obtained using log-rank test and age-adjusted hazard ratio for death
between the groups was obtained using cox-proportional regression model.
Finally, we also analyzed median survival and age adjusted hazard ratio
on conventional MGUS subjects by Mayo clinic MGUS risk stratification
based on risk factors of M-protein>1.5g/dL, non-IgG MGUS, and abnormal
free light chain (FLC) ratio. Analyses were performed in R software
version 3.2.2, and a P-value Introduction:Monoclonal gammopathy of
unknown significance (MGUS) is a premalignant disorder preceding multiple
myeloma that is present in 2.4% of the general population ages 50 years
or older. MGUS can be categorized into conventional MGUS that includes
IgM MGUS and non-IgM MGUS, and light chain MGUS (defined as those with
abnormal free light chain ratio with complete lack of immunoglobulin
heavy chain expression on immunofixation). Our objective was to
investigate the prognosis of MGUS patients by clinical subgroup and risk
stratification suggested by Mayo Clinic.Methods:Data is obtained from
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III and NHANES
1999-2004, a nationally representative health survey with follow-up
mortality data updated in December 2011. Subjects who were diagnosed with
MGUS were included in the study. They were divided into three groups; IgM
MGUS, non-IgM MGUS, and light chain MGUS (LC-MGUS). Median overall
survival of three groups was obtained using log-rank test and
age-adjusted hazard ratio for death between the groups was obtained using
cox-proportional regression model. Finally, we also analyzed median
survival and age adjusted hazard ratio on conventional MGUS subjects by
Mayo clinic MGUS risk stratification based on risk factors of
M-protein>1.5g/dL, non-IgG MGUS, and abnormal free light chain (FLC)
ratio. Analyses were performed in R software version 3.2.2, and a P-value
<0.05 was considered statistically significant.Results:22,523 subjects in
the cohort were screened for MGUS with serum protein electrophoresis,
serum protein immunofixation, serum FLC assay, and M-protein typing.
There were 483 subjects with MGUS (47 IgM-MGUS, 385 non-IgM MGUS, and 51
LC-MGUS). The median ages of total MGUS subjects, and subgroups were 70,
72.3, 69 and 73 years old, respectively. Median follow-up was 116 months.
Median overall survival was 117 months for IgM MGUS, 173 months for
non-IgM MGUS, and 109 months for LC-MGUS (p = 0.03). However, the age
adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) did not show significant difference between
the sub-groups. Likewise, median overall survival of Mayo Clinic MGUS
risk group 0, 1, 2 and 3 was 185 months, 163 months, 137 months, and 76.5
months, respectively (p Introduction:Monoclonal gammopathy of unknown
significance (MGUS) is a premalignant disorder preceding multiple myeloma
that is present in 2.4% of the general population ages 50 years or older.
MGUS can be categorized into conventional MGUS that includes IgM MGUS and
non-IgM MGUS, and light chain MGUS (defined as those with abnormal free
light chain ratio with complete lack of immunoglobulin heavy chain
expression on immunofixation). Our objective was to investigate the
prognosis of MGUS patients by clinical subgroup and risk stratification
suggested by Mayo Clinic.Methods:Data is obtained from National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III and NHANES 1999-2004, a
nationally representative health survey with follow-up mortality data
updated in December 2011. Subjects who were diagnosed with MGUS were
included in the study. They were divided into three groups; IgM MGUS,
non-IgM MGUS, and light chain MGUS (LC-MGUS). Median overall survival of
three groups was obtained using log-rank test and age-adjusted hazard
ratio for death between the groups was obtained using cox-proportional
regression model. Finally, we also analyzed median survival and age
adjusted hazard ratio on conventional MGUS subjects by Mayo clinic MGUS
risk stratification based on risk factors of M-protein>1.5g/dL, non-IgG
MGUS, and abnormal free light chain (FLC) ratio. Analyses were performed
in R software version 3.2.2, and a P-value <0.05 was considered
statistically significant.Results:22,523 subjects in the cohort were
screened for MGUS with serum protein electrophoresis, serum protein
immunofixation, serum FLC assay, and M-protein typing. There were 483
subjects with MGUS (47 IgM-MGUS, 385 non-IgM MGUS, and 51 LC-MGUS). The
median ages of total MGUS subjects, and subgroups were 70, 72.3, 69 and
73 years old, respectively. Median follow-up was 116 months. Median
overall survival was 117 months for IgM MGUS, 173 months for non-IgM
MGUS, and 109 months for LC-MGUS (p = 0.03). However, the age adjusted
hazard ratio (aHR) did not show significant difference between the
sub-groups. Likewise, median overall survival of Mayo Clinic MGUS risk
group 0, 1, 2 and 3 was 185 months, 163 months, 137 months, and 76.5
months, respectively (p <0.001). Only high-risk group (risk of 3) showed
statistically significant aHR 2.9 (95%CI 1.55.6) compared with low risk
group (risk of 0).Conclusion:There was no statistically significant
mortality difference between MGUS subgroup. Only high-risk group defined
by the Mayo Clinic MGUS risk stratification showed inferior survival and
higher risk of death compared to rest of MGUS subjects. Further
prospective studies are needed to validate our findings and to
investigate whether early interventions for MGUS patients by clinical
subgroup and risk stratification are needed rather than the current
standard management of watchful-waiting.

