Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tolfenamic acid and curcumin treatment induces pancreatic cancer
cell growth inhibition via suppressing Sp1 expression, NF-kB
translocation to nucleus


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is an aggressive malignancy. The current treatment
options have limited response in addressing poor prognosis and low
survival rate. Hence it is important to identify novel agents and
strategies for effective treatment. Previously the combination of
phytochemical, curcumin (Cur) and cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitor
celecoxib was tested for improving therapeutic efficacy in PC models. The
objective of current study is to identify a combination treatment
involving a low toxic small molecule and a phytochemical with anti-cancer
properties to inhibit PC cell growth. Experiments were also conducted to
understand potential mechanisms associated with this combination. We
tested the combination of an anti-cancer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID), Tolfenamic Acid (TA) and Cur using PC cell lines, L3.6 and
MIA PaCa-2. Cells were treated with 5-25 M of Cur or 25-100 M of TA or
combination of Cur (7.5 M) and TA (50 M). Effect on cell viability was
measured at 24, 48 and 72 h post-treatment using CellTiter-Glo kit. While
the two agents showed anti-proliferative effect, Cur and TA combination
caused higher growth inhibition. The cell growth inhibition was compared
with two COX inhibitors, ibuprofen and celecoxib and the cardiotoxicity
was assessed using cordiomyocytes (H9C2). TA showed significantly less
cytotoxicity in cardiomyocytes when compared to celecoxib. The expression
of transcription factors, Specificity protein1 (Sp1) and NF-kB, and an
inhibitor of apoptosis family protein, survivin, were determined by
Western blot analysis. The expression of NF-kB, Sp1 and survivin was
decreased by combination treatment. The levels of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) were also measured in flowcytometer. To evaluate the effect of
these agents on apoptosis, the activity of caspase 3/7 was measured with
caspase-Glo kit; apoptotic cell population was evaluated by Annexin-V
staining (flow cytometry); and c-PARP expression was determined by
Western blot analysis. When compared to individual agents, the
combination treatment caused a significant increase in ROS levels and
apoptotic markers. L3.6 and MIA PaCa-2 cells were treated with TNF- to
induce NF-kB translocation from cytoplasm to nucleus and the effect of
individual (TA or Cur) and combined treatment (TA+Cur) on NF-kB
translocation from cytoplasm to nucleus was evaluated by
immunofluorescence. When compared to individual agents, the combination
treatment caused a significant decrease in NF-kB translocation to
nucleus. Cell cycle phase distribution was measured using flow cytometry.
The combination treatment showed mostly DNA synthesis phase arrest;
however TA caused cell cycle arrest in early phase (G0/G1). These results
demonstrate that combination of Cur and TA effectively inhibits PC cell
growth via inducing apoptosis and modulating cell cycle phase
distribution.

