Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted semiconductor sequencing of 409 cancer-related genes for
somatic mutations and copy number variations in multiple myeloma


Background:2016's NCCN guideline recommended that induction therapy used
conventional chemotherapy such as proteasome inhibitors and Imids in MM.
Overall survival is improving by these Novel agents. However, we don't
know how to choose these new agents. In the future, we can use next
generation sequencer as a tool of drug choosing system. So we reviewed
newly diagnosed 11 patients with MM who had received novel agents in our
institution.The comprehensive analysis of genetic alterations in tumor by
next generation sequencing can allow for the prediction of drug
resistance and facilitate improvements in the treatment of MM
patients.Method:DNA was extracted from magnetic bead-enriched bone marrow
CD138-positive malignant plasma cells from 11 cases of MM, and
CD138-negative cells were used as matched non-tumor cells. Forty
nanograms of DNA were used for multiplex PCR amplification with an Ion
Ampliseq Comprehensive Cancer Panel that offers targeted coverage of all
exons in 409 tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes frequently cited and
frequently mutated in human cancers. (covered regions: 95.4% of total).
We sequenced 15,992 regions which obtained more than 1.5 megabases of
target sequence.Result:Each sample underwent on average 8.3 million
sequencing reads after quality filtering. The mean read depths were 539x,
and >95% of targeted bases were represented by at least 20 reads. The
average number of non-synonymous mutations detected per patient was 5.8
(range 0-11). We also detected copy number variations in which segments
of the genome can be duplicated or deleted from sequencing data. We found
several genetic alterations that may have been associated with the poor
prognosis and poor response to chemotherapy of MM patients. Pathway
assessment has shown that somatic aberrations within MM genomes are
mainly involved in several important pathways, including cell cycle
regulation, RTK-MAPK-PI3K and NF-kB.Conclusion:We performed targeted
next-generation sequencing for rapid (2 days), standardized, and
cost-effective gene analysis of malignant plasma cells from patients with
MM. We can use targeted next-generation sequencing as tool of drug
choosing system.

