Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implementation of a fully automated 3D foci counting algorithm to
determine DNA damage in cells


Background: The number of DNA double stand breaks (DSBs) induced after
ionizing radiation is strongly correlated with cell death, mutation and
cancer. Although a wide variety of techniques has been used to quantify
DNA damage, immunostaining of DNA repair proteins, like -H2AX or Rad 51,
that localize to the site of DNA damage within seconds following IR
exposure has become a method of choice due to its sensitivity. DNA damage
foci are imaged using microscopy, and then counted either manually, or
with some form of computer assistance. A number of open source or vendor
provided focus counting programs are available as either stand-alone
applications or as plugins to image processing utilities such as ImageJ.
While counting efficiency is greatly enhanced through the use of these
tools, they are limited in that the analysis is confined to a single
plane, they are often not conducive to high throughput analysis, and
finally, they suffer from user-variability. We therefore developed a
fully automatic, MATLAB-based algorithm which can process and uniquely
identify foci in a 3D image stack, with only limited user
interaction.Methods: We compared three different methods of quantifying
foci for uniformly irradiated cell cultures: a) 2D counting on single
plane with Nikon NIS elements software and b) 2D or c) 3D counting with
the MATLAB-based algorithm. 3D image stacks of stained -H2AX and Rad51
foci, as well as DAPI stained nuclei were acquired at 100X magnification
with 200 nm slice spacing. The automated image analysis process comprises
three steps: (i) nuclei segmentation, (ii) dynamic background
characterization for threshold determination and (iii) segmentation of
separate DNA damage foci of the entire 3D stack to ensure the
identification and counting of unique foci.Results: The accuracy of the
3D counting algorithm was determined to be 99% using a numerical phantom
containing a known number of randomly placed foci in a 3D volume. In cell
culture, 2D counting on a single plane using NIS Elements identified a
mean foci count 0.09 and 31.7 per cell for 0 Gy and 4 Gy respectively
while our algorithm counted 0.24 and 26.7 foci/cell, demonstrating
remarkable consensus. Counting in 3D yielded 0.39 (0 Gy) and 77.58 (4 Gy)
per cell, demonstrating how single plane counting underestimates DNA
damage. The algorithm yielded a six fold speedup in processing a single
field of view over manual counting, with additional time savings realized
by removing the need for user interaction.Conclusions: We have
successfully implemented a fully automated 3D foci counting algorithm
which identifies both foci, as well as surrounding nuclei, with little to
no human interaction. This algorithm allows for the fast processing of
large quantities of immunofluorescence data, thereby providing greater
confidence in our DNA damage experiments.

