Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-Warburg agent BPM 31510 arbitrates fatty acid metabolism
in eliciting an anticancer response


De-regulated lipid homeostasis is a key feature of the altered metabolic
phenotype observed in cancer, particularly in the adipose-rich
microenvironment of breast tumors. Mitochondria serve as a central hub
for lipid metabolism through mitochondrial -oxidation pathways and
biosynthesis through production of citric acid cycle-derived citrate and
the activity of ATP citrate lyase, the rate-limiting enzyme in lipid
biosynthesis. We have previously demonstrated BPM 31510 ability to
effectuate Warburg switch from glycolysis to mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation resulting in activation of apoptosis in multiple cancers
including triple negative breast cancer. The present investigated the
role of BPM 31510 in influencing lipid metabolism in cancer cells to
arbitrate its anti-cancer effect. Cell viability was assessed in
MDA-MB231 and SkBr-3 breast cancer cells exposed to BPM 31510 alone or in
combination with fatty metabolism inhibitors including C75, etomoxir, and
trimetazidine, inhibitors of fatty acid synthase (FASN), carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT-1), and -oxidation, respectively, as well as
a more pleiotropic fatty acid metabolism modulator, metformin. Breast
cancer cells were more sensitive to BPM 31510 when treated in combination
with C75, etomoxir, and trimetazidine as indicated by a left-shift in the
BPM 31510 dose-response curve in both MDA-MB231 and SkBr-3 cells. In
contrast, combined treatment with metformin did not alter cytotoxic
responses to BPM 31510, indicating specificity for responses in fatty
acid metabolism pathway modulation. Interestingly, BPM31510 treatment was
associated with a dose- and time-dependent increase in mRNA expression of
fatty acid metabolism gene products (FASN, CPT1, ACSL1) and accumulation
of the triglyceride backbone, glycerol, in MDA-MB-231 cells. Structural
lipidomic analysis used to assess the metabolic fate of BPM 31510
liposomal formulation components demonstrated that these were readily
incorporated into prevalent diacyl-glyerol (DAG) and triacyl-glycerol
(TAG) species along with de novo fatty acid species such as palmitate.
Together, these results demonstrate that BPM 31510 alters endogenous and
exogenous lipid homeostasis in breast cancer cells and rationale for
potential combination with fatty acid metabolism inhibitors for
anti-cancer therapy. The results expands on BPM 31510 anti-cancer
mechanism, suggesting a central role in arbitrating the convergence of
glycolysis, glucose and fatty acid oxidation pathways within the cancer
cell metabolism network.

