Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Penfluridol suppresses glioblastoma tumor growth by inhibiting
sonic hedgehog signaling


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common brain tumor with poor survival
rate. The main obstacle in the treatment of glioblastoma patients is the
presence of blood brain barrier, which restricts the movement of the
drugs to reach the brain. Penfluridol (PF) is known to cross blood brain
barrier and is a clinically approved drug for schizophrenia patients. It
is demonstrated and established by us that penfluridol suppresses the
growth of metastasized breast cancer cells in brain giving us the
rationale to evaluate it against glioblastoma (Alok Ranjan, Parul Gupta
and Sanjay Srivastava, Cancer Research 2015). Penfluridol significantly
reduced the viability of U87-MG, T98G and U251 MG glioblastoma cells with
an IC50 of 6M, 5.5M and 9M respectively after 24 h of treatment and
induced apoptosis as exhibited by FITC/Annexin assay and cleavage of
caspase 3 as well as PARP. It has been shown that GLI1, a transcription
factor belonging to sonic hedgehog signaling is overexpressed in GBM and
responsible for tumor progression. Our results demonstrated that
penfluridol treatment reduced the expression of GLI1 in U87MG, T98G and
U251 MG cells in concentration-dependent manner. In addition,
overexpression of MGMT, a DNA repair enzyme has been linked to
temozolomide (TMZ) resistance in GBM therapy. Combination of PF and TMZ
induced more apoptosis and reduced the expression of GLI1 and MGMT as
compared to PF or TMZ treatment alone. Our results further demonstrated
that oral administration of PF inhibited the growth of GBM tumors by 66%
and 72% in subcutaneous and intracranial GBM tumor model respectively.
Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor tissue and western blot analysis of
tumor lysate indicated down regulation of GLI1, MGMT and increase in
cleavage of caspase 3, confirming in vitro finding. Apoptosis induction
effect of PF treatment in tumor tissues was further confirmed by Tunel
staining. Taken together, these results indicate that overall GBM tumor
growth suppression by penfluridol was associated with inhibition of Gli1
and induction of apoptosis

