Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bevacizumab enhances the antitumor effect of BRAFV600E inhibition
in colorectal and melanoma xenograft models


BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) have shown improved response rate and overall
survival (OS) compared to standard chemotherapy in metastatic melanoma.
Combinations of BRAF and MEK targeted agents further improve
progression-free survival (PFS) and OS when compared with single-agent
BRAFi, but the development of resistance remains a major obstacle to
long-term disease control. Thus, additional strategies must be exploited
to increase the efficacy of BRAF-MEK blockade in metastatic melanoma and
circumvent or delay the onset of resistance.We have previously
demonstrated in murine xenograft models of BRAF mutant melanomas and
colorectal cancers (CRC) that the vemurafenib analog, PLX4720, has
cytostatic activity and induces vascular normalization by changing the
pro-angiogenic program triggered by the oncogenic mutation (Bottos A et
al., 2012;109(6):E353-9). We hypothesized that BRAF-targeted inhibitors
could cooperate with anti-angiogenic regimens in the treatment of
BRAF-mutant melanoma and colorectal tumors.Here, we demonstrated that
when associated with the VEGFA neutralizing antibody bevacizumab (COMBO),
PLX4720 shows enhanced anti-cancer effects and induces a de novo
transcriptional signature in BRAF mutant melanoma and colorectal
xenografts. Interestingly, in the COMBO, bevacizumab does not alter the
improvement in blood perfusion and tumor vessel normalization observed
with PLX4720 alone. Although targeted inhibition of either BRAF or VEGFA
initially suppresses the tumor growth, only combined inhibition of both
pathways results in an evident apoptotic effect. Furthermore, bevacizumab
delays the onset of resistance to PLX4720 by recruiting macrophages with
a M1-like phenotype and inducing a remodeling of the extracellular
matrix. The latter is characterized by a reduction in collagen deposition
and of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), known to sustain cancer
progression. The effect of bevacizumab on acquired resistance to PLX4720
is transient and depends on the presence of M1 macrophages. Indeed, 3/6
xenografts treated with COMBO start re-growing after 6 weeks with a
dramatic reduction of infiltrating macrophages and an increase of
CAFs.Collectively, our findings offer a new perspective for the
management of clinical resistance to BRAF inhibitors and offer a
rationale to combine BRAFV600E inhibitors with anti-angiogenic regimens.

