Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intrinsic determinants of constitutive activity of exon-skipping
variants of androgen receptor in castration resistant prostate cancer


The C-terminally located ligand-binding domain (LBD) of androgen receptor
(AR) folds into 12 helices (H1-H12) and its structural integrity permits
a strict ligand-dependency of AR to act as a transcription factor. The
two most common AR variants (ARVs) V7 and v567es lack LBD and are
constitutively active and resistant to the forefront antiandrogen drugs.
Moreover, the recent comprehensive splicing landscapes revealed that
metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) harbored multiple
forms of ARVs, many of which have diverse patterns of inclusion/exclusion
of exons (exon 4-8) corresponding to LBD to produce namely exon-skipping
variants. The presence of these previously unreported ARVs adds another
layer of complexity to AR signaling. Thus, it crucial to predict the
functional outcomes associated with their expression of these ARVs in
relation to mCRPC progression. To this end, we characterized these ARVs
with respect to their subcellular localization and transactivation
capability. Notably, v5es, which skips exon 5 (E5), displayed predominant
nuclear localization and constitutive activity as reported for V7 and
v567es. v6es, which includes E5 but excludes E6, is mainly localized in
cytoplasm and transcriptionally inactive. Exclusion of E5 and 6 introduce
premature stop codons in E6 and E7, respectively, which results in
deletion of most of the LBD in v5es and v6es. On the other hand, v56es
maintains the reading frame resulting in the inclusion of C-terminal half
of LBD corresponding to E7 and 8, show nuclear and cytoplasmic
distribution, and lack transactivation capability. Both active and
inactive ARVs commonly possess E1 through E4. Accordingly, E5 appears to
blunt transactivation capability of v6es while both/either of two exons
E7 and 8 suppress the activity of v56es. To gain insight into what
aspects are different between active and inactive LBD-less ARVs, we first
generated and systematically analyzed a series of mutations with deletion
of E5 in v6es toward E4-E5 junction. Among the 12 helices in LBD, H4 and
H5 reside in E5. While the deletion mutants with intact H5 were similar
to v6es in their properties, those with compromise or deletion of
residues in H5 exhibited exclusive nuclear localization and constitutive
activity. When inhibitory effects of E7 and E8 are considered, v56es
without E7 and v56es was found to share similar properties. In contrast,
v56es missing E8 was exclusively localized in nucleus and displayed
significant but much lower transcriptional activity than that of v5es and
the v56es derivative with simultaneous deletion of E7 and 8. These
clearly suggest that multiple mechanisms exist to determine subcellular
localizations and transactivation activities of ARVs. To develop the
treatment based on AR expression profiles, we are continuing to maximize
precise prediction of characteristics of ARVs that can singly or in
aggregate contribute to mCRPC progression.

