Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIC-1 and Endoglin are protein serum biomarkers capable of
increasing the clinical diagnostic specificity of the PSA test


PSA test and digital rectal examination have been routinely used to
screen for prostate cancer (PCa). PSA screening revolutionized the
management of PCa, especially with regards to early detection. Before the
PSA test was available, 20% of men were diagnosed with PCa that had
already spread to the bone. Today, that number is around 4%. However, it
is estimated that 56% of the cases are overdiagnosed resulting in
overtreatment and exposing the patients to serious unnecessary treatment
morbidities. Also the rate of false-positives is incredibly high
(60-80%), since PSA is not cancer specific. It is critical to
discriminate clinically significant PCa patients requiring definitive
treatment from those who would safely undergo active surveillance
monitoring.The aim of this project is to identify and incorporate
multiple serum protein biomarkers into an assay that will enhance the
clinical diagnostic specificity of the PSA screening test. Using ELISA,
we analyzed protein serum levels of Endoglin, IL-8 and MIC-1 in samples
obtained from 50 PCa patients and 50 non-cancer individuals. ROC curve
analysis was used to determine if these biomarkers were capable of
separating the 2 groups. Multivariate logistic regression (MLR) was used
to identify a panel of biomarkers that combined to PSA would increase the
test specificity.MIC-1 was the only biomarker capable of discriminating
PCa from normal cases (AUC = 0.76; p0.7) it suggests a good potential for
this protein as a biomarker in PCa diagnosis. IL-8 did not show
significant differences (p = 0.1828) in the levels detected between
cancer and normal samples. The expression of these proteins were also
evaluated for their prognostic association with clinical-pathological
features: Gleason Score (GS), T and N stage. MIC-1 protein levels was
capable to separate GS 3+3 and 3+4 from those 4+3 or higher (AUC = 0.73),
suggesting that this biomarker might be associated with more aggressive
cases. Using MLR, we identified Endoglin, MIC-1 and PSA as a multiple
biomarker panel that enhanced specificity of the PSA screening test. The
panel resulted in an assay with 88% specificity and 86% sensitivity that
is slightly higher than PSA alone (82% specificity; 84% sensitivity). Our
results suggest that MIC-1 is a strong candidate as a biomarker for
cancer screening and disease aggressiveness. We also showed that when PSA
test is combined with the presence of MIC-1 and Endoglin in serum, it
resulted in an assay with higher specificity and sensitivity than when
these biomarkers are evaluated alone. To validate these results, protein
serum levels of Endoglin, MIC-1 and IL-8 will be determined in a bigger
cohort of normal and PCa patients. Other biomarkers are also being
evaluated.

