Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic therapy to target neuroendocrine prostate cancer using
precision medicine models


BackgroundNeuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) is a highly aggressive
subtype of prostate cancer that may either arise de novo or much more
commonly after hormonal therapy for prostate adenocarcinoma. Patients
diagnosed with NEPC are often treated with platinum chemotherapy able to
produce only short duration responses underling the urgent need of
identifying novel potential therapeutic targets for this lethal
disease.In the context of our Englander Institute for Precision Medicine
we developed patient derived 3D NEPC tumor organoids and patient derived
PDXs to test specific inhibitors on molecular targets identified by
genomic analysis of native tumors. Emerging data from an integrative
molecular analysis of metastatic tumors from a large cohort of castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients, including NEPC, points to a
key role of the Polycomb gene EZH2 and the epigenome in the pathogenesis
of NEPC.MethodsTumor organoids were developed according to protocols
developed by our Englander Institute for Precision Medicine and other
Institutes. Briefly the tissue biopsies (liver and bone biopsy) were
washed, enzymatically digested and then seeded in a Matrigel (BD)
droplet. Organoids were then characterized at both genomic (WES) and
protein level (IHC) to confirm the expression of specific markers.
Organoids were also subcutaneously injected in NSG mice to generate PDX
for drug treatment in vivo.ResultsBased on the significant EZH2
overexpression in NEPC tumors by RNA-Seq and tissue microarray, we
checked the expression of EZH2 and H3K273M, the readout of its activity,
in NEPC organoids and we found out that both EZH2 and H3K273M were high
expressed in NEPC organoids. Therefore we evaluated the effects of the
EZH2 inhibitor, GSK343, in NEPC versus CRPC organoids and in the
castration resistant line DU145 versus the NEPC cell line NCI-H660. We
found out that GSK343 effectively inhibited H3K27me3 and resulted in a
significant reduction of NEPC organoids and H660 viability while DU145 as
well as CRPC organoids were insensitive to the drug. We extended our
studies generating PDXs by subcutaneously injecting NEPC tumor organoids
in NSG mouse. The tumor extracted from the PDXs showed a high
proliferative phenotype with molecular features characteristic of NEPC as
chromogranin A expression and no androgen receptor expression. NEPC PDXs
were treated with the EZH2 inhibitor, GSK126, and we observed a
significant reduction of tumor size along with the treatment suggesting
that EZH2 is a potential therapeutic target for this highly aggressive
disease.ConclusionsIn the Englander Institute for Precision Medicine we
are generating NEPC patient tumor organoids and PDXs to unveil new
targets to facilitate therapeutic decision at this late stage disease.
Among the possible hits, EZH2 represents a promising drug target and a
potential modulator of the NEPC phenotype.

