Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The spindle assembly checkpoint gene Bub1b is essential for the
survival of some breast cancers


As normal breast epithelium evolves towards malignancy, cells accumulate
genomic changes that give them a replicative advantage while at the same
time increasing their genomic instability. Increased genomic instability
results in accumulation of genomic aberrations that compromise the
genomic integrity and, therefore, threaten cell viability, thus putting
cancer cells under mitotic stress. As a consequence, cancer cells
evolutionarily must adapt themselves to compete with the possible
detrimental effects of genomic instability. Finding a balance between the
instability that gives them a replicative advantage and the instability
that could lead them to mitotic catastrophe is crucial. The mitotic
stress caused by genomic instability may require overexpression of
certain spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) genes, which can prevent
mitotic catastrophe that would occur if cancer cells undergo mitosis
prematurely. Although the full mechanism of action of SAC is yet to be
elucidated, Bub1b through its protein BubR1 is an important part of this
checkpoint, and inhibits the onset of anaphase until all chromosomes are
aligned correctly at the metaphase plate.Our analysis of clinical
datasets shows a significant increase in the expression of Bub1b in
breast cancer as compared to normal epithelia. Furthermore, Bub1b
overexpression correlates with decreased overall survival in patient
samples. Our analyses also show a pattern of increasing Bub1b
overexpression in more aggressive variants of breast cancer such as
triple negative tumors and high-grade tumors, which also tend to be more
resistant to current therapies. Expression analyses of breast cancer cell
lines reveal that Bub1b overexpression is positively correlated with more
aggressive behavior.We postulated that the requirement for Bub1b
expression might be a vulnerability of rapidly proliferating cancers;
therefore, its inhibition will result in cell death through mitotic
catastrophe. Using RNA interference with siRNAs, we reduced Bub1b levels
in a variety of breast cancer cells. Our results showed significant
decrease in cell viability and clonogenicity in soft agar upon Bub1b
knockdown, especially in triple negative breast cancer cell lines.
However, the viability of normal breast epithelium cells, MCF12A, was not
affected.Our data indicate that Bub1b is a critical player in breast
cancer viability, and further investigation of the role of Bub1b in
promoting successful proliferation of breast cancer cells with genomic
instability could provide a new therapeutic strategy particularly in
concert with standard genotoxic treatments such as alkylators, spindle
poisons and radiation therapy.

