Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide miRNA methylation analyses in non-small cell lung
cancer patients


Deregulated DNA methylation (referred to as methylation) leading to
transcriptional inactivation of certain genes occurs frequently in
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). Besides protein encoding genes also
microRNA (miRNA) encoding genes were found to be targets for methylation
in NSCLCs, however, the number of known methylated miRNA genes is still
small. Thus, we investigated genome-wide methylation of miRNA genes in
primary tumors (TU) and corresponding non-malignant lung tissue samples
(NL) of 50 NSCLC patients using methylated DNA immunoprecipitation
followed by custom designed tiling microarray analyses (MeDIP-chip).
Differentially methylated miRNA genes between TU and NL samples were
identified using paired t-statistics with permutation adjusted p-values
for step down multiple testing. Using this approach, 201 differentially
methylated probes between TU and NL samples were found. These probes were
annotated resulting in the identification of 39 tumor-specifically
methylated miRNA genes. 79% of them are associated with a 5 CpG island.
While some of these miRNA genes were already known to be methylated in
NSCLCs (e.g. miR-9-3, miR-124) methylation of the vast majority of them
was unknown so far.We selected 6 miRNA genes (miR-10b, miR-1179, miR-137,
miR-572, miR-3150b and miR-129-2) for gene-specific methylation analyses
in TU and corresponding NL samples of 108 NSCLC patients and observed
statistically significant tumor-specific methylation of these miRNA genes
which confirmed our MeDIP-chip data (p 1.000 NSCLC patients from The
Cancer Genome Atlas database, we found that many of the predicted miRNA
targets are upregulated in TU samples (e.g. CCNE1, HMGB3, HOXD11, TFAP2A,
ZIC2). Based on these findings, we investigated if miR-1179 indeed
targets CCNE1 in vitro. Thus, we transfected miR-1179 mimics into CCNE1
expressing NSCLC cell lines (HTB182 and NCI-H1650). Using RT-PCR, we
found downregulated CCNE1 expression in cells transfected with miR-1179
mimics compared to cells transfected with controls. In addition, we
observed downregulated CCNE1 expression in cells transfected with
miR-1179 mimics compared to cells transfected with controls by Western
blot analyses. Additional functional analyses of miR-1179 targets as well
as of other miRNA targets are ongoing.In conclusion, we identified a
large number of tumor-specifically methylated miRNA genes in NSCLC
patients and found that some of these miRNAs target certain oncogenes in
NSCLC cells. Overall, our findings emphasize the impact of miRNA gene
methylation on the pathogenesis of NSCLCs.

