Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional imaging markers for blockade of breast cancer
metastasis by IGF1R and insulin receptor targeted drugs using novel MRI
and targeted iron oxide nanoparticles


IGF1R and insulin receptor (IR) regulate biology of estrogen positive
(ER+) and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells. The results of
initial clinical trials with anti-IGF1R drugs have been disappointing due
to feedback upregulation of insulin receptor (IR) signaling and absence
of biomarkers for these drugs.We evaluated the effects of BMS-754807, a
dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor of IGF1R/IR on ER+ and TNBC. In ER+ MCF-7
cells, it inhibited xenograft growth of MCF-7 tumors (n = 10 per
treatment) compared to vehicle. Interestingly, while tumor growth was
suppressed over a period of five weeks, eventually the tumors displayed
resistance to BMS-754807. In TNBC, it inhibited motility in vitro. In
contrast to ER+ cells, BMS-754807 did not inhibit primary tumor growth of
TNBC cells injected into the mammary fat pad of mice. But at a dose of 50
mg/kg daily inhibited metastasis of TNBC cells, MDA-231-LM2 and
MDA-MB435A/LCC6 cells, in the orthotopic and tail vein models of
metastasis compared to vehicle (n = 10/group). Our data indicate that
regulation of metastasis and tumor growth by IGF1R can be discrete events
and functional imaging to identify biological properties of metastatic
breast cancer regulated by IGF1R/IR are needed to better define
treatments. While MRI is a powerful tool for detecting and imaging
cancer, its utility in imaging metastasis to the lung is limited due to
the challenges of lung MRI with conventional 3D gradient echo (GRE). MRI
does not visualize lung well, mainly due to the abundance of air-tissue
interfaces, which cause the MR signal to decay too rapidly for
conventional MRI pulse sequences to capture. Clinically metastases are
monitored by CT or PET but exposure of patients to ionizing radiation is
a concern and problematic in longitudinal studies monitoring response to
a targeted drug. Therefore, we recently reported the utility of a novel
MR sequence called sweep imaging with Fourier transformation (SWIFT),
where the data is acquired quasi-simultaneously with the radiofrequency
pulse, to image lung metastasis of breast cancer. Here, we monitored
response to IGF1R and IGF1R/IR targeted drugs in preclinical models of
lung metastasis of breast cancer. We used MDA-231-LM2 cells with the tail
vein injection model of metastasis. Mice with breast cancer metastases in
the lungs were treated with either huEM164, an antibody against IGF1R, or
BMS-754807. Metastasis was monitored by BLI and SWIFT MRI weekly. SWIFT
was more sensitive in detecting inhibition of metastasis by these
drugs.Thus, dual inhibition of IGF1R and IR is effective in blocking
growth of ER+ and metastasis of TNBC. However, combination of this
therapeutic strategy with other agents may be necessary to prevent or
delay onset of resistance. Further, noninvasive biomarkers of response to
IGF1R/IR targeted drugs can be developed with SWIFT imaging.

