Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFRL1 in prostate cancer progression


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a disease with high incidence, however, many PCa
patients are over-diagnosed and over-treated. Molecular characterization
of PCa provides a valid approach to stratify patients, and thus reduce
overtreatment. Fibroblast growth factors and their receptor (FGF/FGFR)
signaling pathways are involved in various cellular functions such as
proliferation, differentiation, migration, and apoptosis of prostate
cancer cells. Dysregulated and constitutively activated FGF/FGFR pathways
have been shown to be involved in the initiation and progression of
prostate cancer. Fibroblast growth factor receptor like 1 (FGFRL1, FGFR5)
is the most recently identified member of the FGFR family. FGFRL1 binds
several FGFs but its short intracellular part lacks a tyrosine kinase
domain. Therefore, the extracellular domain has been suggested to act as
a dominant negative regulator of other FGFRs. However, cellular functions
of FGFRL1 remain poorly understood. Aberrant FGFRL1 expression has been
reported in ovarian, bladder, colon, and other cancers. In silico data
analysis indicated altered FGFRL1 mRNA expression in 17% of PCa cases. To
date, there have been no systematic studies of FGFRL1 expression and
function in prostate and PCa. We studied FGFRL1 expression and function
in PCa cell lines, xenografts and in human PCa specimens. FGRL1 was
knocked-down in PC-3M cells, by shRNAs, which showed reduced growth as
nude mouse xenografts when compared to control. This argues against a
dominant negative function. To study FGFRL1 in human PCas, we collected
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples from PCa patients undergoing
radical prostatectomy (n = 243), metastatic PCa (n = 36) and
castration-resistant PCa (n = 21). Samples were prepared for mRNA
analysis, and immunohistochemistry. The overall levels of FGFRL1
immunostaining were significantly increased in PCa compared to normal
tissue. In normal tissue, FGFRL1 immunostaining localized to the cell
membrane and to a lesser extent to the cytoplasm and nuclei. In PCa,
protein expression of FGFRL1 was decreased at the cell membrane, while
expression in the cytoplasm and nucleus were increased. Low membrane and
high nuclear immunostaining of FGFRL1 correlated with high Gleason grade.
High nuclear FGFRL1 also correlated with high levels of preoperative
serum PSA and an increased proportion of tumors with positive surgical
margins. Our results suggest that FGFRL1 may play an active role in PCa
cells and in tumor progression and can possibly be used to assess PCa
prognosis.

