Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleotide excision repair gene expression in childhood acute
lymphocytic leukemia is a predictor of early relapse


Double strand break repair and its relationship with genomic instability
have been well studied in Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL). In contrast,
base repair mechanisms, such as Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) have not
been well characterized in ALL. The NER pathway addresses base damage
resulting in helix distortion and replication stalling, making it
important for all types of cancer. Since increased NER is a known
mechanism of chemotherapeutic drug resistance, we hypothesize that there
will be an increase in the expression of the NER genes at the time of
relapse in ALL patients. We have studied the role of NER in ALL by
secondary analysis of 2 independent gene expression microarray studies
performed by Staal et al. (Set A, GSE18497) and Hogan et al. (Set B,
GSE28460). Both studies analyzed matched samples of ALL patients at
diagnosis and relapse (41 and 49 pairs, respectively). In Set A we found
that 17/20 NER genes have higher expression at the time of relapse, than
at the time of diagnosis. 4 of these genes were individually significant.
However, in a subset analysis of these data sets, based on the time to
relapse, patients who have early (3 years) relapse gave distinct results.
In Set A, 18/20 NER genes were upregulated at the time of diagnosis in
the early relapse group vs. the late relapse group. 4 genes were
individually significantly increased. In set B, NER gene expression at
the time of diagnosis of patients in the early relapse group was
increased in all 20 NER genes when compared to the late relapse group. 7
genes showed individually significant increases in expression. In
addition patients in the late relapse group showed an increase in
expression of many of the NER genes at time of relapse when compared to
time of diagnosis. In conclusion, there are two types of ALL. Early
relapsing ALL manifests high NER gene expression at diagnosis with little
change at relapse. Late relapsing ALL manifests low NER gene expression
at diagnosis with substantial increase at the time of relapse. NER gene
expression at the time of diagnosis may allow us to predict which
patients are at greatest risk for earlier relapse. This will allow
pharmacogenomic targeting of each type of ALL.

