Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRISENOX disrupts MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP interaction and increased
promyelocytes formation in murine model of APL


Trisenox (ATO) is widely used in the treatment of all age group of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients in both induction and consolidation
therapy. In vitro studies are shown that it works through oxidative
stress, cell cycle regulation and apoptosis to kill APL cells having
PML-RAR oncogene. Some ATO resistant case of APL patients are reported
with different oncogenes combination. However, in vivo anti-leukemic
mechanism of action of ATO in APL patients poorly known. We have used
transgenic murine model to elucidate the anti-cancer properties of ATO
through new target. We hypothesized that ATO disrupts MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP
interaction and also increased more number of promyelocytes formation
inside bone marrow cells of APL mice. To test the hypothesis, we used
different groups of younger (4-5weeks old) transgenic APL mice and
standardized different dose of ATO (1.25, 2.5, 5.0 and 7.5 mg/kg body wt)
after 21days continuous treatment in PBS. We utilized western blotting,
immunocytochemistry, confocal imaging and other molecular techniques to
identify molecular mechanisms of ATO action in APL mice hepatocytes as
well as bone marrow cells. We found that it increases number of
promyelocyte formation in bone marrow cells and also degradation of
PML-RAR dose dependent fashion. ATO nicely activated p53 expression in
both liver tissue as well as bone marrow cells of APL mice through
degradation of MDM2. It was also disrupted both expression and
association of MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP complex molecules dose dependent manner in
mice liver tissues. On the basis of these findings, we conclude that ATO
disrupts MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP interaction, increased promyelocytes formation,
MDM2 degradation by accumulating P53 in APL mice liver tissues. It is
novel target for treatment of APL patients through designing of new
anti-leukemic drugs.Keywords: Trisenox, P53, MDM2-DAXX-HAUSP complex
molecules APL Mice hepatocytes and bone marrow cells.Acknowledgements:
This research was financially supported by National Institutes of Health
NCRR Grant No. 5G12RR013459 and MIMHD Grant No. 8G12MD007581, through the
RCMI-Center for Environmental Health at Jackson State University.

