Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of a combination of lenvatinib mesilate,
ifosfamide, and etoposide against human pediatric osteosarcoma cell lines


Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is an orally administered molecular
targeted agent that selectively inhibits several receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) including vascular endothelial growth factor receptors
(VEGFR1-3), fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4),
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) , RET, and KIT.
Lenvatinib has been marketed for the treatment of advanced or
differentiated thyroid cancer refractory to radioactive iodine.
Lenvatinib showed antitumor activity against various tumor types mainly
through its potent inhibition of angiogenesis. In this study we evaluated
the antitumor activities of lenvatinib in combination with ifosfamide and
etoposide against human pediatric osteosarcoma cell lines.Five human
pediatric osteosarcoma cell lines (143B, G-292 clone A141B1, HOS, HuO9,
and Saos-2) were used. Antiproliferative activity of lenvatinb and
etoposide was evaluated in WST-8-based colorimetric proliferation assay
or in soft agar colony formation assay. To evaluate the in vivo antitumor
activity, lenvatinib alone, the combination of etoposide and ifosfamide,
and the combination of these 3 drugs were administered to mice bearing
the human osteosarcoma xenografts.Etoposide inhibited cell proliferation
with IC50 values of a range within 0.31 - 4.1 mol/L. G-292 clone A141B1
(G-292) had the lowest sensitivity to etoposide. Four human osteosarcoma
cell lines out of five were not sensitive to lenvatinib in proliferation
assay (IC50 values >10 mol/L), and only G-292 was susceptible to
lenvatinib with IC50 values of 1.3 and 0.059 mol/L in proliferation assay
or soft agar colony formation assay, respectively. G-292 has been
reported to have FGFR1 amplification and shows high transcript expression
of FGFR1, suggesting that the antiproliferative activity of lenvatinib
could be mediated by the FGFR1 blockade. In all xenograft models, tumor
volumes with the triple combination treatment were significantly lower
than that with vehicle treatment on Day 8. Antitumor effect of the triple
combination was significantly more potent than that of lenvatinib alone
and the ifosfamide-etoposide combination in 143B, G-292, and HOS, and
more potent than that of lenvatinib alone in HuO9 and Saos-2 xenograft
models.The triple combination of lenvatinib, ifosfamide, and etoposide
was active against all examined human pediatric osteosarcoma xenografts
in mice, and lenvatinib enhanced antitumor activity of the
ifosfamide-etoposide combination in 3 out of 5 models. These results
support further investigation of the combination of lenvatinib with
ifosfamide and etoposide in osteosarcoma. In addition, direct antitumor
activity of lenvatinib against the osteosarcoma cells harboring FGFR1
amplification warrants further investigation.

