Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of osteopontin splicing isoforms in prostate cancer
cells resistant to docetaxel


Resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs corresponds to main causes of
treatment failure. Total osteopontin (OPN) has been described as a gene
product involved on chemoresistance, besides activating several aspects
of tumor progression. OPN regulates the expression of P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) in prostate cancer (PCa) cells, besides promoting apoptosis
evasion induced by chemotherapy using paclitaxel and estramustin. These
data point OPN as a potential therapeutic target to approaches that could
reduce chemotherapy tumor resistance. However, most of this data are
related to total OPN. Once OPN suffers alternative splicing, producing 3
isoforms, further investigation should demostrate their specific
involvement on chemoresistance. Recent data from our group indicated that
OPNb and OPNc splicing isoforms activate PCa tumor progression features.
Besides, PCa cells that overexpress these splice variants are more
resistant to apoptosis induced by docetaxel (DXT). The current work aims
to investigate the expression pattern of OPN splicing isoforms (OPN-SIs)
and their relationships in DXT-PCa resistant cells. Total RNA has been
extracted from PCa cell lines resistant to DXT (PC3-D8 and PC3-D12) and
PC3 control cells with similar cell passages (PC3-Ag). Then, cDNa has
been synthesized. OPN-SI expression levels were analyzed by quantitative
real time PCR (qRT-PCR) using SYBR Green and isoform specific
oligonucleotides. Relative expression levels were calculated using CT
method. Among the 3 OPN-SIs, we observed that OPNb and OPNc variants are
overexpressed in relation to OPNa in DXT-PCa resistant cells PC3-D8 and
PC3-D12, when compared to PC3-Ag. PC3-D12 cell line, resistant to higher
DXT concentrations, expresses higher levels of OPNc, when compared to the
other cell lines. Overall, our data further evidence that OPNb and OPNc
overexpression in DXT-PCa resistant cells could be involved on resistance
to DXT. Functional assays will be performed in order to investigate the
molecular mechanisms by which these OPN-SIs mediate resistance to this
chemotherapeutic drug.

