Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and application of a novel model of human
lung-to-brain metastasis: identification of TWIST2 and SPOCK1 as unique
regulators of brain metastases


Brain Metastases (BM) are the most common type of cerebral tumor in
adult, occurring at a rate ten times greater than that of primary brain
cancers. The inherent properties of a primary tumor cell capable of
initiating a BM resemble that of a cancer stem cell (CSC). Previous work
conducted in our lab identified a CSC population within lung-derived BM.
We hypothesize that a subgroup of CSC-like cells, termed brain
metastasis-initiating cells (BMICs), are responsible for the initiation
of BM and are identifiable by an exclusive subset of genes that regulate
self-renewal and metastasis. Despite the prevalence and lethality of BM,
there is no clinically relevant model that fully reflects metastasis in
patients. The selection of an appropriate metastatic in vivo model is
crucial for the identification of genes that regulate BM formation,
prognostic and/or predictive markers, and evaluation of anti-metastatic
therapeutics. We recently generated a novel human-mouse
xenotransplantation model of BM that allows for interrogation of each
phase of the metastatic process from lung to brain, through injection of
human patient-derived GFP-expressing BMICs into immunocompromised mice
via three routes: 1) intracranial (IC), 2) intrathoracic (IT) and 3)
intravascular/intracardiac (IV). GFP+ BMICs were harvested from the lungs
and/or brains from each injection route, and RNA was submitted for
microarray analysis to identify a unique metastatic and tissue-specific
gene signature from BMICs isolated from IT injections. We performed RNA
interference screens in vitro and in vivo on BMIC lines against 150 genes
implicated in BM formation in order to identify genes involved in
self-renewal, tumor initiation and metastasis. We validated two top hits,
TWIST2 and SPOCK1, using our novel BM mouse model, and determined that
their knockdown functionally blocked BM formation. Future work will
examine the expression of these genes in primary lung FFPE samples to
determine if they are predictive biomarkers of lung-to-brain metastasis
in prospective cohorts of newly diagnosed lung cancer patients, and to
determine their potential as therapeutic targets.

