Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential clonal selection in tumor tissue and cell-free DNA
from a neratinib-treated refractory breast cancer patient harboring an
activating ERBB2 (HER2) mutation


The ongoing Copenhagen Prospective Personalized Oncology (CoPPO) research
program aims to offer patients with exhausted treatment options, targeted
therapy against actionable driver mutations identified in freshly
obtained biopsies by whole exome sequencing (WES). Mutations are tracked
in circulating cell free DNA (cfDNA) to examine the clonal selection of
tumor cells evoked by therapy. Here we report the results from a patient
with metastasizing HER2 negative and estrogen receptor (ER) positive
breast cancer (Luminal A) previously exposed to seven lines of
chemotherapy as well as ER antagonists and aromatase inhibitors. After
enrollment in the program, examination of liver metastases by whole exome
sequencing, RNA-Seq and microarray expression analysis revealed high
expression of the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) as well as a mutation in the
ligand-binding domain of ESR1 (H524L). Moreover, somatic variants in
ERBB2 and PIK3CA were identified, including an activating mutation in
ERBB2 (S310Y), and consequently the patient treated with neratinib, an
irreversible pan-HER (EGFR/ERBB2/ERBB4) tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
through a compassionate use program (Puma Biotechnology Inc.). Neratinib
caused a rapid decrease in the allelic frequency of ERBB2 (S310Y) cfDNA
after 2 days with a continuous decline during the next 7 days. Consistent
with this neratinib treatment effect, MRI scans showed regression of the
liver metastases. In contrast, the PIK3CA mutation showed an increase in
the allele frequency, indicating the existence of a subclone that was
insensitive to neratinib. Two months later, the total amount of cfDNA
increased and continued to do so. After 5 months on neratinib, the
patient progressed with the appearance of brain metastases which were
surgically removed and subject to WES. The vast majority of the
mutations, including the ERBB2 mutation, observed in the liver metastasis
could not be identified in the brain metastases, except for the PIK3CA
mutation. More than 300 new variants were exclusively identified in the
brain metastases, among these, ERBB3 as well as new PIK3CA, and ESR1
mutations, that were not present in the pre-treatment cfDNA samples.
After 4 months of treatment, an increase in the mutation frequency of the
liver metastasis specific ESR1 and ERBB2 mutations was observed. In
conclusion, neratinib was able to suppress an activating ERBB2 mutation
in a heavily pre-treated ER+ breast cancer patient. However, refractory
tumor clones harboring ERBB3, PIK3CA and ESR1 mutations developed in
brain. These data indicate that combining neratinib with fulvestrant or
inhibitors of the HER3/PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway might prove beneficial to
overcome potential resistance mechanisms to therapy.The two first authors
contributed equally.

