Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PAK4 allosteric modulator (KPT-9274) attenuates the growth of
renal cell carcinoma


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is an increasingly prevalent cancer type that
is frequently asymptomatic on presentation and is associated with poor
responses and resistance even to the current targeted therapies. Thus,
novel therapeutic approaches to treat this disease are urgently needed.
P21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) is a mediator of filopodia formation and
stabilizes -catenin transcriptional activity, both of which are integral
to nephrogenesis and cancer. We hypothesized that inhibitors of the PAK4
signaling pathway would result in salutary effects on RCC. To test this,
we evaluated the in vitro response of several human RCC cells and normal
kidney proximal epithelial cells (NHKs) to the specific PAK4 Allosteric
Modulators (PAMs; KPT-8752 and KPT-9274). 786-O (VHL-mutant RCC) and
caki-1 (VHL-wt RCC) cells showed decreases in cell viability (MTT),
induction of apoptosis and arrest in G2/M phase when incubated with these
inhibitors. These responses were diminished in NHK cells which served as
a normal control cell line. Target and specific pathway proteins
(phospho-PAK4, Phospho--catenin, c-Myc and cyclin D1) were reduced after
RCC, but not NHK, were incubated with KPT-8752 and KPT-9274. To confirm
specificity of the inhibitor to PAK4, all these responses were reproduced
in RCC cells using specific PAK4 siRNA. Since 85% of RCC cases are
associated with mutation in vhl we used 786-0 xenograft mouse model to
evaluate the clinical candidate KPT-9274. KPT-9274 was orally
administered at 100 and 200 mg/kg BIDX5 for 4 weeks, resulting in clear
attenuation of tumor growth at both doses. There was no obvious change in
the health or weight of any of the animals when compared to vehicle group
suggesting manageable tolerability. We are currently evaluating
combination therapy and plan to test this inhibitor on a metastatic RCC
model. In summary, PAK4 inhibitors show considerable promise as novel
treatments of RCC as a single agent and warrants further investigation.

