Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Claudin 1 expression levels affect miRNA dynamics in human
basal-like breast cancer cells


MiRNAs have been shown to regulate numerous cellular functions including
metastasis of cancer cells, and are considered promising biomarkers of
disease. The major tight junction protein of epithelial cells, claudin 1,
is down regulated or absent in human invasive breast cancer and is
therefore considered a putative tumor suppressor. However, claudin 1 has
now been shown to be highly expressed in the basal-like molecular subtype
and in vitro studies revealed that claudin 1 can regulate breast cancer
cell motility and proliferation. To gain further understanding of how
claudin 1 mediates its activities in breast cancer, we examined changes
in global micro RNA (miRNA) gene expression when claudin 1 was
over-expressed in the phenotypically basal-like human breast cancer (HBC)
cell line MDA-MB231.Using next generation sequencing, followed by qPCR
validation, we identified seven miRNAs (miR-9-5p, miR-9-3p, miR- let-7c,
miR-127-3p, miR-99a-5p, miR-129-5p, and miR-146a-5p) whose expression
were altered as a consequence of claudin 1 over expression. Most of these
miRNAs were down regulated and associated with tumor suppression in a
variety of cancers including breast. Additionally, using gene expression
profiling analysis of the claudin 1 over expressing clones, we identified
a number of down regulated EMT related genes, including PDGFRB and CDH1
(E- cadherin). Expression of these genes is frequently lost during breast
tumor progression. Interestingly, SPP1 and SERPINE 1, genes often
associated with tumor cell migration and motility, were up regulated in
the claudin 1 over expressing clones. Employing the miRNA target
prediction program miRWalk, a number of validated miRNA target sites were
identified on some of these deregulated genes. A target site for miR-9-5p
was identified on the CDH1 sequence, whereas a target site of miR-99-5p
was identified on SERPINE 1. Altogether, over 500 target genes have been
validated as targets for the deregulated miRNAs.Overall, we show for the
first time that in HBC, claudin 1 can alter the dynamics of a number of
miRNAs involved in tumor progression. Moreover, our data provides further
evidence to suggest that claudin 1 has the potential to be a useful
biomarker that identifies a subset of tumors, within the aggressive but
currently poorly characterized basal-like subtype. Our study also
suggests that miRNAs may be used in conjunction with claudin 1 to better
characterize these cancers. Further studies are now warranted to
determine the role of these miRNAs in facilitating the function of
claudin 1 in breast cancer.

