Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unique cell-based transposon mutagenesis screen for studying EMT
process of tumor in the liver


Background and Aims: Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a complex
differentiation process that epithelial cells lose its own characteristic
and acquire mesenchymal property. EMT is reported to contribute vascular
invasion, metastasis and poorer prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). However, how and what types of genes are involved in EMT process
of HCC is still not fully understood. Here we develop cell-based
transposon mutagenesis system to screen genes involved in EMT process in
the liver, Methods: Mouse hepatoblasts were isolated from embryos of
hepatocyte-specific T2Onc2 transposon transgenic and SB11 transposase
knock-in mice (Alb-Cre/T2Onc2/SBase) or their control littermates. They
were cultured in vitro and waited for spontaneous immortalization.
Multiple immortalized hepatoblast cell lines (IHBCs) were then injected
into the flank or the liver of nude mice and monitored for tumor growth.
Results: IHBCs from Alb-Cre/T2Onc2/SBase mice showed hepatoblast
characteristics with active T2Onc2 transposition and maintained
differentiation capacity into mature hepatocytes in vitro. Five of 7
IHBCs developed tumors at flank and 3 of 5 inside the liver, while
injection of 8 IHBCs from the control littermates never developed any
tumors, indicating that transposon conferred tumorigenic potential on
IHBCs. Histological analysis revealed tumors were positive for
transposase in addition to Sox9 and EpCAM, indicating that they were
originated from hepatoblasts with albumin expression. However, they were
spindle-shaped mesenchymal tumors with positive staining for Vimentin,
suggesting that transposon induced EMT of hepatoblasts during malignant
transformation. qPCR array also showed the strong activation of
EMT-related genes in these tumors. We further confirmed these phenotypes
by additional injections of IHBCs and collected 52 xenografted tumors
from 5 IHBCs. Sequence of transposon insertion sites in these tumors
identified 803 candidate cancer genes (CCGs). Trunk driver analysis
identified oncogenic activation of Met/Gab1 signaling as the driving
force of tumor development. Pathway analysis revealed that CCGs were
enriched in known signaling pathways involved in EMT process including
Wnt, TGF-beta, MAPK and Notch signaling as well as adherence junction,
focal adhesion and regulation of actin cytoskeleton, indicating that
transposon targeted these pathways, inducing EMT in these tumors.
Furthermore, analysis of RNA-seq data from TCGA human HCC samples showed
that CCGs were enriched in genes that show significant correlation
between their mRNA levels and those of EMT-related genes, suggesting
their involvement in EMT process. Conclusion: Our unique transposon tumor
model mimics EMT process of the tumor in the liver. Therefore,
transposon-identified CCGs may be a good resource to discover genes
involved in EMT process in the liver.

