Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of Rab GTPase-mediated pathways critical for the
antimyeloma activity of Rab GGTase inhibitors


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy characterized by the
production of high levels of monoclonal protein (MP). This leads to an
increased protein folding burden in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in MM
cells, resulting in a constitutively upregulated unfolded protein
response (UPR) and a lower threshold for ER stress-mediated apoptosis. We
have previously shown that inhibitors of Rab GGTase, the enzyme
responsible for Rab GTPase geranylgeranylation, disrupt MP trafficking in
MM cells, leading to an accumulation of MP in the ER and induction of the
UPR and apoptosis. There are over 60 different Rab GTPases in mammalian
cells involved in regulating a wide range of membrane trafficking events
including exocytic, endocytic, and lysosomal pathways. In this study, we
aimed to further define how disruption of RabGTPase function in MM cells
leads to apoptosis by knocking down individual Rab proteins. Given the
accumulation of MP and induction of UPR, our initial focus was on
secretory Rabs. Knockdown of Rab1A/B (>50%) using siRNA in RPMI 8226
cells lead to moderate increases in intracellular lambda light chain in
Rab1A/B knockdowns after 72 hours (120-140% of control levels by ELISA).
However, despite the increase in intracellular MP, no increases in UPR or
apoptosis markers were seen by western blot analysis or
annexin-V/propidium iodide flow cytometry. Extended time course
experiments (up to 120 hours) also did not exhibit any increase in UPR or
apoptosis. Knockdown of Rab6A (>60%), another RabGTPase associated with
the secretory pathway, did not lead to increases in intracellular lambda
light chain or induction of apoptosis. These results suggest that
although individual knockdown of Rab1 is sufficient to partially disrupt
MP trafficking, either more complete knockdown of the individual Rabs or
knockdown of multiple Rabs is necessary for induction of the UPR and
apoptosis. Additional optimization of the knockdowns will be performed in
order to verify these results. These studies support the further
development of Rab GGTase inhibitors that globally effect Rab GTPase
geranylgeranylation as a novel anti-myeloma strategy.

