Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased interleukin-17RA expression inhibits the tumorigenesis
and independently predicts good prognosis of colorectal cancer patients


Background:Interleukin-17 receptor type A (IL-17RA) plays critical role
in promoting early colorectal tumor development and affects immune
response in tumorigenesis. Our previous study have reported
interleukin-17A modulated tumorigenesis and affected metastasis in
colorectal cancers, but the roles of its receptor (IL-17R) in colorectal
cancers remain unknown. This study explores potential role and function
of IL-17RA in colorectal cancers.Materials and MethodsThe expression of
IL-17RA was determined in colorectal cancer tissues and adjacent normal
tissues using quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. The
IL-17RA expression level and clinical parameters were then analyzed. To
investigate the functional significance of IL-17RA, IL-17RA knockdown
cells were analyzed using transwell assay in vitro and implanted
subcutaneously in mice, and monitored for primary tumor growth and
angiogenesis.ResultsIL-17RA was overexpression in colorectal cancer
tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues (PBackground:Interleukin-17
receptor type A (IL-17RA) plays critical role in promoting early
colorectal tumor development and affects immune response in
tumorigenesis. Our previous study have reported interleukin-17A modulated
tumorigenesis and affected metastasis in colorectal cancers, but the
roles of its receptor (IL-17R) in colorectal cancers remain unknown. This
study explores potential role and function of IL-17RA in colorectal
cancers.Materials and MethodsThe expression of IL-17RA was determined in
colorectal cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues using quantitative
real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. The IL-17RA expression level and
clinical parameters were then analyzed. To investigate the functional
significance of IL-17RA, IL-17RA knockdown cells were analyzed using
transwell assay in vitro and implanted subcutaneously in mice, and
monitored for primary tumor growth and angiogenesis.ResultsIL-17RA was
overexpression in colorectal cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal
tissues (P<0.05).The elevated expression level of IL-17RA was associated
with poor survival (PBackground:Interleukin-17 receptor type A (IL-17RA)
plays critical role in promoting early colorectal tumor development and
affects immune response in tumorigenesis. Our previous study have
reported interleukin-17A modulated tumorigenesis and affected metastasis
in colorectal cancers, but the roles of its receptor (IL-17R) in
colorectal cancers remain unknown. This study explores potential role and
function of IL-17RA in colorectal cancers.Materials and MethodsThe
expression of IL-17RA was determined in colorectal cancer tissues and
adjacent normal tissues using quantitative real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry. The IL-17RA expression level and clinical
parameters were then analyzed. To investigate the functional significance
of IL-17RA, IL-17RA knockdown cells were analyzed using transwell assay
in vitro and implanted subcutaneously in mice, and monitored for primary
tumor growth and angiogenesis.ResultsIL-17RA was overexpression in
colorectal cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues
(P<0.05).The elevated expression level of IL-17RA was associated with
poor survival (P<0.001). In vitro, the IL17RA knockdown cells reduced
migration and invasion. In mice, the decreased IL-17RA inhibited tumor
growth and angiogenesis.ConclusionsThese results demonstrated that
IL-17RA plays a critical role in growth, angiogenesis and prognosis of
colorectal cancer.

