Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion and gene networks associate
with pancreatic cancer induced cachexia


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is associated with a high rate of
cachexia, which specifically diminishes quality of life, prohibits
effective therapies, and subsequently contributes to morbidity and
mortality. Unfortunately, mechanisms underlying this cancer-induced
muscle wasting in the human disease remain incompletely described, in
part due to limited translational models. Therefore, we hypothesize that
the development of more representative models of PC cachexia will allow
for development of therapeutic targets for cachexia. To test our
hypothesis, we propose to 1) establish the first patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) cancer cachexia models to identify the muscle associated
with PC induced cachexia and 2) support these results by examining the
corresponding skeletal muscle of PC patients whom contributed to the PDX
models. Methods: Rectus abdominis muscle was biopsied from surgically
resected PC patients and matched non-cancer controls. After surgical
harvest of PC specimen, PDX models were derived in
NOD.Cg-PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice and skeletal muscle was
subsequently harvested for histologic investigations on ultrastructural
disorganization and qRT-PCR for atrophy-related transcription factors
differentially regulated in PC patients. Systemic cytokine expression
profiles were analyzed with luminex technology and confirmed by ELISA.
Results: Rectus biopsies from patients with resected PC displayed marked
muscle fiber atrophy, increased extracellular space, greater variation in
fiber size and shape and more centralized nuclei compared to controls.
These architectural abnormalities were also present in mice bearing
xenografts from corresponding PC patients. Despite the absence of an
adaptive immune system, PDX mice demonstrated high levels of systemic
TNF, IL-1, IL6 and KC (IL8) with a concomitant decrease in
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL10 when compared to matched controls.
Further, skeletal muscle from both patients with PC and mice bearing PDX
tumors demonstrated increased expression of the Forkhead boxO1 (FoxO1)
transcription factor and FoxO target gene and E3 ubiquitin ligase, MuRF1,
both of which have been directly implicated in the regulation of muscle
mass. Conclusions: Preoperative muscle wasting in PC is associated with
characteristic architectural abnormalities and elevated FoxO1-MuRF1
levels. Mice bearing PDX demonstrate comparable elevations in circulating
pro-inflammatory cytokines, muscle pathology and FoxO1-MuRF1 levels.
These results provide a valid translational model of cachexia which
suggests a central role for FoxO1 and MuRF1 in PC-associated muscle
wasting.

