Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of 2nd generation HER2-directed
antibody-drug conjugates


The HER2 receptor tyrosine kinase is amplified in approximately 20% of
human breast cancer and is associated with poor clinical outcome. The
humanized antibodies trastuzumab and pertuzumab are approved for use in
both early and metastatic HER2-positive breast cancer, and are most often
given with chemotherapy. Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are anti-tumor
agents designed to deliver potent cytotoxic drugs selectively to
target-expressing tumor cells. Trastuzumab emtansine is a HER2-directed
ADC comprised of trastuzumab covalently linked to the microtubule
inhibitor DM1, through the stable MCC linker. Trastuzumab emtansine is
approved for use in HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer as a single
agent in patients who have received prior trastuzumab and a taxane. We
are now exploring new HER2-directed ADCs (2nd generation ADCs) with
different mechanisms of action (MOA) than trastuzumab emtansine by
investigating ADCs utilizing DNA-damaging agents, such as
pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimers and cyclopropylbenzindole (CBI)
dimers, as the cytotoxic drug components. These agents have been
conjugated to either trastuzumab or the humanized anti-HER2 antibody 7C2
(hu7C2) using both uncleavable and cleavable linkers. As free drugs and
ADCs, the PBDs and CBIs show similar or greater potency in cell
proliferation assays in vitro compared to DM1 and trastuzumab emtansine.
However, unlike DM1, these agents are not strong substrates of Pgp/MDR1.
Moreover, the PBDs and CBIs are active on non-dividing cells, whereas
microtubule inhibitors such as DM1 do not affect non-dividing cells.
Robust anti-tumor activity was observed in vivo in the fo5 HER2
transgenic tumor transplant model with the 2nd generation ADCs.
Efficacious doses resulting in tumor stasis or regression ranged from
0.25-3 mg/kg administered as a single injection. In contrast, doses of
trastuzumab emtansine required for stasis/regression in this model are 10
and 15 mg/kg, respectively. Efficacious doses were well-tolerated in the
mouse xenograft models. Further tolerability studies of the 2nd
generation ADCs were performed in rats. As rats are a non-binding species
for trastuzumab and hu7C2, these studies assessed antigen-independent
toxicities. Maximum tolerated doses for the different ADCs ranged from
2.5-15 mg/kg administered as a single injection, compared to 46 mg/kg for
trastuzumab emtansine (Poon et al., 2013), likely reflecting both the
different MOA and greater potency of the cytotoxic agents utilized in the
2nd generation HER2-directed ADCs. Overall, our findings demonstrate
robust in vitro and in vivo activity of HER2 ADCs comprised of DNA-active
agents, allowing for further development of a HER2-directed ADC distinct
from trastuzumab emtansine.

