Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming glucose metabolism and energy production with a
small molecule HJC0152 suppresses breast cancer development and
progression to metastasis


Currently there are no targeted therapeutic strategies for estrogen
receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer (ENBC), which constitutes 30-40% of
breast cancer cases and is prone to metastasize and recur. Distant
metastasis accounts for 90% of cancer-associated deaths. The majority of
deaths from breast cancer are caused by distant metastasis developed in
lung, liver, bone, or brain. However, to date it remains a challenge and
unmet need to treat existing metastasis and block new metastasis in
cancer patients. Dysregulated glucose and energy metabolism is critically
involved in the development and progression of various cancers via
promoting aberrant cell growth, malignant transformation and metastasis,
but the potential role of glucose/energy metabolism in ENBC progression
and metastasis has scarcely been explored heretofore, thus representing a
key knowledge gap and a potential avenue for anticancer targeting. A
number of anticancer metabolic and biogenetic therapies have been
developed, yet none of them has progressed to clinical use, due to their
limited potency, specificity or drug properties such as toxicity and poor
bioavailability. We recently identified a novel small molecule HJC0152
that significantly suppresses ENBC xenograft tumor growth and blocks
ER-negative mammary tumor development in mouse models. HJC0152 treatment
for 24-72 hours differentially modulates protein expression of HK1,
PFK-L, PFKFB2, ENO2, PDH, PDK1, PGAM1 and ALDOA in a time-dependent
manner. HJC0152 also regulates the transcription of genes involved in
glucose and mitochondrial energy metabolism, including the subunits of
mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes. Functional assessments of
mitochondrial complexes demonstrate that HJC0152 significantly inhibits
Complexes IV but increases Complex V (ATP synthase) function, while
Complexes I and II function is minimally affected. Migration and invasion
of MDA-MB-231 cells are significantly inhibited by HJC0152 treatment. In
vivo, HJC0152 administrated either before, concurrent with or after tail
vein injection of MDA-MB-231 cells dramatically blocks the development of
lung macro- and micro-metastasis in all groups. These results suggest
that HJC0152 can specifically reprogram/restore the dysregulated glucose
metabolism by inducing specific glycolytic enzyme expression and
mitochondrial respiratory chain function, likely via targeting one or
more upstream signal molecule(s) that regulates glucose and energy
metabolism, thereby suppressing breast cancer progression to metastasis.
This work was supported by Grants P50 CA097007, P30DA028821, and
R21MH093844 (J.Z.) from the NIH, CPRIT (J.Z.), John Sealy Memorial
Endowment Fund (J.Z.), DFI Seed Grants from MD Anderson Cancer Center
(Q.S.), and Holden Family Research Grant in Breast Cancer Prevention from
the Prevent Cancer Foundation (Q.S).

