Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROS signaling by NADPH oxidase 5 (Nox5) modulates proliferation of
human melanoma UACC-257 cells and prolongs growth in the absence of serum
or growth factors


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by the NADPH oxidase (Noxs)
homologs participate in signaling cascades regulating proliferation.
Recently, we have reported substantial overexpression of Nox5 in several
human cancers including those of prostate, ovary and melanomas. Despite
being upregulated in many human cancers and implicated in promoting cell
proliferation, the molecular mechanisms modulated by Nox5 are poorly
understood. In this study, the functional significance of Nox5 was
assessed in human UACC-257 and WM-852 melanoma cells by generating
Nox5-overexpressing and knockdown cells. Stable overexpression of Nox5 in
UACC-257 cells resulted in enhanced cell growth, increased BrdU positive
cells and decreased protein tyrosine phosphatase activity. Additionally,
these cells had increased normoxic Hif-1 expression and decreased p27Kip1
expression. Conversely, knockdown of endogenous Nox5 in UACC-257 cells
resulted in decreased cell growth, decreased BrdU positive cells,
decreased Hif-1 expression and increased p27Kip1 expression. Likewise, in
human WM-852 melanoma cells, transient overexpression of Nox5 decreased
p27Kip1 expression and knockdown of endogenous Nox5 resulted in increased
p27Kip1 and gamma-H2AX expression with decreased cell growth. Cadherin
switch, loss of E-cadherin expression and upregulation of N-cadherin was
observed in UACC-257 Nox5 overexpressing cells indicative of an invasive
phenotype; conversely, an upregulation of E-cadherin expression in Nox5
knockdown cells was noted. Cell invasion assay through matrigel-coated
membranes also demonstrated enhanced invasion by Nox5 overexpressing
cells. Additionally, 3D cultures of Nox5 overexpressing UACC-257 cells
exhibit an amoeboid morphology compared to that of the Nox5 knockdown
cells that were mesenchymal, suggestive of an amoeboid - mesenchymal
(AMT) transition. Strikingly, UACC-257 cells that overexpress Nox5 were
able to proliferate in serum-free conditions for over a month. In
summary, our findings suggest that ROS signaling by Nox5 in human
melanoma could modulate multiple signaling networks that regulate Hif-1
and p27Kip1 expression, contributing in part, to cell proliferation and
the ability to grow in the absence of serum or growth factors.

