Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK signal suppression and sensitivity to CH5183284/Debio 1347, a
selective FGFR inhibitor


Drugs that target specific gene alterations have proven beneficial in the
treatment of cancer. Because cancer cells have multiple resistance
mechanisms, it is important to understand the downstream pathways of the
target genes and monitor the pharmacodynamic markers associated with
therapeutic efficacy. In a previous study, we analyzed the signaling
pathway of an FGFR (fibroblast growth factor receptor) fusion kinases,
FGFR3-BAIAP2L1. A Rat-2 cell line stably expressing FGFR3-BAIAP2L1
exhibited potent tumorigenic activity. Gene expression analysis revealed
strong up-regulation of genes downstream of the MAPK pathway, and
up-regulation of the MAPK pathway was validated by western blotting; in
contrast, the PI3K/AKT pathway was not activated by FGFR3-BAIAP2L1.
Therefore, we suggested that MAPK pathway activation is essential to the
tumorigenic activity of FGFR3-BAIAP2L1. In this study, to generalize the
MAPK pathway dependency of FGFR, we characterized the pathway modulation
by CH5183284/Debio 1347, a selective FGFR inhibitor, in several FGFR
genetically altered cancer cell lines, such as FGFR1 gene amplified,
FGFR2 gene amplified or mutated, and FGFR3 gene mutated or rearranged
cell lines. We performed a transcriptome analysis to characterize the
response of various cancer cell lines to CH5183284/Debio 1347, a MEK
inhibitor, or a PI3K inhibitor. FGFR and MEK inhibition produced similar
expression patterns, and the ERK gene signature was altered in several
FGFR inhibitor-sensitive cell lines. Consistent with these findings,
CH5183284/Debio 1347 suppressed phospho-ERK in every tested FGFR
inhibitor-sensitive cell line. Because the MAPK pathway functions
downstream of FGFR, we searched for a pharmacodynamic marker of FGFR
inhibitor efficacy in a collection of cell lines with the ERK signature
and identified dual-specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6) as a candidate
marker. Suppression of DUSP6 protein level was also confirmed in mice
xenograft models. Although a MEK inhibitor suppressed the MAPK pathway,
most FGFR inhibitor-sensitive cell lines are insensitive to MEK
inhibitors and we found potent feedback activation of several pathways
via FGFR. We therefore suggest that FGFR inhibitors exert their effect by
suppressing ERK signaling without feedback activation. In addition, DUSP6
may be a pharmacodynamic marker of FGFR inhibitor efficacy in
FGFR-addicted cancers.*CH5183284/Debio 1347 was discovered by Chugai
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. and is being developed by Debiopharm
International S.A. under an exclusive worldwide license.

