Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is adherence to the WCRF/AICR cancer prevention recommendations
associated with colorectal cancer in African American women in the Black
Women's Health Study


Background: African American women are more likely to be diagnosed with
colorectal cancer than women from other racial/ethnic groups. Differences
in adherence to cancer prevention recommendations may contribute to
disparities. Adherence to cancer prevention guidelines has previously
been shown to be associated with lower breast cancer incidence, but
previous study populations have included few African Americans.Objective:
The purpose of this study was to evaluate adherence to the World Cancer
Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR) cancer
prevention recommendations and colorectal cancer incidence in the Black
Women's Health Study (BWHS).Methods: In this ongoing prospective cohort
of African American women (analytic cohort N = 49,103), 354 incident
colorectal cancers were diagnosed between baseline (1995) and 2011.
Adherence scores for seven WCRF/AICR recommendations (adherent = 1 point,
non-adherence level 1 = 0.5 points, non-adherence level 2 = 0 points)
were created using questionnaire data and summed to an overall adherence
score (maximum = 7). Diet-specific recommendations were additionally
summed for a diet only score (maximum = 5). Recommendation adherence and
incidence of colorectal cancer combined and colon cancer only were
evaluated using baseline and time-varying data in Cox regression
models.Results: Guideline adherence was low with 8.5% of women (5.6%
among women who later developed colorectal cancer) adhering to more than
four recommendations at baseline. Adherence to a greater number of
WCRF/AICR recommendations was not statistically significantly associated
with colorectal cancer risk in time-varying or baseline models. In
time-varying analyses, the HR (per 0.5 point increase) was 0.98 (95% CI:
0.84-1.15) and 0.51 (95% CI: 0.23-1.10) among women who adhered to >4
compared to 4 vs. 4 vs. 4 vs. <3 recommendations HR = 0.72, 95% CI:
0.39-1.34). Regardless of modeling approach, adherence to dietary
recommendations or individual recommendations was not associated with
colon only or combined colorectal cancer risk.Conclusions: Further
research in diverse populations is essential to evaluate the validity of
existing recommendations, and to assess whether there are alternative
recommendations that are more beneficial for colorectal cancer prevention
in specific populations.

