Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reconstructing the evolutionary history of metastatic cancers


The evolution of metastases is responsible for 90% of cancer-related
deaths. Genome wide sequencing and phylogenomic methods enable the
reconstruction of the evolutionary history of a patient's cancer at
unprecedented depth. However, due to a lack of samples from multiple
spatially-distinct metastases from untreated patients and a lack of
phylogenomic tools applicable to noisy and impure sequencing samples, the
evolutionary rules governing metastatic spread have remained poorly
understood.We performed whole-genome sequencing (coverage: median 51x) as
well as deep targeted sequencing (coverage: median 347x) on 21 samples
from multiple regions of the primary tumor and many distinct liver and
lung metastases of two treatment-nave pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
patients. We developed a tool, called Treeomics, that leverages
computational and statistical advances to reconstruct the phylogeny of a
cancer with commonly available sequencing technologies. Treeomics employs
a uniquely-designed Bayesian inference model to account for error-prone
sequencing and varying low neoplastic cell content (estimated purities
16-44%) to calculate the probability that a specific variant is present
or absent in each sequenced lesion. Based on Mixed Integer Linear
Programming, a mathematically guaranteed optimal evolutionary tree is
produced.We obtained robust phylogenies consistent with the biological
processes underlying cancer evolution. The reconstructed phylogenies show
that advanced cancer cells of related subclones were equally capable of
seeding lung and liver metastases. Treeomics identified sequencing and
biological artifacts such as those resulting from insufficient coverage
or loss of heterozygosity; almost 7% of the variants were misclassified
by conventional methods. Among the identified false-negatives was the
common clonal driver mutation in KRAS within a region that has low
sequencing read alignability and a significantly reduced coverage. Such
artifacts can skew phylogenies by creating illusory tumor heterogeneity
among distinct samples. Additionally, we reanalyzed publicly available
data from ovarian, prostate and skin cancers. We further illuminated
evolutionary relationships among some samples in a conclusive fashion and
show that classical distance-based phylogenetic methods can produce
evolutionarily implausible results. Treeomics avoids these common
pitfalls and infers robust phylogenies confirmed by high bootstrapping
values.The new approach described here efficiently reconstructs the
evolutionary history of metastases, detects potential artifacts in noisy
high-throughput sequencing data, and finds subclones of distinct origin.
These phylogenies shed new light on seeding patterns and metastatic
progression, which has significant implications for clinical decision
making and may provide predictive value for a patient's prognosis.

