Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galiellalactone derivative targets stem cell population in
ENZ-resistant prostate cancer through inhibition of STAT3


Background: Androgen ablation remains the most effective therapy for
patients with advanced disease. Unfortunately, most patients progress to
castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) characterized with
hyper-activation of the androgen receptor (AR). Enzalutamide, a potent AR
inhibitor showed efficacy by prolonging survival in CRPC patients.
However, ENZ resistance (ENZR) rapidly occurs in patients and in our
pre-clinical model targeting AR in ENZ resistant tumors with a 3rd
generation AR inhibitor is short lived. The role of signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) 3 in the progression of prostate cancer
is well established and has been repeatedly linked with maintenance of a
stem cell phenotype across cancers. Additionally, drug resistance has
been hypothesized to occur via enrichment of cancer stem-like cells
(CSC), a phenotype associated with poor survival in patients. Therefore,
we propose a shift of focus to target CSC phenotype using small molecule
inhibitor of STAT3 called GPA500, instead of the AR axis to deal with ENZ
resistance.Methods and Results: We developed a unique model of
ENZ-resistance and found that cell lines derived from serially passaged
ENZR tumors displayed broad genetic diversity and differential AR
activity. Notably, the cell lines 42DENZR and 42FENZR are PSAlow, harbor
an expanded CSC population and have STAT3 hyper-activation compared to
CRPC controls measured by STAT3-luc reporter. Accordingly, Crystal Violet
and MTT proliferation assays showed that 42DENZR and 42FENZR cell lines
were more sensitive to the STAT3 inhibitor GPA500 compared to CRPC
control. Targeting the ENZ-R cells with GPA500 reduced mRNA levels of
CD133, CD44, SOX2, OCT4 and Nanog. The reduction of these CSC markers was
accompanied by reduced self-renewal capacity measured by spheroid assay.
Cytometry analysis revealed that treatment with GPA500 reduced 21+, CD44+
and CD133+ (CSC) population in the 42D and 42F cells.Conclusion: In this
study, we provide pre-clinical proof that targeting the STAT3 pathway
using GPA500 in ENZ resistance as well as CRPC reduces cell proliferation
as well as expression of stem cell markers.Impact: Exploring mechanisms
of ENZR resistance serves a critical unmet need in PCa oncology, as the
number of men with ENZ resistant CRPC continues to rise. Targeting STAT3
with the small molecule inhibitor GPA500 may provide an effective method
to treat ENZR patients or delay the emergence of ENZ resistance in CRPC
by reducing the emergence of stem cells.

