Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antioxidant compounds and their effects on ECM-detached ovarian
cancer cells


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) has the highest mortality rate of all
gynecological cancers. Approximately 70% of all EOC patients are
diagnosed at advanced stages of the disease. In these patients, ovarian
cancer cells shed from the primary tumor and accumulate in ascites in the
peritoneal cavity. These shed cells have shown the ability to attach and
form secondary tumors throughout the peritoneal cavity, making EOC more
difficult to treat. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms
involved in the survival of ovarian cancer cells in ascites could lead to
the development of improved chemotherapeutics aimed at eradicating this
nonadhesive subset of cells and thus resulting in better survival rates
of EOC patients. While non-tumorigenic epithelial cells require
attachment to the extracellular matrix (ECM) for survival, ovarian cancer
cells surviving in ascites gain the ability to survive in anchorage
independence. Striking increases of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
mediated by ECM-detachment has been shown to inhibit energy production
and inhibit cell viability in non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cells.
Consequently, neutralization of ROS with antioxidant compounds enhance
ATP production and promote survival in anchorage independence.
Furthermore, previous publications from our laboratory suggest that
antioxidant enzymes are critical for metabolic maintenance and survival
of ECM-detached breast cancer cells. While these recent studies reveal a
novel role for antioxidant activity in metastatic breast cancer,
antioxidant activity and its effects on ECM-detached ovarian cancer cells
has yet to be unveiled. Currently, we have found that neutralization of
ROS through treatment with a variety of antioxidant compounds increases
metabolic efficacy in ECM-detached ovarian cancer cells. More
specifically, ECM-detached SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells treated with
antioxidant compounds Trolox (a vitamin E analog), Vitamin C, and
Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) results in large increases in ATP levels.
Given these data, we are further working to understand the mechanisms
involved in this metabolic increase. In addition, we are working to
understand the relationship between this increase in metabolism and
survival in anchorage independence. Future studies include looking at
this phenomenon in other ovarian cancer cell lines as well as using mouse
xenograft studies to examine the effects of antioxidant compounds on
survival of metastatic ovarian cancer cells.

