Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel potent and selective orally available CDK8/19 kinase
inhibitors


CDK8 and its paralog CDK19 are cyclin-dependent kinases and together with
CDK7 and CDK9 belongs to the group of C-terminal domain (CTD) kinases
that phosphorylate the CTD of RNA polymerase II, thus regulating
transcription. CDK8 together with its partner Cyclin C, MED12 and MED13
are components of multi-protein Mediator complex which couples action of
transcription factors with the molecular machinery that carries out
transcription, e.g. CDK8 couple basal transcriptional machinery to
sequence-specific transcription factors such as Notch, p53, -catenin, and
also repress the transcription of other genes. As Mediator independent
roles, CDK8 has been shown to act as part of a separate complex behaving
as a histone kinase. Moreover, CDK8 has been identified as a major kinase
in the response to IFN signaling mediated STAT1-S727
phosphorylation.Several studies indicated that high overexpression and
activity of CDK8 could be a driver of malignant progression in colorectal
cancer being a marker of poor prognosis. Moreover, in gastric cancer CDK8
expression and the delocalization of -catenin expression showed a
significant positive correlation with carcinogenesis and tumor
progression, especially lymph node metastasis. Recently, gene
amplification of CDK8, CDK19, CCNC and MED13 in breast cancers has been
related with poor response to adjuvant therapy. These results suggest
that CDK8 inhibitors may become a unique class of anticancer drugs that
could increase the efficacy of cancer therapy by blocking
chemotherapy-induced production of tumor-promoting secreted factors.We
have carried out a medium throughput screening campaign which led to the
discovery of several low nanomolar hits belonging to 3 different chemical
series. Later on, we have performed a Hit Generation phase, designing
novel inhibitors within a patentable chemical space. Here, we have taken
into account information from the chemical structures of the screening
hits, X-ray structure of CDK8 protein co-crystalized with sorafenib,
docking studies, chemical feasibility and intellectual property.We have
identified a novel chemical series of CDK8/19 inhibitors. After a HtL
exploration we have reached lead compounds with potency in the picomolar
range and high selectivity versus a panel of 468 protein kinases. The
leads display cellular activity by blocking catenin reporter activity and
STAT1 phoshorylation in the low nanomolar range. Lead compounds have been
screened in a panel of tumoral cell lines, showing a defined profile in
terms of sensitivity with GI50s which range from nanomolar to low
micromolar values. These inhibitors induce cell death in a dose response
manner. The novel chemical series show a drug-like profile in terms of
solubility, permeability, CYP450 inhibition and hERG. The identified lead
compounds are orally bioavailable, with good clearance, volume of
distribution and exposure levels. A selected lead compound has been used
in in vivo PK-PD studies showing positive results.

