Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 is a central regulator of proliferation, invasion and
metabolism in GBM tumor initiating cells


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive primary brain tumor.
Currently, treatment for GBM involves surgical resection, chemotherapy,
and radiation, resulting in a median survival of 15 months. This poor
outcome highlights the need for improved therapeutic approaches to treat
GBM patients. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) pathway is abnormally active in GBM, primarily in the mesenchymal
subtype of GBM. STAT3 regulates various cellular processes including:
proliferation, invasion and resistance to therapy. The Weiss lab has
established a large collection of brain tumor initiating cell (BTIC)
lines derived from GBM patients. These GBM BTIC lines are used to model
the subpopulation of cells that are predicted to be the source of
resistance and recurrence following treatment. Here, we are focused on
the role of STAT3 as a central regulator of proliferation, invasion and
metabolism in GBM BTIC lines. We show that activation of the STAT3
pathway using the ligand oncostatin M (OSM) or by stably expressing a
constitutively active STAT3 mutant (STAT3C) in GBM BTIC lines leads to an
increase in proliferation. STAT3 is known to regulate the expression of
multiple matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that promote invasion. Using
time-lapse imaging of 3D sphere invasion into matrigel, we observed that
JAK2 (an activator of STAT3) and direct STAT3 inhibitors decrease
invasion of GBM BTICs. Our analysis of gene expression data available
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) demonstrates that a glutamine
metabolism gene expression signature correlates inversely with a STAT3
gene expression signature in GBM patient samples. Conversely, similar
analysis reveals that a high glycolysis gene expression signature
correlates with a high STAT3 gene expression signature. We hypothesize
that targeting the STAT3 pathway will decrease proliferation and invasion
while simultaneously sensitizing GBM BTIC lines to inhibition of
glutamine metabolism. Glutaminase (GLS) is the first enzyme to act on
glutamine, converting glutamine to glutamate, which is then further
processed to -ketoglutarate (KG). KG is important for the production of
biosynthetic macromolecules that are essential for cell growth. Chemical
inhibition of GLS decreases cell growth in culture with varying levels of
sensitivity across multiple GBM BTIC lines. Interestingly, activation of
the STAT3 pathway using OSM de-sensitizes GBM BTIC lines to GLS
inhibition. Furthermore, chemical inhibition of JAK2 sensitizes a subset
of GBM BTIC lines to GLS inhibition resulting in a further decrease in
cell growth. Overall, we show that STAT3 is a central hub in GBM BTIC
lines that modulates proliferation, invasion, and sensitivity to GLS
inhibition. Currently, we are continuing these studies in vivo using GBM
BTIC orthotopic xenografts in mice.

