Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of tumor endothelium-related genes in colorectal
cancer


Background and Aims:Angiogenesis is a hallmark of cancer development that
has been considered an attractive therapeutic target. In this study, we
aimed to unravel the molecular mechanism of tumor angiogenesis in
colorectal cancer (CRC).Materials and Methods:We isolated endothelial and
epithelial cells from surgically resected 14 human CRC tissues by using
antibodies against endothelial (CD146) and epithelial markers (EpCAM).
RNA sequencing was carried out using 3 pairs of normal and tumor
endothelial cells. Expression of the genes was validated using
quantitative RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry. Functions of a selected gene
were carried analyzed by tumor conditioned medium (TCM) experiments, tube
formation assay, gene expression microarray and cell cycle
analysis.Results:Through RNA-seq analysis, we identified 18 genes, which
were upregulated in the endothelial cells isolated from CRC tissues. We
further validated the results by performing quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohistochemical analysis in a larger series of clinical samples, and
identified gene A as a novel candidate of the tumor endothelium-related
gene. Expression of gene A was also upregulated in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) treated with TCM obtained from CRC cell lines.
Knockdown of gene A in HUVECs suppressed in vitro tube formation and
induced G1 cell cycle arrest. Microarray analysis revealed that gene A
knockdown induced expression changes of approximately 300 genes in
HUVECs, and gene ontology analysis showed that genes related to cell
cycle or cell division were significantly enriched in the affected genes.
To confirm our findings in vivo, we co-transplanted CRC cells with HUVECs
into nude mice. We found that gene A knockdown in HUVECs resulted in
reduced micro vessel formations in the xenograft tissues.Conclusion:We
identified elevated expression of gene A in tumor endothelial cells of
primary colorectal cancer tissues. Our results suggest that gene A may
play an important role in the angiogenesis in colorectal cancer, and that
it could be a potential therapeutic target.

