Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the differences of allelic imbalance between tumor
and normal tissues by next-generation sequencing


Genetic variation has proved to contribute to tumor formation. One of the
phenomenon caused by genetic variation, allelic imbalance, means
different expression abundance between two alleles, recently has become a
special landmark on cancer biology, with high prevalence in recent cancer
studies. However, the present of allelic imbalance has not been fully
understood yet. Taking the advantages of next generation sequencing,
allelic imbalance can be identified and quantified through bioinformatics
algorithms. Here, we developed a mathematical model to identify with
allelic imbalance by concurrently analyzing RNA-Seq and DNA-Seq. First we
called heterozygous SNP variants from both RNA-Seq and Exome-Seq data.
The allele ratio is counted by the ratio of read depth between two
alleles after integrating SNPs into gene level. Next, we identify allelic
imbalance genes by differences of RNA and DNA allele ratios between tumor
and normal samples. As results, a total of 91143 SNPs were identified in
Exome-Seq, and about 3% (2586 out of 91143) SNPs were heterozygous in
both tumor and normal tissues. We found that about 118 allelic imbalance
genes in tumor tissue are significantly different from those in normal
tissue. Furthermore, we investigate the enriched function of these
allelic imbalance genes. These result showed that these genes are
significantly enriched in DNA repair pathway. We speculated that allelic
imbalance in tumor tissue may be involved in the dysregulation of DNA
repair. Also other enriched functions were identified, such as z-finger
protein pathway.Our goal is to investigate the landscape of allelic
imbalance between tumor sample and normal sample. Our results demonstrate
the role of allelic imbalance of dysregulation of tumor. Moreover, our
method can be applied to uncover more basic mechanisms on allelic
imbalance and tumorigenesis.

