Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcription factor as target: Novel small molecule inhibits
FOXM1 DNA binding and oncogenic gene products


Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a transcription factor of considerable
importance. Aberrant overabundance of FOXM1 through mutations in upstream
regulators or gene amplification is now known to be a driving factor of
most human cancers. Further, FOXM1 has prognostic value as expression
correlates with severity of disease. Thus, chemical inhibition of FOXM1
has become a major goal. To address this need, we designed a novel in
vitro assay to detect disruption of FOXM1 DNA binding. We executed a
screen of 400,000 compounds from the NIH Molecular Library Small Molecule
Repository, consisting of diverse drug-like molecules intended as
starting points for medicinal chemistry lead development. After iterative
and orthogonal counter screens, we ultimately identified the small
molecule FDI-6 as a potent inhibitor of FOXM1. We characterized the
perturbation in detail by biophysical analyses and confirmed that FDI-6
binds FOXM1 protein directly. The molecule was cytotoxic to multiple
cancer cell lines (GI50 10M) and we demonstrated that the inhibitor
displaces FOXM1 protein from promoters of target genes (AURKB, CCNB1,
CDC25B) using an MCF-7 breast cancer model. To generalize the effect, we
used chromatin immunoprecipitation and next generation sequencing
(ChIPseq) to show that the inhibitor physically displaces FOXM1 from
consensus binding motifs across the entire genome, reducing FOXM1 peaks
by an average of over 60%. Transcriptome-wide expression profiling by
RNAseq further confirmed that this displacement by FDI-6 selectively
down-regulates the global FOXM1 transcriptional program, suppressing
mitotic entry and cell-cycle progression. Importantly, we found that
FDI-6 is specific for FOXM1 and has no effect on the expression of genes
regulated by related forkhead family factors, which exhibit homology with
the DNA binding domain of FOXM1. We are now evaluating the efficacy of
this compound in allograft mouse models of FOXM1-driven breast cancer.
Our study shows that the genomic interaction of this clinically important
transcription factor can now be manipulated with small molecules to
regulate the expression of key gene families. This improves our ability
to probe transcription factor function, helps establish the oncogenic
roles in different disease contexts and demonstrates clear potential for
FOXM1 to be pursued as a clinical target in the future.

