Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha (CaMK2A)
regulates the tumor initiating cell phenotype through SOX2 expression and
modulates treatment response to anti-cancer drugs in lung adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the most lethal of all cancers world-wide and the majority
of patients require chemotherapy or targeted therapy at presentation.
Survival is compromised by drug resistance through multiple mechanisms
such as by-pass mutations, micro-environment activation of survival
programs and induction of tumor initiating cells (TIC). Induction of TIC
phenotypes could be accompanied by upregulation of embryonic or
developmental pathways but molecular mechanisms are incompletely
understood. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha (CaMK2A)
is a multifunctional serine/threonine kinase involved in growth and
stress signals integration. A tumor-supportive role has been reported in
leukaemia and thyroid cancer but reports on its involvement in TIC
regulation are limited. We investigated the role and molecular mechanism
of CaMK2A in lung cancer TIC regulation using in vitro and in vivo
models. The results showed CaMK2A was overexpressed in lung cancer cell
lines and human lung adenocarcinomas compared to normal lung. In cancer
cells with stable CaMK2A-knockdown, in vitro reduction in tumor spheres
formation, anchorage independent growth and increased reactive oxygen
species, as well as in vivo reduction of xenograft tumorigenicity were
observed. The opposite effects were observed in cancer cells with stable
CaMK2A over-expression. Further, specific pharmacological inhibition of
CaMK2A by KN93 led to significantly reduced IC50 for gefitinib in lung
cancer cells harboring activating EGFR mutation (HCC827) and in HCC827
exogenously induced for gefitinib resistance. In contrast, IC50 of
cisplatin treatment was increased in cancer cells with
genetically-induced CaMK2A over-expression. Moreover, CaMK2A knockdown
led to reduced mRNA expressions of pluripotency genes (SOX2, NANOG, OCT4)
and TIC markers (ALDH, CD166). These results suggested CaMK2A is involved
in lung tumorigenicity through TIC regulation. To further investigate the
molecular mechanism, we showed tumorigenicity was restored in xenografts
with CaMK2A knockdown rescued with SOX2 over-expression. In CaMK2A
knockdown cells, reduced SOX2 expression was associated with increased
H3K27me3 repressive histone mark, which has not been reported in the
literature. Taken together, we have shown CaMK2A plays a role in lung
adenocarcinoma and TIC maintenance through histone modification and
regulation of SOX2 expression. Targeting TIC through CaMK2A modulation
might be useful for overcoming drug resistance and improving long term
lung cancer survival.

