Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional modules involving EWS-FLI1 and SRF in Ewing sarcoma


Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive pediatric bone tumor with a high
tendency to metastasize. The primary genetic aberration responsible for
ES pathogenesis is EWS-FLI1, a chimeric gene, derived from the
chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). EWS-FLI1 encodes an aberrant
ETS transcription factor. However, due to its lack of enzymatic activity
and intrinsically disordered structure it has yet not been successfully
targeted. EWS-FLI1 is prone to rapidly engage in protein-protein
complexes, enhancing its oncogenic activity. It has been reported to be
involved in interactions with regulators of the basal transcriptional
machinery, RNA processing and DNA repair. Furthermore, it has been shown
that, similar to the ternary complex factors (TCF) SAP1a and ELK1,
EWS-FLI1 is able to form a complex with the global transcriptional
regulator Serum Response Factor (SRF) on ETS containing promoter
elements. SRF binds to CArG motifs in serum response elements (SRE) and
requires a transcriptional co-activator, which is commonly provided
upstream via the Rho- or the Ras-axis. Upon serum induced Rho activation,
polymerization of globular (G-) actin into filamentous (F-) actin takes
place, thereby releasing the G-actin bound myocardin-related
transcription factors A and B (MRTFA/B) to translocate to the nucleus and
concertedly with SRF regulate transcription of target genes. Binding of
MRTFs to SRF is mutually exclusive and competed by TCFs, which are
activated downstream of Ras, and require presence of an ETS motif
adjacent to CArG. In this study we aim to investigate a potential
competition of EWS-FLI1 with MRTFs, which might uncouple SRF dependent
transcription from upstream G-protein linked regulation and hence
interfere with processes such as proliferation, migration and
differentiation. To address this question, we performed gene expression
profiling in A673 and SKNMC ES cell lines where we combined EWS-FLI1
knockdown with MRTFA/B knockdown under serum starved and serum induced
(SI) conditions. We found that transcriptional activity of MRTFA/B is
largely repressed by EWS-FLI1 and that upon combined knockdown
conditions, EWS-FLI1 transcriptional effects are rescued by MRTFA/B. To
further elucidate the underlying mechanisms of EWS-FLI1 and MRTFA/B gene
regulation, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with
massive parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) of MRTFA, MRTFB, SRF and EWS-FLI1
in A673 ES cells. Preliminary results corroborate EWS-FLI1 and MRTF
sharing a large number of target genes and indicate that MRTFA binds to
DNA motifs, which are associated with activated and repressive EWS-FLI1
signatures. Ongoing experiments aim at a proteomic understanding of the
EWS-FLI1 containing SRF complex as a basis for potential therapeutic
intervention.This study was supported by the Liddy Shriver Sarcoma
Initiative and the 7th framework program of the European Commission
(FP7-259348, ASSET).

