Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free high throughput microfluidic device for the isolation
and single cell multiplex gene expression analysis of circulating tumor
cells from breast cancer patients


Introduction and Objective: The metastasis of cancer is preceded by the
dissemination of cancer cells from the primary tumor site to remote sites
via the blood circulation. The presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
in the peripheral blood represents a strong and independent prognostic
factor for decreased disease-free and overall survival. Immune-affinity
based capture, although being the most commonly used method for the
isolation of CTCs, offers low throughput (1mL/hr) and have considerably
cell loss caused by the heterogeneous expression of biomarkers on CTCs.
Various label-free approaches utilizing the physical properties of CTCs
have been developed to overcome the limitations, such as micro-filters,
microscale laminar vortices, inertial migration of particles, and
integrated systems. Here we present an inertial microfluidic-based
separation technique for high throughput and label-free isolation of CTCs
yielding the highest throughput with high CTC recovery and high blood
cell removal among all the label-free technologies. The isolated CTC
populations were further analyzed for single cell multiplex gene
expression analysis.Methods: The PDMS-made inertial microfluidic device
has 637 mm in length with 56 corners, 500 m in width, and 100 m in
height. The separation of CTCs is driven by two main forces: (i) inertial
force that focuses the cells into streamlines, and (ii) drag force from
Dean flow that migrates the focused cells to various positions based on
size. Device is optimized with MCF-7 and Panc-1 cell line within PBS
buffer solution and diluted blood, and is tested in patients with breast
cancer on an average of 5 mL of whole blood processed through double
devices in series. CTCs isolated were analyzed for tumor specific protein
markers and genomic characterization is done using singe cell analysis
techniques.Results: Samples are processed through the inertial
microfluidic device and CTCs are enriched in second outlet based on size
difference between CTCs and blood cells. Device is optimized to operate
at an extremely high throughput of 2500 L/min with high recovery (greater
than 90%) and high white blood cells (WBCs) removal (5 log orders). In
patient samples, we identified CTCs in 38 of 40 (95%) breast patients
with metastatic disease (5.44.6 CTC/mL) with low WBC contamination
(663647 WBC/mL). Based on the gene expression, both inter and intra
patient heterogeneity of CTCs at the single cell level were discovered
among the tested patient samples.Conclusion: The study of CTCs could have
a direct impact upon society by presenting novel ways to address one of
the major hurdles in cancer research - early detection - and will foster
the advancement of science and engineering via the exploration of new
druggable targets approaches and the further understanding of the
pharmacodynamics.

