Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma with
23-dideoxycytidine as a novel therapeutic strategy for acute myeloid
leukemia


A subset of AML cells display unique mitochondrial characteristics such
as increased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), mt mass, and sensitivity to
inhibition of mtDNA transcription and protein translation. Given these
unique mitochondrial characteristics, we evaluated the effect of
inhibiting mtDNA replication by targeting the mtDNA polymerase gamma
(POLG). POLG is a nuclear-encoded gene that replicates and repairs mtDNA.
POLG mRNA is increased in leukemia cell lines and a subset of AML
patients.We evaluated the preclinical efficacy of targeting POLG using
the nucleoside analog 2,3-dideoxycytidine (ddC), an FDA-approved
anti-retroviral drug that cross-reacts with POLG.Treatment with ddC at
500nM depleted mtDNA by >90%, decreased mtDNA-encoded COXI and COXII
proteins and basal oxygen consumption, and induced apoptosis in AML cell
lines (OCI-AML2, TEX, K562). ddC further decreased cell viability in a
subset of primary AML cells, while normal peripheral blood stem cells
(PBSCs) were resistant to ddC in vitro.Next, we assessed the preclinical
efficacy and toxicity of ddC in an OCI-AML2 xenograft model of human AML.
Treatment with 35mg/kg of i.p. ddC induced tumor regression and decreased
tumor mass by >75% compared to vehicle. No toxicity was observed
including changes in liver enzymes or organ histology. We also observed
reductions in COXI and COXII protein in tumors but not liver excised from
treated mice.We next investigated the mechanism for preferential
sensitivity to ddC in AML cells. A two-fold greater decrease in mtDNA
content was observed in AML cells treated with ddC compared to PBSCs, in
part explaining the heightened sensitivity. However, the increased
sensitivity to ddC in AML was not due to increased mtDNA turnover as
mtDNA depletion after ethidium bromide treatment was comparable between
AML and PBSCs.Therefore, we investigated the role of ddC uptake and
metabolism. ddC is transported by nucleoside transporters (ENTs, CNTs)
and activated by cytoplasmic nucleoside kinases to ddC-triphosphate
(ddC-TP). Analysis of Haferlach et. al. (2010) dataset demonstrated that
a subset of AML cells have higher mRNA expression of hENT2 and hCNT1, and
the nucleoside diphosphate kinases NME1,2,3,5 compared to normal
hematopoietic cells. Using mass spectrometry, we observed higher levels
of ddC and ddCTP in sensitive AML cells compared to resistant cells.
Lastly, knockdown of the deoxycytidine kinase rescued ddC cytotoxicity in
TEX cells.In summary, targeting POLG with ddC displays anti-leukemic
activity in both in vitro and in vivo models of AML. The preferential
toxicity of ddC is due, in part, to increased rates of uptake and
activation in AML along as well as their increased sensitivity to
inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, POLG inhibitors such as
ddC may have clinical utility in a subset of AML.

