Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aggressiveness niche within BRCA1-IRIS/TNBC tumors is supported by
reciprocal interactions with the microenvironment


Introduction: Bi-directional interactions with stromal cells promote
metastasis from breast tumors. We aimed at determining the role these
bi-directional interactions between BRCA1-IRIS-overexpression (IRISOE)
tumor cells and stromal cells in generating aggressive triple negative
breast cancers.Experimental Procedures: We used co-culturing assay,
immunohistochemistry, in vitro invasion assay with or without cytokines
neutralization, ELISA, western blot analysis, exposure to hypoxic
conditions, cytokines receptor inactivation, in vivo orthotopic tumor
formation assay, analysis of publically available data sets for the
association of selected factors with overall survival, distant metastasis
free survival and recurrent free survival to define the role of these
bi-directional interactions in enhancing IRISOE tumors
aggressiveness.Results: Here we show formation of an aggressiveness niche
within IRIS overexpressing triple negative breast cancers (IRISOE/TNBCs)
defined as the necrotic/hypoxic core. To this niche, metabolically
stressed IRISOE/TNBC cells attract mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to the
aggressiveness niche through secreting high levels of IL-1.
IL-1R-negative MSCs are induced to express the receptor upon exposure to
medium conditioned by IRISOE/TNBCs. Activated by IL-1, IL-1R activates
AKT, MAPK and NF-B signaling in MSCs to which they respond by releasing
inflammatory cytokines, such as CXCL1. Inhibiting IL-1 signaling
utilizing neutralizing antibody attenuates MSCs recruitment and CXCL1
secretion, in vitro and in vivo. CXCL1 receptor; CXCR2 is expressed on
IRISOE/TNBCs only and thus CXCL1 acts in a paracrine fashion to entrain
IRISOE/TNBCs. Mechanistically, MSCs-entrained IRISOE/TNBCs secrete CCL2
and VEGF that activate and attract tumor associated macrophages (TAMs)
and endothelial cells (ECs), respectively to the vicinity of IRISOE/TNBCs
in the aggressiveness niche. S100A8 and IL-8 secreted from
IRISOE/TNBCs-activated TAMs and ECs, respectively in concert with CXCL1
enhance IRISOE/TNBCs aggressiveness. In pre-clinical model, IRISOE cells
co-injected with MSCs (10:1 ratio) developed faster and bigger orthotopic
mammary tumors containing more TAMs and ECs compared to IRISOE/TNBCs
injected alone. These tumors progressed to develop spontaneous lymph-node
or distant metastases (e.g., bone, lung and/or brain).Conclusion: We
propose that in concert with an anti-BRCA1-IRIS drug, inhibitors to the
reciprocal interactions between IRISOE/TNBCs and their surrounding
stromal cells could be exploited as a viable therapy for IRISOE/TNBCs and
their metastases.

