Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CLCA2 interaction with EVA1 promotes mammary epithelial
differentiation


CLCA2 is a p53-, p63-inducible transmembrane protein that is frequently
downregulated in breast cancer. It is induced during differentiation of
human mammary epithelial cells, and its knockdown causes
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To determine how CLCA2
promotes epithelial differentiation, we searched for interactors using
membrane dihybrid screening. We discovered a strong interaction with the
cell junctional protein EVA1 (Epithelial V-like Antigen 1) and confirmed
it by co-immunoprecipitation. Like CLCA2, EVA1 is a type I transmembrane
protein that is regulated by p53 and p63. It is thought to mediate
homophilic cell-cell adhesion in diverse epithelial tissues. We found
that EVA1 is frequently downregulated in breast tumors and breast cancer
cell lines, especially those of mesenchymal phenotype. Moreover,
knockdown of EVA1 in immortalized HMEC caused EMT, implying that EVA1 is
essential for epithelial differentiation. Both EVA1 and CLCA2
co-localized with E-cadherin at cell-cell junctions. The interacting
domains were delimited by deletion analysis, revealing the site of
interaction to be the transmembrane segment (TMS). The TMS primary
sequence of CLCA2 was found to be conserved throughout mammals. Moreover,
competitive inhibition of the interaction by ectopic expression of the
TMS caused partial EMT, suggesting that the interaction is important for
differentiation. A screen for other junctional interactors revealed that
CLCA2 was involved in two different complexes, one with EVA1 and ZO-1,
the other with beta catenin. Overexpression of CLCA2 caused
downregulation of beta catenin and beta catenin-activated genes. Thus,
CLCA2 links a junctional adhesion molecule to cytosolic signaling
proteins that modulate proliferation and differentiation. These results
may explain how attenuation of CLCA2 causes EMT and why CLCA2 and EVA1
are frequently downregulated in metastatic breast cancer cell lines.

