Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)-targeting
nanobioconjugate-encapsulated green tea polyphenol EGCG for prostate
cancer prevention and therapy


Initially we introduced the idea of employing nanotechnology to improve
the outcome of natural agents in chemoprevention and coined the term
Nanochemoprevention. Recently we reported the efficacy of chitosan
nanoparticles encapsulating (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) for
prostate cancer (PCa) prevention and therapy. Here we employed the
concept of targeted uptake of therapeutic nanoparticles, a potentially
powerful technology to enhance the efficacy of EGCG for PCa management.
We developed chitosan nanobioconjugates encapsulating EGCG and surface
functionalized with the A10 2-fluoropyrimidine RNA aptamers that
recognize the extracellular domain of the PSMA, henceforth called
chit-EGCG-Apt. Cellular binding and uptake of the fluorescent nanosystem
was detected suggesting PSMA specific internalization and accumulation.
Further, we observed that chit-EGCG-Apt lead to a PSMA specific increase
of anti-proliferative activity in PCa cells, with a better efficacy in
PSMA positive cells (LNCaP and C4-2) than in PSMA negative (PC3 and
DU145) cells and a decrease in IC50 by at least half the dose of the
native agent. Further, we also observed a significant inhibition in the
colony formation potency of PCa cells when treated with chit-EGCG-Apt as
compared to the native EGCG with the effects more distinct in PSMA
positive cells. Next, we established that EGCG in chit-EGCG-Apt retains
its mechanistic identity and observed that the treatment resulted in
significant (i) shift in Bax/Bcl-2 ratio in favor of apoptosis, (ii)
increase in PARP cleavage, (iii) inhibition in caspase 3, 7, 8 and 9, and
other key regulators of apoptosis, (iv) modulation of death receptor
pathway proteins, and (v) cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors in addition
to arrest of the cells in S phase of the cell cycle. Importantly, these
effects were only visible at higher doses of the native EGCG. The
nanobioconjugate also demonstrated a significant inhibition of invasive
potential of several PCa cells and 3-dimensional spheroid BME cell
invasion assay. Further, chit-EGCG-Apt treated mice implanted with
androgen sensitive CWR22R(nu)1 cells showed significant inhibition in
tumor growth and decreased serum PSA levels reciprocating our in vitro
findings. In tumor tissues of mice treated with Chit-EGCG-Apt there was
significant (i) induction of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerases cleavage, (ii)
increase in the protein expression of Bax with concomitant decrease in
Bcl-2, (iii) activation of caspases, and (iv) reduction in Ki-67 and
proliferating cell nuclear antigen, as compared to native EGCG. We
further observed inhibition of angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis
markers in these tissues. Translation of these data to appropriate animal
model systems could pave way for prostate cancer therapy in humans.

