Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-196b is an epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor for lung
cancer


Silencing of microRNAs by promoter hypermethylation could play a
significant role in lung cancer initiation and progression. A
pre-malignancy model using carcinogen transformed human bronchial
epithelial cells (HBECs) treated with the demethylating agent
5-aza-2deoxycytidine followed by next-generation sequencing identified
miR-196b and miR-34c-5p as being epigenetically regulated. Bisulfite
sequencing confirmed silencing via dense promoter hypermethylation that
was commonly replicated in malignant cell lines and primary tumors.
Functional studies of miR-196b revealed that it was epigenetically
silenced by chromatin modification and DNA methylation during
transformation of HBECs and re-expression modulated genes involved in
cell cycle regulation. Stable re-expression led to a cell cycle arrest
mediated in part through transcriptional regulation of the FOS oncogene
that was replicated in vivo by a profound reduction in growth of tumor
xenografts. Luciferase assays demonstrated that forced expression of
miR-196b inhibits FOS promoter and AP-1 reporter activity. A case-control
study showed that methylation of miR-196b in sputum was strongly
associated with lung cancer (OR = 4.7, pSilencing of microRNAs by
promoter hypermethylation could play a significant role in lung cancer
initiation and progression. A pre-malignancy model using carcinogen
transformed human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) treated with the
demethylating agent 5-aza-2deoxycytidine followed by next-generation
sequencing identified miR-196b and miR-34c-5p as being epigenetically
regulated. Bisulfite sequencing confirmed silencing via dense promoter
hypermethylation that was commonly replicated in malignant cell lines and
primary tumors. Functional studies of miR-196b revealed that it was
epigenetically silenced by chromatin modification and DNA methylation
during transformation of HBECs and re-expression modulated genes involved
in cell cycle regulation. Stable re-expression led to a cell cycle arrest
mediated in part through transcriptional regulation of the FOS oncogene
that was replicated in vivo by a profound reduction in growth of tumor
xenografts. Luciferase assays demonstrated that forced expression of
miR-196b inhibits FOS promoter and AP-1 reporter activity. A case-control
study showed that methylation of miR-196b in sputum was strongly
associated with lung cancer (OR = 4.7, p<0.001). These studies identify
miR-196 as a tumor suppressor whose silencing early in lung
carcinogenesis may provide a selective growth advantage to pre-malignant
cells. Targeted delivery of this microRNA could benefit prevention and
therapy for the management of lung cancer.

