Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the role of the ovarian stromal extracellular matrix in
early tumor development


Background: Advancements in ovarian cancer research have shown evidence
for extra-ovarian origins of malignant cells. The fallopian tubes (FT)
are thought to be a source of the most common and aggressive type of
ovarian tumor, high grade serous which are more common in women with
increased ovulation. We have previously demonstrated that the ovulation
wound site provides an ideal environment for malignant FT cells to
implant into the ovary (1). However, while malignant cells implant during
the reproductive stage, the highest instance of ovarian cancer occurs in
peri- and postmenopausal women. We hypothesize that the ovarian
environment provides the necessary factors to keep implanted malignant
cells quiescent until peri- and post-menopause when the changes in the
ovarian environment trigger proliferation and growth. The extracellular
matrix (ECM), secreted by the ovarian stroma, is a major part of this
environment which regulates cell-to-cell communication and maintains
structural integrity. The intent of this study is to determine the
critical role of the pre- and postmenopausal ECM and elucidate the
effects of matrix remodelling on malignant cells.Methods: We generated
malignant cells by introducing p53 mutations to healthy FT and ovarian
surface epithelial (OSE) cell lines. In vitro, we isolated ECM from
pre-menopausal ovarian stroma. Additionally, we overexpressed matrix
metalloproteinase 2/9 (MMP2/9) in stromal cells to induce matrix
remodelling, resulting in an ECM resembling postmenopause. These matrices
were used to develop a new 3D culture method which allowed us to evaluate
the effect menopausal ECM remodelling has on malignant cell
pathways.Results: The 3D ovarian stromal ECM maintained and delayed
growth of the co-cultured malignant cells compared to their monolayer
counterparts. Postmenopausal remodelling of the ECM, via upregulation of
MMPs, triggered proliferation and expansion of malignant cells. We
discovered, through pathway screening, that AKT, ERK 1/2, PTEN, WNT and
PYK2 were associated with these ECM-related changes in the malignant
cells.Conclusion: These results support the use of a 3D model in
culturing pre-tumor cells to create an in vitro model that closely
resembles an ovarian environment. We have also shown that the ECM plays a
role in maintaining malignant cells by supressing proliferation and
growth. Additionally, we have demonstrated that the remodelling of the
ECM that occurs with menopause-associated increase in MMP2/9 expression
triggers expansion of malignant cells. It is clear that the ECM plays an
important role in the early development of ovarian cancer and that MMP
could be a contributing factor to the postmenopausal presentation of
these malignancies. Going forward, we plan to further elucidate the
specific molecular mechanisms involved in postmenopausal tumor
development.

