Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential prognostic value of MYC immunohistochemistry in
papillary RCC subtypes


IntroductionThe histomorphological classification of type 1 and type 2
papillary renal cell carcinomas (pRCCs) has substantially improved the
prognostication of patients long-term outcome. We previously established
microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of type1 and type 2 pRCCs and, based
upon the results, hypothesize a differential expression of the MYC
proto-oncogene in pRCCs.Material and methodsAn multi-institutional tissue
microarray with more than 200 histomorphological classified pRCCs was
acquired from the PANZAR consortium. Immunohistochemistry for MYC, the
MYC-induced nuclear antigen MINA53 and Ki67 was performed. The prognostic
value for patients long-term survival was examined using uni- and
multivariate survival models.ResultsAs expected, a pRCC type 2 morphology
was associated with reduced overall and cancer-specific survival.
Interestingly, pRCCs with a mixed type 1/2 morphology showed an even
worse clinical outcome. When combining the pRCC morphology and
immunohistochemical staining, only the combination of morphology and MYC
staining patterns was able to further sub-stratify the group of pRCC type
1 tumors in a good and worse prognosis group. None of the patients with
pRCC1 tumors and the favorable MYC staining pattern (>44% of all pRCC
type 1 tumors) suffered a tumor-related death. Patients with pRCC type 1
tumors and the adverse MYC staining pattern had an 4.5-fold elevated risk
of death (multivariate corrected for pathological tumor
stage).ConclusionsAlthough a pRCC type 1 histomorphology is regarded as a
favorable prognostic factor, associated with good clinical outcome, still
patients die of tumor-related causes. We conclude, that in particular for
patients with pRCC type 1 tumors, MYC immunohistochemistry is able to
provide additional prognostic information for a sub-stratification of
this patient population. This knowledge could be used for the
establishment of risk-stratified follow-up schemes for patients after
surgical treatment.

