Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytokine response of stromal cells to prostate cancer
chemotherapeutics


Non-responsiveness to chemotherapeutic drugs presents a significant
challenge to the effective treatment of advanced prostate cancer.
Exploration of the therapeutic response in prostate cancer has largely
focused on the epithelial tumor cells. However, evidence suggests that
the tumor microenvironment may modulate response to chemotherapeutics.
The tumor microenvironment consists of immune, fibroblastic, and vascular
cells, as well as extracellular matrix (ECM) and stromal-derived soluble
factors, all of which contribute to interactions within the tumor
microenvironment. It has been demonstrated that tumor cells cross-talk
with stromal cells, to establish a protective niche at primary and
distant sites and to facilitate survival of cancer cells. Such
tumor-stroma cell cross-talk often involves secreted factors, such as
cytokines. Previous studies have illustrated the importance of cytokines
and cytokine receptors as modulators of drug response. In this study, we
sought to identify cytokine factors expressed in response to drugs
clinically used to control prostate cancer. To obtain the expression
profiles, we conducted a human cytokine and chemokine array, which
consisted of 84 specific genes. Analysis of the prostate cancer and
stromal cells treated with Docetaxel (4nM), Enzalutamide (30M) and
Bicalutamide (30M) revealed differential expression patterns. The effect
of chemotherapeutics on the expression of the cytokine IL-16 and its
cognate receptors CD9 and CCR5 in prostate cancer and stromal cell lines
was further examined. We found IL-16 expression increased several fold
following chemotherapeutic treatment in stromal cell lines compared to
prostate cancer cell lines. To validate gene expression, we examined the
expression of IL-16 and its receptors by RT-PCR. All experiments were
performed in triplicates. Student t- tests were used to determine the
statistical significance between groups. IL-16 expression increased
following exposure to chemotherapeutics in stromal cell lines. CCR5
expression showed a decrease in PC3 prostate cancer cells but no
significant changes were observed in LNCaP cells. CD9 expression showed
an increase in both LNCaP and PC3 cell lines. Collectively, these results
indicate that chemotherapy of prostate cancer may alter the expression of
IL-16 and its receptors. We hypothesize that IL-16 is a soluble stromal
factor that is expressed in response to anticancer drugs, and may have
paracrine activity on neighboring cells that express the cognate
receptors.

