Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Rac1 GTPase activity by SH7139, a new drug candidate
for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma targeting HLA-DR10


SH7139, the first in a series of selective high affinity ligand (SHAL)
therapeutics designed to treat non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, has been shown to
be selectively cytotoxic to lymphoma cells over-expressing HLA-DR10.
Recent efforts to elucidate the mechanisms of action of SH7139 show that
the small molecule drug functions similar to both an antibody drug
conjugate and a pro-drug. SH7139 is comprised of three small molecule
recognition elements that, when linked together, collectively target the
drug to HLA-DR10. Following its binding to HLA-DR10, SH7139 is shuttled
into the interior of the lymphoma cell where the subsequent metabolism of
these recognition elements releases a series of metabolites that inhibit
multiple activities required for tumor cell growth and replication.
Studies performed using the Burkitt's lymphoma cell line Raji have shown
that SH7139 is metabolized by Raji cells, and the metabolic cleavage of
two of the recognition elements (Ct and Dv) produce cytotoxic compounds
that contribute to tumor cell killing. While the third recognition
element, Cb, is not cleaved off the SHAL scaffold or hydrolyzed to
release a cytotoxic metabolite, its structural similarity to known
inhibitors of the GTPase activating protein (GAP) MgcRacGAP suggested
that it might be active in this pathway. MgcRacGAP functions as a switch
that stimulates by many orders of magnitude the activity of the Rac1
GTPase, which is required for cleavage furrow formation, ingression, and
the completion of cytokinesis. Experiments conducted with the
MgcRacGAP-Rac1 complex have shown that the intact SH7139 molecule (IC50 =
10.61.6M) as well as SH7139 fragments containing the Cb recognition
element is effective in inhibiting the GTPase activity of the
MgcRacGAP:Rac1 complex. These results confirm that one mechanism action
of SH7139 is the inhibition of the Rac1-dependent effector pathways that
control the rounding of cells undergoing mitosis, confine Rho activation
to the equator of the cell for proper cleavage furrow formation and other
processes involved in the completion of cytokinesis. This research was
supported by the National Cancer Institute Phase II SBIR award
R44CA159843 to SHAL Technologies Inc. Part of this work was performed
under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.

