Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of endoscopic stent insertion on detection of viable
circulating tumor cells for obstructing colon cancer


The obstructive colorectal cancer(CRC) was reported to be 7-20% of CRC.
For the patients (pts) with obstructive colorectal cancer, self-expanding
metallic stents (SEMS) have been useful as a palliative treatment.
Insertion of SEMS for obstructive colorectal cancer is used as a bridge
to surgery approach. But suspicion have been raised about whether shear
forces that act on the tumor during expansion of the stent may result in
a release of cancer cells into the circulation (i.e., CTCs). This study
was conducted to clarify whether insertion of colonic stents results in
increased levels of viable CTCs (v-CTCs). For detecting viable
CTCs(v-CTCs) of CRC, we employed a novel method, TelomeScan F35 detection
system. The system was constructed with a GFP-expressing attenuated
adenovirus, in which the telomerase promoter regulates viral replication.
7.5 ml of peripheral blood samples were obtained before and after stent
insertion and after operation. GFP-positive and CD45-negative cells were
counted as v- CTCs. This study was a single institution trial, approved
by the Kure Medical Center IRB. Surgical operation was scheduled within 1
month after stenting. Between October 2013 and June 2015,10 pts aged
58-89 years (5 males and 5 females) were enrolled. The surgical operation
(R0) was performed in 9 cases. CEA was reduced to The obstructive
colorectal cancer(CRC) was reported to be 7-20% of CRC. For the patients
(pts) with obstructive colorectal cancer, self-expanding metallic stents
(SEMS) have been useful as a palliative treatment. Insertion of SEMS for
obstructive colorectal cancer is used as a bridge to surgery approach.
But suspicion have been raised about whether shear forces that act on the
tumor during expansion of the stent may result in a release of cancer
cells into the circulation (i.e., CTCs). This study was conducted to
clarify whether insertion of colonic stents results in increased levels
of viable CTCs (v-CTCs). For detecting viable CTCs(v-CTCs) of CRC, we
employed a novel method, TelomeScan F35 detection system. The system was
constructed with a GFP-expressing attenuated adenovirus, in which the
telomerase promoter regulates viral replication. 7.5 ml of peripheral
blood samples were obtained before and after stent insertion and after
operation. GFP-positive and CD45-negative cells were counted as v- CTCs.
This study was a single institution trial, approved by the Kure Medical
Center IRB. Surgical operation was scheduled within 1 month after
stenting. Between October 2013 and June 2015,10 pts aged 58-89 years (5
males and 5 females) were enrolled. The surgical operation (R0) was
performed in 9 cases. CEA was reduced to <50% of baseline value in 6 of 9
measurable pts after resection. 6 pts had no v-CTCs before stenting.
Among them, 3 pts had increasing number of 1-3 v-CTCs after stenting and
1 of them developed multiple liver metastasis 12 month after resection.
While, 4 pts had v-CTCs (1-19 cells) before stenting and 3 of these 4
patients had significant increase of number of v-CTCs (1-21 cells) after
stent insertion. 2 of them had 12 and 14 v-CTCs, respectively after
operation, despite the normalized value of CEA. The present study
suggested that endoscopic stent insertion may result in tumor cell
dissemination into the peripheral circulation and may induce early
distant metastasis. In conclusion, v-CTCs may become useful for prognosis
assessment, especially when SEMS insertion is considered.

