Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astrocyte elevated gene-1(AEG-1)as a potential
diagnostic/prognostic marker for prostate cancer


AEG-1/MTDH/LYRIC was initially identified as a HIV-1-inducible gene in
primary human fetal astrocytes. Astrocyte Elevated Gene-1 (AEG-1) is
ubiquitously overexpressed in all or most cancers and plays a regulatory
role in diverse and multiple processes of carcinogenesis. AEG1 is a
multi-functional regulator of normal and abnormal physiology; it
contributes to broad-spectrum resistance to various chemotherapeutics;
and it was recently proposed as the first potential pan-cancer gene
However, despite its critical relevance to carcinogenesis, until now
genetic polymorphisms for this important gene have not been studied for
association with cancer susceptibility. For example, though studies have
reported AEG-1 gene expression in animal models and tumor tissues, no
studies have been reported in Caucasians on the AEG-1 gene polymorphisms
in large samples to establish an association with cancers. We report a
PCR-RFLP screening protocol for AEG-1 gene polymorphism which is cost
effective, simple and reproducible. This study also shows the strong
association of AEG-1 gene with prostate cancer risk and metastasis.DNA
and RNA was isolated from 232 normal healthy age matched male Caucasians
and 129 prostate cancer patients recruited in the study with an informed
consent. AEG-1 gene polymorphism (rs2438211) was screened using PCR-RFLP
method. Patients were compared with normal healthy controls and also
within patient group comparisons were made between primary and metastasis
cases. Genotype analysis was done using IBM SPSS 22 software and gene
expression analysis was done using RT2 profiler PCR Array Data analysis
version 3.5 (SABIOSCIENCES).A strong association of AEG-1 gene
polymorphism with prostate cancer (pAEG-1/MTDH/LYRIC was initially
identified as a HIV-1-inducible gene in primary human fetal astrocytes.
Astrocyte Elevated Gene-1 (AEG-1) is ubiquitously overexpressed in all or
most cancers and plays a regulatory role in diverse and multiple
processes of carcinogenesis. AEG1 is a multi-functional regulator of
normal and abnormal physiology; it contributes to broad-spectrum
resistance to various chemotherapeutics; and it was recently proposed as
the first potential pan-cancer gene However, despite its critical
relevance to carcinogenesis, until now genetic polymorphisms for this
important gene have not been studied for association with cancer
susceptibility. For example, though studies have reported AEG-1 gene
expression in animal models and tumor tissues, no studies have been
reported in Caucasians on the AEG-1 gene polymorphisms in large samples
to establish an association with cancers. We report a PCR-RFLP screening
protocol for AEG-1 gene polymorphism which is cost effective, simple and
reproducible. This study also shows the strong association of AEG-1 gene
with prostate cancer risk and metastasis.DNA and RNA was isolated from
232 normal healthy age matched male Caucasians and 129 prostate cancer
patients recruited in the study with an informed consent. AEG-1 gene
polymorphism (rs2438211) was screened using PCR-RFLP method. Patients
were compared with normal healthy controls and also within patient group
comparisons were made between primary and metastasis cases. Genotype
analysis was done using IBM SPSS 22 software and gene expression analysis
was done using RT2 profiler PCR Array Data analysis version 3.5
(SABIOSCIENCES).A strong association of AEG-1 gene polymorphism with
prostate cancer (p<0.0001) was observed. A high frequency of the mutant
allele was observed in patients (27%) as compared to normal healthy
controls (7.9%).This study also highlights the possible effect of AEG-1
interaction with other genes (p53, BCCIP) contributing to tumorigenesis.

