Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoliposomal targeting of ephrin receptor A2 (EphA2): Preclinical
in vitro and in vivo rationale


Ephrins receptors are cell to cell adhesion molecules that mediate
signaling and are implicated in neuronal repulsion, cell migration and
angiogenesis. Ephrin receptor A2 (EphA2) is part of the ephrin family and
was shown to be overexpressed in several solid tumors including ovarian,
gastric and lung cancer and is associated with poor prognosis. MM-310 is
a novel EphA2 targeted docetaxel nanoliposome. Similar to other
nanoparticles, MM-310 leverages organ specificity through enhanced
permeability and retention, but can also leverage cellular specificity
through its EphA2 targeting arm.Binding of targeted liposomes to cells in
vitro was assessed using flow cytometry in a large panel cell lines. 3D
spheroids were used to assess targeting as well as liposome penetration.
In order to test the effect of targeting on liposome microdistribution in
vivo, primary and metastatic tumor bearing animals were injected with a
mixture of EphA2-targeted liposome (EphA2-Ls) and non-targeted liposome
(NT-Ls) labeled with two different lipophilic fluorescent dyes. Tissues
were assessed using fluorescent microscopy. In order to evaluate the
contribution of EphA2-targeting to efficacy, four gastric xenograft
models were treated with either MM-310 or a non-targeted version of the
drug NT-310, and compared to free docetaxel.In cell suspension models, we
observed a high level of specificity for EphA2-Ls, with more than one
hundred-fold increase in liposome cell association. 3D spheroid assays
showed that EphA2-Ls binds and penetrates EphA2+ spheroids, while
non-targeted liposomes show minimal penetration. Tissue microdistribution
analysis in triple negative breast and esophageal tumor models following
injection of the EphA2-Ls/NT-Ls mixtures showed a target mediated shift
in the microdistribution of liposomes. EphA2-Ls penetrated deeper within
the lesions while the NT-Ls deposited at high levels in areas close to
the microvasculature. The target mediated shift in microdistribution was
also observed in lung metastasis model, with a pattern of distribution
that potentially matches disseminated tumor cells. In the same animals,
targeting did not affect microdistribution in normal organs such as
liver, spleen and skin. Four models of gastric and esophageal cancers
were used to test the potential link between cell targeting and tumor
growth control. While NT-310 and MM-310 were both able to control tumor
growth leading to regression in most models, in three out of four models
there was a statistically significant difference between MM-310 and
NT-310 at 25 mpk. Biomarker analysis is underway to evaluate the key
parameters necessary to mediate targeting.In conclusion, the data
suggests clear evidence of targeting in 2D cell suspension, 3D spheroids,
and in primary as well as metastatic tumor models in vivo. In vivo
efficacy data showed evidence of the contribution of EphA2 targeting to
tumor growth control and regression in several gastric cancer models.

