Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the phosphorylated RXR on diethylnitrosamine-induced
liver tumorigenesis in mice


We have previously reported that a malfunction of RXR due to aberrant
phosphorylation at serine 260 by MAPK is associated with the development
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The phosphorylated RXR impairs normal
receptor functions of either RXR or RAR, which are respective homodimeric
or heterodimeric partner of RXR, in a dominant-negative manner. Besides,
these impaired receptor functions result in the downregulation of their
target gene expression and inducing hepatocarcinogenesis by stimulating
cell proliferation and inhibiting apoptosis, suggesting that
phosphorylated RXR plays a crucial role in the development of HCC.
However, these findings were revealed primarily using HCC cell lines that
express the phosphorylated-RXR (p-RXR) proteins and it still remains
unclear whether p-RXR may impact in the process of hepatocarcinogenesis
in vivo. Therefore, in order to investigate the biological functions of
p-RXR on hepatocarcinogenesis in vivo, we generated doxycycline-inducible
ES cell line and transgenic mouse, both of which overexpress phosphomimic
mutant of RXR (T82D/S260D). Interestingly, the transcriptional activities
of Retinoid X Receptor Response Element (RXRE) were significantly reduced
in the Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from the transgenic
mice, suggesting that the retinoid signaling via RXR were impaired in the
mice. Moreover, the development of liver tumors induced by liver
carcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DEN) was enhanced in the transgenic mice
that overexpress T82D/S260D protein in the liver. Notably, the increased
liver tumors in the transgenic mice resulted from the promotion of cell
cycle progression, not the inhibition of apoptosis. Interestingly,
expression of -catenin and its target genes, cyclin D1 and c-myc, were
increased in transgenic liver tumors, although the expression of
retinoid-related genes, such as RAR, p21 and p27, were not altered
compared with control mice. These results suggest that the
phospho-modification of RXR may promote the development of DEN-induced
liver tumors through the activation of -catenin signaling pathways in
mice.

