Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rhabdomyosarcoma tumors recur by a PAX3-FOXO1-independent
mechanism in a human myoblast xenograft model


The PAX3-FOXO1 fusion gene is generated by a 2;13 chromosomal
translocation, and is a characteristic feature of a subset of
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) with aggressive behavior and poor prognosis. This
study utilizes an inducible expression system in human myoblasts to
dissect the molecular mechanism of PAX3-FOXO1 action during RMS
tumorigenesis and progression.Constitutive and doxycycline-inducible
expression constructs were used to generate a human myoblast cell line
that constitutively expresses MYCN and reversibly expresses PAX3-FOXO1,
respectively. PAX3-FOXO1 expression was assessed by Western blotting,
qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Oncogenicity in these engineered
myoblasts was studied in vitro by focus formation and in vivo by
intramuscular injection of NOD-SCID mice. Cell proliferation, apoptosis
and myogenic differentiation were assessed by western blot or
immunohistochemical assays.In focus formation assays, doxycycline-treated
myoblasts expressing constitutive MYCN and doxycycline inducible
PAX3-FOXO1 showed a high level of oncogenic transformation. When
doxycycline was removed during the course of this assay, smaller foci
formed with prominent myogenic differentiation and cell death.
Intramuscular injection of these engineered myoblasts resulted in RMS
tumor formation when fusion protein expression was induced by feeding
mice a doxycycline-supplemented diet. After small palpable tumors formed,
doxycycline withdrawal resulted in decreased PAX3-FOXO1 expression and
tumor regression. Microscopic examination of regressing tumors revealed
widespread myogenic differentiation and cell death. In most cases, the
tumors recurred several weeks later despite the absence of inducing
agent. Analysis of recurrent tumor samples revealed that a subset emerged
in the absence of PAX3-FOXO1 expression. A cell line generated from a
PAX3-FOXO1-independent recurrence demonstrated transformation in vitro in
the absence of doxycycline. Though cell lines derived from primary tumors
were dependent on PAX3-FOXO1 and differentiated when doxycycline was
removed, the recurrent tumor-derived cells did not differentiate under
these conditions and instead proliferated continuously. Furthermore,
reinjection of these recurrent tumor-derived cells resulted in tumor
formation in mice in the absence of doxycycline, and even more rapid
tumor formation in the presence of doxycycline.Our study provides
evidence that the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion protein is necessary to develop
primary tumors but recurrent tumors can develop by a
PAX3-FOXO1-independent mechanism. The recurrent tumors are postulated to
have acquired secondary oncogenic events that were activated or selected
by initial PAX3-FOXO1 expression. These secondary events have an additive
oncogenic effect with PAX3-FOXO1 expression, and then contribute to tumor
recurrence in the absence of PAX3-FOXO1 expression.

