Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic potential of serum and exosomal microRNAs for patients
with pre-malignant lesions of colorectal cancer: Detection of adenoma


Background: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are dysregulated during colorectal cancer
(CRC) development and progression. Profiling of CRC tissue has elicited
interest in the potential use of miRNAs as non-invasive biomarkers for
early detection of CRC. Exosomes have capacity to envelop specific
miRNAs, and maintain the integrity of contents in circulation. Therefore,
circulating miRNAs in exosomes are more stable than other forms. Thus
miRNAs extracted from exosome in serum may have significant potential as
disease specific biomarker; however there is no report to assess whether
whole serum or exosome-derived miRNAs from serum is a more accurate
diagnostic marker and indicator of tumor progression in CRC. This study
aimed to evaluate the diagnostic value of serum and exosomal miRNAs for
adenoma patients, respectively.Methods: Following a literature review, we
investigated the expression of candidate miRNAs in 20 normal colonic
mucosa, 27 adenoma, and 19 CRC tissue samples. Then, we quantified their
expression in serum and in exosome from 26 adenoma patients and 47
healthy controls to evaluate their clinical significance. Additionally,
we compared the expression levels of serum miRNAs with of exosomal miRNAs
to investigate their potential as biomarker.Results: We selected four
miRNAs, miR-21, miR-29a, miR-92a, and miR-135b, for further
investigation. MiR-21, miR-29a, miR-92a, and miR-135b expression in
adenoma were significantly higher than in normal colonic mucosa.
Regarding the miRNAs expression in serum, miR-21, miR-29a, miR-92a levels
in adenoma patients were significantly higher than in healthy controls,
and significantly correlated with adenoma size and total adenoma counts
in the colorectum. MiR-21, miR-29a and miR-92a levels in serum could
significantly discriminate patients with adenoma, and in the patients
with advanced adenoma (>1.0 cm), the capacity to discriminate advanced
adenoma improved. On the other hand, exosomal miR-21 and miR-29a levels
in serum from adenoma patients were significantly higher than that from
healthy volunteer. Only exosomal miR-21 significantly correlated with
adenoma size and total adenoma counts in the colorectum, and could
differentiate patients with adenomas significantly. In the patients with
advanced adenoma, the capacity of exosomal miR-21 for biomarker did not
improve, and significance disappeared.Conclusion: Our results revealed
that although both serum and exosomal miRNAs could be non-invasive
biomarkers for the early detection of CRC, but exosomal miRNAs were
unfavorable for the identification of high-risk adenomatous polyps. Serum
miR-21, miR-29a and miR-92a are potential diagnostic biomarkers in
high-risk adenomatous polyp patients.

