Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase a regulation of malignant brain tumor migration


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and deadly type of
primary brain tumor, accounting for over 13,000 new cases in the U.S.
annually and a two-year survival rate of Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is
the most common and deadly type of primary brain tumor, accounting for
over 13,000 new cases in the U.S. annually and a two-year survival rate
of < 5%. GBMs are highly invasive and classified by the World Health
Organization as a grade IV astrocytoma. Recent studies have shown that
protein kinase A (PKA), a key regulator of signal transduction and
various biological functions, is essential for maintaining polarity
during cell migration and that localized activation of PKA at the leading
edge is an early event in directional cell migration of other cell types.
Though PKA has previously been shown to promote proliferation and
migration in lung, colorectal, adrenocortical, and prostate cancer cell
lines, the molecular mechanisms that link PKA activity with GBM
physiology remain unclear. Wound healing assays in human GBM cell lines
U-251 MG, U-87 MG and A172, demonstrated that GBM cell migration
increased following the addition of 20 M epidermal growth factor (EGF).
Similar results were found with 5 M treatment of the adenylate cyclase
activator, forskolin, and inhibited by pre-treatment with 10 M of the PKA
inhibitor, H89. In order to assay the amount of PKA activity, we measured
the phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) in
these cell lines. Western blot studies revealed an increase in CREB
phosphorylation in cells treated with EGF and forskolin. Phosphorylation
of CREB was decreased with the addition of H89 treatment. Our western
blot analysis supports our wound healing data demonstrating a correlation
between increased PKA-mediated CREB phosphorylation and migration in the
absence of serum. Taken together, these data suggest that PKA activation
by EGF is involved in GBM cell migration. Moreover, our findings describe
a mechanism by which PKA regulates the migration of human brain tumors.

