Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel antibody-drug conjugate directed to the ALK receptor
tyrosine kinase demonstrates efficacy in models of neuroblastoma


Activated ALK by mutation or amplification is a validated therapeutic
target in a subset of patients with high-risk neuroblastoma, and tyrosine
kinase inhibitors are being developed to abrogate ALK signaling (Bresler
et al, 2014). Native ALK is expressed on the surface of the majority of
neuroblastoma tumors, but not on normal tissue, giving it properties of a
tumor antigen. We hypothesized that ALK-targeted antibodies may be useful
in neuroblastoma as single-agent immunotherapy or in combination with
small-molecule ALK inhibitors - especially where mutations reduce kinase
inhibitor sensitivity. In this work, an anti-ALK monoclonal antibody
(anti-ALK2) was conjugated to a cytotoxic agent (ALK2-ADC) and its
anti-tumor activity was investigated in a panel of extensively
characterized human neuroblastoma cell lines (n = 10) harboring wild type
and mutant ALK. Cell surface ALK was quantified using flow cytometry and
revealed differential antigen expression. Using in vitro growth
inhibition assays, there was evidence for a dose-dependent cytotoxicity
to neuroblastoma cells at subnanomolar concentrations that correlated
with ALK expression and was independent of underlying mutation status. In
order to evaluate the therapeutic potential of ALK2-ADC in vivo, mice
bearing Felix-patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors, containing the
third most common ALK mutation (R1245C), were used to demonstrate that
ALK2-ADC led to a significant reduction in tumor growth compared to
unconjugated antibody and a control ADC (pActivated ALK by mutation or
amplification is a validated therapeutic target in a subset of patients
with high-risk neuroblastoma, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors are being
developed to abrogate ALK signaling (Bresler et al, 2014). Native ALK is
expressed on the surface of the majority of neuroblastoma tumors, but not
on normal tissue, giving it properties of a tumor antigen. We
hypothesized that ALK-targeted antibodies may be useful in neuroblastoma
as single-agent immunotherapy or in combination with small-molecule ALK
inhibitors - especially where mutations reduce kinase inhibitor
sensitivity. In this work, an anti-ALK monoclonal antibody (anti-ALK2)
was conjugated to a cytotoxic agent (ALK2-ADC) and its anti-tumor
activity was investigated in a panel of extensively characterized human
neuroblastoma cell lines (n = 10) harboring wild type and mutant ALK.
Cell surface ALK was quantified using flow cytometry and revealed
differential antigen expression. Using in vitro growth inhibition assays,
there was evidence for a dose-dependent cytotoxicity to neuroblastoma
cells at subnanomolar concentrations that correlated with ALK expression
and was independent of underlying mutation status. In order to evaluate
the therapeutic potential of ALK2-ADC in vivo, mice bearing
Felix-patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors, containing the third most
common ALK mutation (R1245C), were used to demonstrate that ALK2-ADC led
to a significant reduction in tumor growth compared to unconjugated
antibody and a control ADC (p<0.0001). Although ALK2-ADC binds potently
to mouse ALK as well as human ALK, doses of up to 10 mg/kg in the rodent
model appeared to be well tolerated with no overt toxicity noted.
Additional in vivo studies are ongoing to assess the antitumor potential
of the ADC in a broader range of ALK-expressing neuroblastoma models.
Thus, targeting human ALK-expressing with an ALK antibody-drug conjugate
demonstrated early signs of favorable efficacy and tolerability
supporting future development of this approach as a potential novel
therapeutic for patients with neuroblastoma.

