Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation-expression QTLs (meeQTLs) as part of an integrated
model of the disruption of gene regulation in cancer


This work describes a new approach aimed at untangling the complex
relationship that disrupted methylation patterns share with aberrant gene
expression in cancer.Typically, the association between methylation and
gene expression is considered through correlation analysis.
Anti-correlation of promoter DNA methylation with expression is taken to
imply repression of the gene. However, this approach is limited in its
ability to consider the effect of methylation on genes other than the one
most proximal to a CpG whose methylation value is known. Furthermore, the
lack of a statistical model means that covariates may be ignored.
Additionally, unnecessary tests may be run (reducing statistical power)
when all data points are treated as independent, when in reality CpG loci
that are close to each other are often highly correlated. Finally, the
effect of copy number variation on gene expression is often not
considered.We propose an approach that addresses these issues and finds
significant results with large effects even with relatively small sample
sizes. The core of our method involves eQTL analysis, but not based on
the typical SNP-gene association. Instead, matched tumor/normal data are
used to model differentially methylated regions (DMRs) throughout the
genome. Highly correlated values are aggregated, resulting in a more
stable measure of methylation and fewer tests. The extant of differential
methylation for an individual is then assigned as that individual's
genotype for a DMR. These genotypes are then used for an eQTL analysis,
modeling the association of methylation and expression both in cis and in
trans. We call this meeQTL analysis, for methylation-expression QTLs.
Covariates can also be included in the model. Furthermore, the effect
sizes from meeQTL analysis are adjusted, to compensate for the effect of
copy number variation on the results.As a proof of concept, we ran our
meeQTL analysis on breast cancer data from TCGA, and found thousands of
significant meeQTLs, using just 78 matched samples. The top 10
cis-meeQTLs (by effect size) had absolute log-odds between 6 and 9 (i.e.
a 1 unit increase in methylation is associated with a 6 to 9 unit change
in expression), and include genes such as HIF3A, a negative regulator of
hypoxia response genes, or KLF15, which regulates TP53 and NF-kappa B.
The top 10 trans-meeQTLs had absolute log-odds between 16 and 19 and
include multiple genes associated with a DMR in the first intron of
CRADD, a death-domain containing protein. Our model also found that DMRs
experience significantly fewer somatic mutations than other loci and
identified regions of copy number variation associated with aberrant gene
expression in trans. These results suggest our approach can provide
robust delineation of methylation and expression relationships arising
from the complex structure of the genome and the epigenetic mechanisms
regulating its activity.

