Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of hepatocarcinogenesis in rats by arabinoxylan rice
bran, MGN-3/Biobran


Objective: Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the most common cancers in
the world and one of the most lethal. MGN-3/Biobran, derived from rice
bran hemicelluloses, has been reported to possess a strong anticancer
effect against several neoplasms. In the current study, we examined the
protective effect of MGN-3/Biobran against N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA)
and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in rats and
studied the molecular mechanisms underlying its effect.Materials and
Methods: Male albino rats received carcinogen NDEA (200 mg/kg body
weight) single dose i.p. plus promoter CCl4 (3 ml/kg b.w.) weekly s.c.
for 6 weeks. Another group of rats were treated with MGN-3/Biobran
(25mg/Kg b.w.) 5 times/week i.p. for 2 weeks prior to receiving
carcinogens and continued for 20 weeks. Tumor incidence, histopathology,
body and liver weight, liver marker enzymes, cell cycle progression, cell
proliferation and apoptotic-related markers at mRNA and protein
expression levels were quantitatively determined.Results: Rats exposed to
carcinogens alone showed loss of liver architecture, and proliferative
and neoplastic changes. This group also showed marked decrease in body
weight, increase in liver weight, and elevation in the levels of hepatic
diagnostic markers: serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase (gamma GT). In contrast, rats pretreated with MGN-3/
Biobran and subsequently exposed to carcinogens showed significant
reduction in liver tumor incidence, marked decrease in the percentage of
pre-neoplastic foci in hepatic parenchyma, and inhibition in the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma. MGN-3/ Biobran treatment also
maintained AST, ALT, ALP, and gamma GT levels close to normal values. In
addition, MGN-3/Biobran treatment was associated with marked increase in
both the cell cycle sub-G0/G1 population and AnnexinV-binding. The
molecular studies at mRNA and protein expression levels in the liver
tissues demonstrated that MGN-3/ Biobran reversed carcinogen induced
suppression in the level of IkappaB-alpha (IB-), downregulated the
expression of the nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-Bp65) and Bcl2, upregulated
the expression of p53, Bax, caspases-3 and markedly increased Bax/Bcl2
ratio.Conclusion: This study concluded that MGN-3/ Biobran inhibited
hepatocarcinogenesis induced by NDEA and CCI4 via induction of apoptosis
and inhibition of cancer cell proliferation. MGN-3/ Biobran may be a
promising chemopreventive agent for liver carcinogenesis.Biobran /MGN-3
was provided by Daiwa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan.

