Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor associated macrophages in undifferentiated uterine sarcoma:
association with angiogenesis and therapeutic implications


Sarcomas of the uterus are derived from uterine smooth muscle
(leiomyosarcomas) or from endometrial stromal cells. The latter group
includes three subtypes: the low-grade (LG) and high-grade (HG)
endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS), each defined by characteristic
chromosomal translocations, and undifferentiated uterine sarcoma (UUS),
the most aggressive form. The majority of UUS patients present with
high-stage disease and even patients with stage I tumors often die within
2 years from diagnosis. Adjuvant radio- and chemotherapy do not improve
the clinical outcome. No prior comprehensive molecular analysis of all
three types of endometrial stromal tumors has been reported.We performed
genomic analysis (whole exome sequencing and aCGH), gene expression
profiling (RNA-seq and microarrays), immunohistochemistry (IHC) and FISH
on 31 endometrial stromal tumors, including 17 UUS and 14 LG and HG ESS.
All ESS cases carried characteristic JAZF1, PHF1, MBTD1 or YWHAE
rearrangements. Selected findings were validated by IHC, qRT-PCR and
Sanger sequencing.Genomic analysis revealed that UUS are characterized by
complex chromosomal aberrations. The most frequent somatic mutations (in
TP53, KRAS, FBXW7, PIK3CA and ERBB3) and copy number changes (e.g. gains
of 19q, 8q11.1-q24.3 and 3q26.2-q29) in UUS resemble those seen in
uterine carcinosarcomas and carcinomas.UUS over-expressed numerous genes
encoding M2 macrophage-specific markers, including CD163, CCL18, mannose
receptor, stabilin-1, and macrophage galactose-type C-type lectin 2.
Immunohistochemistry for CD163 and CD68 confirmed high tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM) counts in UUS tissues compared to the ESS. In UUS, we
also observed significantly higher mRNA expression for genes implicated
in angiogenesis (CD34, MMP9), immunosuppression and tumor invasion (e.g.
CCR2, IL10RA, IRAK3, CCL13, CXCL9, CXCL10).TAMs are associated with
progression, resistance to cytotoxic therapy and metastatic spread in
most human tumor types. In animal models, TAMs were shown to induce
increased angiogenesis. CSF1 is a major regulator of macrophage function
and is implicated in these tumor-promoting effects. Clinical trials have
shown an effect of inhibitors of the CSF1 pathway in tenosynovial giant
cell tumors and our data indicate that these inhibitors may be considered
for the treatment of UUS. Our study also showed significantly elevated
expression in UUS of two additional therapeutic targets involving
macrophage pathways: CCR2 (C-C chemokine receptor type 2) that can be
targeted by monoclonal antibodies, and BTK (Bruton's tyrosine kinase)
that can be targeted by ibrutinib.In conclusion, our findings demonstrate
abundant presence of TAMs and over-expression of TAM-associated markers
in UUS compared to the other tumors derived from endometrial stroma.
Moreover, our results indicate novel potential therapeutic targets for
UUS patients management.

