Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A microRNA signature in urinary exosomes for diagnosis of prostate
cancer


MicroRNAs constitute a class of small cellular noncoding RNAs (typically
19-23 nt) which function as post-transcriptional regulators of gene
expression. The involvement of microRNA in both normal development as
well as disease is well established and microRNAs are considered
important biomarkers in several diseases including cancer. Surprisingly
cell free microRNAs are also found in several biofluids where they have
been shown to be very stable, most likely because they are protected from
degradation by protein complexes and other particles including
exosomes.Exosomes are nanovesicles secreted into the extracellular
environment by a wide range of cell types under normal and pathological
conditions. As the profile of exosomal microRNAs may be a fingerprint of
the releasing cell type and because they are released in easily
accessible body fluids such as blood and urine, their microRNA content
holds potential as biomarkers for early detection of malignancy.We have
developed different technologies enabling the detection of prostate
cancer microRNA biomarkers in exosomes derived from urine from
non-prostate massaged men. The first of these technologies is a highly
sensitive LNA-based qPCR platform for microRNA detection, which enables
profiling in biofluids where microRNA levels are extremely low. At this
point we have already applied this platform on thousands of biofluid
samples including serum/plasma and urine to establish normal reference
ranges for circulating microRNAs as well as to identify biomarkers of
disease. The second technology is a simple exosome precipitation system
which only requires low speed centrifugation to harvest urine
exosomes.Our developed technologies was applied to cell-free urine from
three different cohorts including individuals with prostate cancer (PCa)
and benign prostate hyperplasia, to identify several differentially
regulated microRNAs in urine from PCa bearing individuals. PCa specific
signatures were obtained by different combinations of these
differentially regulated microRNAs. In conclusion, cell free urine
samples holds potential as a liquid biopsy source for exosomal microRNA
markers in prostate cancer. Data showing that small miRNA signatures
(down to two miRNAs) hold strong diagnostic potential in PCa will be
presented.

