Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic antitumor effect of selinexor, a selective inhibitor
of nuclear export (SINE) compound and trastuzumab in a mouse model of
breast cancer


Introduction: Selinexor (sel) is an oral, first-in-class SINE compound
that binds to the primary nuclear exporter XPO1/CRM1. XPO1 exports
include major tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) leading to their
inactivation. Inhibition of XPO1 results in nuclear retention of TSPs and
restores their normal functions. We have previously shown that HER2+
breast cancer (BC) cells are highly sensitive to sel (SKBR3 and MCF7 IC50
0.21 and 0.073 M, respectively). Here we tested the hypothesis that
inhibition of HER2 signaling with trastuzumab (tras) synergizes with sel
as both mediators (PI3K-AKT and Ras-Raf-MEK pathways) and effectors
(FOXO3A, MDM2) of the HER2 pathway are among direct cargos of
XPO1.Methods: The effects of sel and tras alone or in combination on cell
viability were tested on MCF7 and BT474 HER2+ BC cells using MTT assays.
Total RNA and whole protein cell lysates were extracted and analyzed by
qPCR and by immunoblots. In-vivo, BT474 cells were used to derive a
xenograft mouse model. Mice were treated with sub-therapeutic doses of
sel and tras alone or in combination and with the therapeutic dose of
sel. Tumor Growth (TG) was monitored for 60 days. Xenografts were
harvested and analyzed by immunohistochemestry (IHC).Results: Sel-tras
combination was highly effective in-vitro and in-vivo. In MTT assays,
both sel and tras demonstrated low IC50 values (nanomolar) and when
combined, they synergistically inhibit proliferation. In-vivo, the
combination resulted in significant survival benefit and enhanced TG
inhibition of 88% compared to the monotherapy groups 57% (sel) and 25%
(tras). Interestingly, an increase in pro-survival cytoplasmic FOXO3A
protein was observed in the tras-treated group however, in the
combination group, FOXO3A, which is an XPO1cargo, was restricted to the
nucleus where it can trigger apoptosis. In addition, a synergistic
increase in P27 protein, the G1 phase arrest regulator, was observed in
the sel-tras-treated group. While in the monotherapy groups p-ERK was not
modulated, in the combination group an increase in cytoplasmic p-ERK was
observed, suggesting an affect on its downstream regulators of apoptosis.
Indeed, apoptosis was evident in the combination samples by increased IHC
staining to Cleaved caspase3 and Apoptag. In addition, an increase in
PARP protein was observed in the tras-treated group however, in the
combination group, PARP was dramatically reduced. We have previously
shown that selinxor modulates DNA Damage Response (DDR) proteins
suggesting that one mechanism by which the combination enhances cancer
cell death is by accumulation of DNA damage that cannot be
resolved.Conclusion: Sel-tras combination is a novel candidate therapy to
HER2+ BC modulating DDR and apoptosis. It synergizes to induce survival
benefit and TG inhibition. These data provide rational support for study
of sel-tras combination in clinical trials.

