Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of ALDH1, Bmi-1 and CD24 in human oral squamous cell
carcinoma and its relationship with clinical factors


[Background] A cancer stem cell (cancer initiating cell, CSC) is
considered capable of self -replication, self-differentiation, drug
resistance, and immune evasion. Recently, CSC has become increasingly
important in the treatment of malignant tumors. Cancer stem cells express
specific molecules termed CSC marker, including aldehyde dehydrogenase
(ALDH) 1, B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog (Bmi-1) and CD24,
and their expression has been reported to be the potential prognostic
values. However, the prognostic values of ALDH1, Bmi1, and CD24
expression in patients with oral cancer are less understood.[Purpose] The
aims of present study were to evaluate the expression of ALDH1, Bmi1, and
CD24 in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and to elucidate the
relationships among the CSC marker expression, clinical stages,
histological differentiation, the classification of invasion mode,
cerebral lymph node metastasis and disease-free survival rate.[Materials
and Methods] Tissue specimens were obtains from 103 patients with OSCC
after surgery or biopsy. Immunohistochemistry was used to assess ALDH1,
Bmi1, and CD24 protein using at least 10% staining-positive cells as the
definition of positive staining.[Results] Immunohistochemical analysis of
103 cases showed that 31 cases (30%) expressed ALDH1. There was no
relationship between ALDH1 expression and clinical stages or metastasis.
However, there was significant association between ALDH1 expression and
histological differentiation, or classification of invasion mode or
disease-free survival rate. Otherwise, 39 cases (38%) cases of 103 OSCC
patients expressed Bmi-1. There was significant association between Bmi-1
expression and invasion mode or disease-free survival rate. Sixty four
cases (62%) expressed CD24. There was significant association between
CD24 expression and histological differentiation.[Conclusions] These
findings suggested that the expression of ALDH1 and Bmi-1 as CSC markers
in OSCC may be good marker indicating survival in patients with OSCC.

