Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Very low methylation is a novel epigenetic regulatory mechanism in
normal tissues and predisposes to hypermethylation in cancer


High level DNA methylation of promoter CpG Island (CGI) represses gene
expression. However, low-level CGI methylation is usually not
distinguished from complete absence of methylation. Here we show that
Very Low Methylated Regions (VLMRs 1-20%) on promoter CGIs are present in
up to 20% of human and mouse genes and negatively correlate with gene
expression in all tissues examined. In vitro, low-level methylation
directly represses reporter gene expression; an effect mediated by
methyl-CpG-binding proteins as transient knockdown of MBD4 reverses this
repression. In vivo VLMR genes are enriched for polycomb occupancy but
can also occur in H3K4me3 occupied promoters, where it correlates with
gene repression independent of polycomb complex binding. VLMRs in
promoter CGIs in healthy WBCs are 19 fold and 65 fold more likely to gain
hypermethylation in Acute Myelogenous Leukemia and Myelodysplastic
Syndrome patients respectively compared to unmethylated CGIs (High level
DNA methylation of promoter CpG Island (CGI) represses gene expression.
However, low-level CGI methylation is usually not distinguished from
complete absence of methylation. Here we show that Very Low Methylated
Regions (VLMRs 1-20%) on promoter CGIs are present in up to 20% of human
and mouse genes and negatively correlate with gene expression in all
tissues examined. In vitro, low-level methylation directly represses
reporter gene expression; an effect mediated by methyl-CpG-binding
proteins as transient knockdown of MBD4 reverses this repression. In vivo
VLMR genes are enriched for polycomb occupancy but can also occur in
H3K4me3 occupied promoters, where it correlates with gene repression
independent of polycomb complex binding. VLMRs in promoter CGIs in
healthy WBCs are 19 fold and 65 fold more likely to gain hypermethylation
in Acute Myelogenous Leukemia and Myelodysplastic Syndrome patients
respectively compared to unmethylated CGIs (<1%). Our study reveals a
novel epigenetic control mechanism that has strong effects on gene
expression in normal tissues and accounts for most of the gene
specificity of hypermethylation in cancer.

