Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine prevents chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy in
vivo, and fails to stimulate the growth of lung cancer cells or interfere
with the effectiveness of chemotherapy in vitro


Chemotherapy has played a significant and unparalleled role in the
treatment and survival of cancer patients. However, this pharmacological
approach can lead to long-term symptoms of drug toxicity, including
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN), a result of peripheral
nerve fiber dysfunction or degeneration. CIPN is characterized by sensory
symptoms such as numbness, tingling, cold sensitivity, or allodynia, and
an overall decrease in quality of life. Paclitaxel (Taxol), a taxane that
is commonly used to treat breast, lung, and ovarian cancers, has been
found to cause CIPN in 59 to 78% of patients. There is currently no
effective preventative or therapeutic treatment for this side effect,
which can present either during or after chemotherapy administration.
Without the development of an efficacious treatment, CIPN can be a
dose-limiting factor for chemotherapy or delay treatment, thereby
influencing survival and quality of life. Our studies have revealed that
the prototypical nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist, nicotine, is
capable of reversing and preventing the development of paclitaxel-induced
CIPN in vivo, and does not interfere with the cytotoxic properties of
paclitaxel in vitro. Male C57BL/6J mice were infused with 24 mg/kg of
nicotine via subcutaneous 7-day osmotic minipumps starting 48 hours prior
to paclitaxel treatment, which consisted of 8 mg/kg intraperitoneal
injections every other day for a total of four injections. The use of von
Frey filament testing revealed that nicotine dose-dependently reverses
and prevents paclitaxel-induced mechanical allodynia. In regards to the
in vitro studies, MTT and MTS colorimetric assays showed that
concentrations of nicotine ranging from 0.1 to 10 M fail to significantly
increase or decrease the viability of A549, H460, Lewis lung carcinoma,
or human explant lung cancer cells. Similar results were obtained in
ovarian cancer cell lines, where no significant difference in cell growth
was observed following nicotine treatment of SKOV-3/DDP and OVCAR-3
cells. Most importantly, the paclitaxel-induced decreases in both H460
cell viability and growth were not significantly attenuated by nicotine.
Moreover, 1 M nicotine did not interfere with paclitaxel-induced sub-G1
DNA content or apoptosis of A549 cells. These findings suggest that
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors may be promising drug targets for the
prevention and treatment of CIPN.

