Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between meat and fish intake and genes involved in
hormones, inflammation and energetic factors, and risk of breast cancer
among Hispanic and Non-Hispanic White women: The Breast Cancer Health
Disparities Study


Previously, we reported associations between breast cancer (BC) risk and
tuna intake in non-Hispanic White (NHW) and Hispanic women, and processed
meat intake among Hispanic women only. We also reported associations with
SNPs in genes involved in the Convergence of Hormones, Inflammation, and
Energy-related Factors (CHIEF) network. Given the multifactorial nature
of BC etiology, we tested for interactions (GxE) between meat/fish intake
and SNPs in selected CHIEF pathways using a set-based method that
aggregates SNPs into groups for GxE association testing.The study
population included Hispanic (1046 cases, 1331 controls) and NHW (1234
cases, 1468 controls) women from two US population-based case-control
studies that are part of the Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study.
Harmonized meat intake variables were dichotomized, and include red meat,
processed meat, poultry, fish, and tuna. 734 SNPs were grouped into 107
genes based on loci. Genes were further grouped into 7 pathways based on
biological function: CHIEF core, ALOX/COX, Interleukins, JAK/STAT/SOC,
TLR/TNF, MAPK, and TGF-. We performed the analysis in a top-down fashion,
sequentially testing for interactions between meat/fish intake and
pathways, genes within pathways, and SNPs within genes. To test pathways
and genes, we used a set-based GxE approach that extends the adaptive
rank truncated product (ARTP), and to test individual SNPs we used
logistic regression. At gene and SNP level analyses, we applied
Bonferroni corrections for the number of genes or SNPs tested. Analyses
were stratified by ethnicity. Models were adjusted for study, age,
education, menopausal status, family history of breast cancer, parity,
body mass index, physical activity, education, intake of alcohol, fiber,
calories, fat, carbohydrates, proteins, and genetic ancestry. We report
results that showed statistically significant interactions at both
pathway and gene levels. Analyses were conducted using the R programming
language. Among NHW women, pathway-level analyses using ARTP identified
an interaction between poultry intake and the interleukin/cytokine
pathway, which was driven by the IL17A gene (2 SNPs); poultry intake was
inversely associated with BC risk among carriers of the minor alleles in
this gene. Among Hispanics, ARTP analyses identified an interaction
between tuna intake and total fish intake and the Jak/Stat/SOC pathway,
which was driven by STAT5A (tuna: 2 SNPs) and STAT5B (total fish and
tuna: 3 SNPs). The positive associations between fish or tuna and BC risk
were restricted to carriers of minor alleles in these two genes. Overall,
our findings suggest a role for poultry and fish intake in chronic
inflammation and tumor growth promotion in breast carcinogenesis and
highlight specific genes that may play roles in these carcinogenic
pathways.

