Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global analyses of HOXB13-regulated transcription reveal a
potential link between HOXB13 G84E and prostate cancer risk


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most heritable cancers. However,
germline genetic variations that are consistently and highly associated
with PCa have remained elusive. Recently, a variety of non-synonymous
SNPs in HOXB13 have been identified in prostate cancer patients from
distinct ethnic populations. Among the HOXB13 variants, HOXB13 G84E has
been consistently shown to associate strongly with increased PCa risk in
men of European descent. HOXB13 is a prostate-specific transcription
factor that plays a role in prostate development. HOXB13 has also been
implicated in various aspects of PCa biology. However, to this date, the
exact role of HOXB13 in normal prostate physiology and in PCa biology
remains obscure. Our lab previously reported that neither HOXB13 WT nor
G84E alone can transform prostate cells and that the G84E variant does
not behave differently from HOXB13 WT in interactions with cofactors (AR,
MEIS2) and protein half-life. To further delineate the function of HOXB13
in the prostate and to identify G84E-induced alterations that subject
G84E carriers to PCa susceptibility, we performed RNA-seq of the LAPC4
prostate cancer cell line overexpressing a control vector, HOXB13 WT or
G84E. Comparisons of the RNA-seq datasets were made using Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA) by selecting genes whose expression was altered by
2 standard deviations or higher. Among pathways altered by HOXB13 WT or
G84E compared to the vector control dataset, the VDR/RXR activation
pathway was negatively regulated by both WT and G84E. When the G84E
dataset was compared to the WT dataset, the IPA analysis revealed that
G84E can up-regulate the e-NOS signaling pathway. Interestingly, the top
contributor to the difference imparted by HOXB13 G84E compared to WT was
identified to be a set of genes regulated by HOXB13 itself. Overall, this
preliminary analysis suggests that HOXB13 G84E may be a gain-of-function
mutation whereby potential tumor-promoting functions of HOXB13 are
over-activated. Finally, to further identify targets directly regulated
by HOXB13 WT and G84E, we combined the RNA-seq datasets with HOXB13
overexpression ChIP-seq datasets we previously reported and a HOXB13
knockdown dataset in LAPC4 (Norris et al. 2009). We focused initially on
genes that were shown to be up- or down-regulated in the same direction
in the RNA-seq and HOXB13 knockdown datasets. Those genes were screened
for nearby HOXB13 binding sites as annotated in our ChIP-seq analyses,
followed by validation with droplet digital PCR. Among the genes that
were down-regulated by HOXB13 WT and G84E include INPP4B, TNFSF10,
IGFBP3, KLF5 and SOX9, which all have tumor suppressing functions in PCa.
Among HOXB13-upregulated genes was BCHE, which is also implicated in the
suppression of PCa initiation and progression. These results provide us
with potential areas of further investigation in which HOXB13 G84E may
differentially regulate transcription of these genes.

