Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-biomarker subtyping of circulating tumor cells using
sequential fluorescence quenching


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are rare but clinically
valuable indicators of cancer status. However their clinical utility is
limited to 2-3 positive fluorescent markers and 1 negative fluorescent
marker. By contrast, tissue biopsies allow for numerous subtyping
markers, yielding information about the tumor's biology and predicted
treatment response. If CTC analysis is to be more useful, it must move
beyond 2-3 identification markers. We describe a simple and inexpensive
method to capture and identify CTCs using traditional fluorescence
biomarkers with repeated restating of 9 unrelated fluorescent antibodies.
In this study, we sought to subtype CTCs with the epithelial to
mesenchymal-like phenotype (EMTCTCs) from pancreatic cancer samples first
identified using a conventional CTC marker panel: Cytokeratin (CK),
EpCAM, and CD45. We further subtyped these EMTCTCs with an
immunosuppression therapy panel (PD-L1, CXCR4, PD-1) and then with a
mesenchymal marker panel (CD14, CD34, Vimentin) to better interrogate the
EMT phenotype. Alternative predictive and prognostic biomarkers may also
be utilized. The order of staining does not affect the result. Our data
demonstrate the ability to sequentially analyze, subtype and track 9
distinct cancer markers on each individual cell.Methods: We developed a
method of fluorescence quenching using cell lines: A2058, MB231, MCF7,
HUVEC, and LnCAP. The technique consists of the steps: quench,
underivatize, amine strip and restain (QUASR). Cells isolated on
CellSieveTM microfilters were stained using the CTC marker panel, after
which the QUASR protocol was applied and the cells were stained with a
second mesenchymal marker panel. After imaging, QUASR was repeated for a
third immunotherapy marker panel, and cells imaged a third time. QUASR
was then used on 12 pancreatic cancer patient blood samples previously
identified with EMTCTCs provided by Medical College of Wisconsin.Results:
No degradation was observed in cell surface, or intracellular markers for
the 3 rounds of QUASR. There were 764 EMTCTCs identified as CK+/CD45- in
the cancer patient samples, while EpCAM was positive in only 2% of these
EMTCTCs. Post quenching, most EMTCTCs had additional mesenchymal
phenotypes, i.e. 97% of cells were vimentin+ and 11% were CD34+.
Expression of the immunotherapy markers were highly heterogeneous between
patients, ranging from 0% to 100% positivity for PD-L1 and from 0% to 90%
positivity for CXCR4. None of the CTCs were PD-1+ nor CD14+.Conclusions:
Our data demonstrates that sequential multi-panel restaining of
clinically applicable cancer biomarkers can provide a greater amount and
broader variety of information from patient blood samples. The ability to
analyze CTCs beyond simple enumeration will greatly enhance the clinical
utility of blood based biopsies, as patient samples can now be screened
for multiple prognostic and predictive biomarkers.

