Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protective effect of the -blocker carvedilol on UVB-induced skin
damage


The response to ultraviolet (UV) radiation is the primary etiologic
factor leading to carcinogenesis of the skin. The effects of UV radiation
on the skin is generally transient, but the long term consequences can be
carcinogenic. Despite growing public awareness and the use of sunscreen
to prevent skin cancer, the incidence continues to rise, and therefore
there is a need to develop innovative chemoprevention strategies.
Previously, we showed that the receptor subtype nonselective -adrenergic
receptor antagonist (i.e., -blocker) carvedilol prevented EGF and
UVB-mediated neoplastic transformation of the mouse epidermal cell line
JB6 P+, indicating its chemopreventive potential against skin cancer. To
demonstrate the in vivo effects of carvedilol, in the present study,
hairless SKH-1 mice were irradiated for two weeks with 200 mJ/cm2 of UVB
and drugs were topically applied immediately after the radiation. Since
carvedilol is able to absorb UV, its analogue 4-hydroxycarbazole, which
has the same UVB absorption profiling as carvedilol but does not function
as a -blocker, was included as a sunscreen control. Significant skin
thickening measured by bi-fold skin thickness on the dorsal skin was
observable within a week and over the course of the two-week period.
Treatment with carvedilol, but not the analogue, reduced UVB-induced skin
hyperplasia, reddening and inflammation. Furthermore, carvedilol, but not
the analogue, reduced H2O2 and UVB- induced cytotoxicity and reactive
oxygen species production in JB6 P+ cells. To elucidate the molecular
mechanism(s) for carvedilol's chemopreventive activity, the signaling
profile for JB6 P+ cells treated with EGF and/or carvedilol for 15 min
was examined using a Phospho Explorer Antibody Microarray containing 1318
site and phosphor-specific antibodies from over 30 signaling pathways.
The antibody array data suggested that the phosphorylation of the
intracellular signaling pathways involved in skin carcinogenesis, AP-1
and NF-kB, were increased by EGF but attenuated by carvedilol. These
results were validated using luciferase reporter assays. The array data
also suggested that carvedilol was able to induce the expression of tumor
suppressors p53 and PTEN. In addition, the checkpoint kinases CHK1 and
CHK2 and other cell-cycle regulators such as cyclins were also
upregulated by carvedilol, suggesting a role in carvedilol's protective
effect. Since highly abundant mutations are observable in sun-exposed
skin, our current work is to examine the effects of carvedilol on the
production of cyclo-pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) induced by UVB. In
conclusion, our study has demonstrated novel mechanisms underlying
carvedilol's chemopreventive activity against skin cancer. Since
carvedilol and other -blockers are FDA approved drugs and relatively
safe, they may offer a new approach of prevention for UVB-induced skin
cancer.

