Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational landscape of colorectal adenomas reveals potential
signatures for progression


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) continues to rank as one of the
most common cancers in the U.S. and around the world. Colorectal adenoma
is the well-established precursor of CRC, yet only a very small
proportion of adenomas progress to CRC. Therefore, identification of
biomarker associated with adenoma progression is vital for risk
stratification and development of intervention strategies. We hypothesize
that genomic analysis of adenoma will lead to better understanding of
tumorigenesis and identification of novel biomarkers.Methods: We carried
out whole exome sequencing (WES) on tissues and paired blood in 14
sessile serrated adenoma (SSA) and 36 tubulovillous adenoma (TVA)
patients. Frequently mutated genes from TVA along with significantly
mutated genes of TCGA colorectal adenocarcinoma were further investigated
in an additional 100 pairs of TVA by targeted sequencing.Results: 1) WES
revealed similar somatic mutation frequency but distinctive mutated genes
in TVA and SSA. 2) All adenomas included in WES were non-hypermutators
with mutation frequency ranged from 0.55 to 3.71 (average: 1.49)
non-silent somatic mutations per million base, which is significantly
lower than that of TCGA non-hypermutators that ranged from 0.48 to 10.11
(average 4.47, p Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) continues to rank
as one of the most common cancers in the U.S. and around the world.
Colorectal adenoma is the well-established precursor of CRC, yet only a
very small proportion of adenomas progress to CRC. Therefore,
identification of biomarker associated with adenoma progression is vital
for risk stratification and development of intervention strategies. We
hypothesize that genomic analysis of adenoma will lead to better
understanding of tumorigenesis and identification of novel
biomarkers.Methods: We carried out whole exome sequencing (WES) on
tissues and paired blood in 14 sessile serrated adenoma (SSA) and 36
tubulovillous adenoma (TVA) patients. Frequently mutated genes from TVA
along with significantly mutated genes of TCGA colorectal adenocarcinoma
were further investigated in an additional 100 pairs of TVA by targeted
sequencing.Results: 1) WES revealed similar somatic mutation frequency
but distinctive mutated genes in TVA and SSA. 2) All adenomas included in
WES were non-hypermutators with mutation frequency ranged from 0.55 to
3.71 (average: 1.49) non-silent somatic mutations per million base, which
is significantly lower than that of TCGA non-hypermutators that ranged
from 0.48 to 10.11 (average 4.47, p < 2.210-16). 3) MutSigCV v1.4
discovered shared and unique significantly-mutated genes (SMG) in TVA and
SSA reflecting difference in biology. 4) Targeted sequencing confirmed
the findings in WES with a better estimate of population frequency for
genes of interest. 5) Unsupervised clustering achieved high
discrimination between adenoma and adenocarcinoma. 6) A subset of
mutations that best discriminate adenoma and adenocarcinoma were
identified by random Forest.Conclusions: We discovered a set of genes
with distinctive mutation pattern between adenoma and adenocarcinoma. We
are conducting functional analysis to explore the potential of these
genes as progression driver and risk predictors. We predict that the
findings of this project will help lay the foundation to inform
development of surveillance program and preventive intervention in CRC.

