Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PI3K inhibitor, taselisib (GDC-0032), has enhanced potency in
PIK3CA mutant models through a unique mechanism of action


Alterations of the phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway
occur broadly in cancer via multiple mechanisms including mutational
activation of the PIK3CA gene. The dysregulation of this pathway has been
implicated in tumor cell growth and survival, thus PI3K is a promising
therapeutic target with multiple inhibitors in clinical trials. The
mechanism of action of taselisib (GDC-0032), a novel, oral, selective
inhibitor of p110alpha sparing inhibition of p110beta, is investigated in
these preclinical studies.Taselisib demonstrates greater potency in
cancer cell lines harboring activating mutations in PIK3CA vs. wild-type
lines, and induces regressions at tolerated doses in both PIK3CA mutant
xenograft and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models. When comparing
taselisib to other clinical-stage PI3K inhibitors at Maximum Tolerated
Dose (MTD) in vivo, taselisib confers greater activity in PIK3CA mutant
models, which may indicate a larger therapeutic index. Unlike other PI3K
inhibitors, taselisib has a gain of potency in PI3K alpha mutant SW48
isogenic cells compared to wildtype SW48 parental cells. Pathway
inhibition and increased apoptosis are associated with the enhanced
activity observed in PI3K alpha mutant cells. Other clinical PI3K
inhibitors, including PI3K alpha selective and pan-PI3K inhibitors, do
not have improved potency in PI3K alpha mutant cells due to their
inability to maintain pathway suppression after alleviation of negative
feedback. The unique mechanism of action of taselisib is most notable
when comparing signaling suppression at 24 hours vs. 1 hour of drug
exposure. In mutant cells, Taselisib displays greater pathway suppression
at 24 hours and is more effective at maintaining pathway suppression upon
re-activation of growth factor RTK signaling. This mechanism is specific
to PIK3CA mutant cells and not observed in wildtype cells. Ongoing
studies to further elucidate this mechanism of action will be presented.

