Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MDM2 inhibitor AMG 232 causes tumor regression and potentiates
the anti-tumor activity of MEK inhibition and DNA-damaging cytotoxic
agents in preclinical models of acute myeloid leukemia


AMG 232 is a potent inhibitor of the MDM2-p53 interaction and is a
promising clinical candidate for treating tumors, in particular those
harboring wild-type p53. AML represents a compelling indication for AMG
232 given the low rate of p53 mutation, frequent MDM2 overexpression, and
unmet medical need. We evaluated the effect of AMG 232 treatment on AML
tumors in vitro and in vivo, elucidated the mechanism of anti-tumor
efficacy, and tested the effect of combining AMG 232 with targeted agents
and chemotherapeutics. Combinations were identified based on evidence of
in vitro synergy from cell based screens, or based on biological
rationale and clinical opportunity with standard of care agents.
Combinations evaluated included MEK inhibitors, and p53-inducing,
DNA-damaging cytotoxics cytarabine, doxorubicin, and decitabine. In vitro
assays demonstrated that AMG 232 as a single agent was effective at
inducing cell death across a panel of p53 wild-type AML cell lines. The
anti-tumor efficacy involved activation of the p53 pathway, robust
inhibition of the cell cycle and induction of apoptosis. AMG 232
treatment caused AML tumor regression in vivo which was related to dose-
and time-dependent induction of the p53 targets p21 and PUMA. The
combination of AMG 232 and MEK inhibition resulted in synergistic tumor
cell killing in vitro, and enhanced in vivo anti-tumor activity which was
significantly better than either single agent. Combinations of AMG 232
with chemotherapies which induce DNA damage resulted in synergistic in
vitro cell killing, and superior anti-tumor efficacy in vivo with
increased induction of p53 signaling in tumors. These data support a
clinical strategy for evaluating AMG 232 as a monotherapy and in
combination with targeted and cytotoxic agents to treat AML patients.

