Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AXL and EGFR signaling mediate resistance to Crizotinib in
non-small cell lung cancer cells harboring the ROS1 fusion gene


Background: The multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) crizotinib elicits
a dramatic response in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harboring the c-ros oncogene 1 (ROS1) fusion gene (Shaw et al. NEJM
2014); however, these patients inevitably develop resistance to
crizotinib within a year, which limits the efficacy of crizotinib.
Although reported molecular changes include ROS1 tyrosine kinase
mutations, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation, and
epithelial-to mesenchymal transition, the detailed mechanism of
crizotinib resistance has not been elucidated.Methods: To explore the
molecular mechanisms of acquired crizotinib resistance in detail, we used
a cell line model. HCC78 cells harboring the SLC34A2-ROS1 fusion gene,
which are sensitive to crizotinib, were exposed continuously to
increasing concentrations of crizotinib in a step-wise manner. A
crizotinib-resistant cell line designated HCC78R was established and
assessed by MTT assay, Western blotting, a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
array, quantitative PCR (RT-PCR), ELISA, and an RNA kinome targeted
kinome panel (612 genes) with next-generation sequencing.Results:
Crizotinib-resistant HCC78R (50% inhibitory concentration [IC50] 4085.9
nmol/L) was 47-fold more resistant to crizotinib than was parental HCC78
(IC50 85.8 nmol/L) (p = 0.0145) according to MTT assay. The RTK array
revealed that EGFR phosphorylation was upregulated in HCC78R cells.
Western blotting confirmed the activation of EGFR and its downstream
signaling pathways. RT-PCR screening of EGFR ligand family member
expression showed increased heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor
(HB-EGF) in HCC78R compared with HCC78 cells. Consistently, addition of
the HB-EGF or conditioned medium from HCC78R cells rendered the HCC78
parental cells moderately resistant to crizotinib. EGFR overexpression or
activating mutations were not detected. Furthermore, RNA kinome
sequencing revealed 16-fold higher AXL mRNA expression and 1.68-fold
lower ROS1 fusion gene expression in HCC78R compared with HCC78.
Overexpression of the AXL protein and downregulation of the ROS1 protein
were confirmed by Western blotting. Monotherapy with gefitinib (EGFR-TKI)
or R428 (AXL inhibitor) or cabozantinib (AXL inhibitor) moderately
inhibited the growth of HCC78R cells, while combined therapy suppressed
proliferation more significantly compared with each
monotherapy.Conclusions: AXL and EGFR signaling mediate resistance to
crizotinib, and combination treatment of an EGFR-TKI and AXL inhibitor
may be an alternative strategy in ROS1 fusion gene-driven lung cancer
cells.

