Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marker free isolation and expansion of cancer stem cells from
small cell lung cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for approximately 15% of all lung
cancer cases and, contrary to the advances in diagnostics and therapeutic
options for non small cell lung cancer, SCLC long term survival has
failed to materially improve over the last 3 decades. Early dissemination
with hematogenous metastasis, advanced stages at diagnosis, dramatic
response to chemotherapy with early and aggressive relapses are the
clinical hallmarks. Limited surgical samples, early palliation and
limited second line treatment options negating the benefit of repeat
biopsies have limited tissue available for research to understand the
biology of this relatively rare tumor. Recent data has suggested the
presence of rare populations of cells within the primary SCLC tumors
which have stem cell-like properties. We hypothesize that novel in vitro
culture platforms and methods can be used to isolate and expand cancer
stem cells (CSCs) within SCLC tumors and that the expanded CSCs will
yield a renewable cell source for research applications and for
predictive drug response profiling. Many groups have relied upon cell
surface markers such as CD133 and CD24 to identify the CSC population.
Our approach is unique in that we have employed a marker-free approach
utilizing a combination of chemical and functional isolation. We then use
a combination of growth factors, extracellular matrix proteins, and
oxygen tension in a 3D perfusion culture system to further isolate,
purify and expand isolated cells with the goal of having quantities of
functional SCLC stem cells for molecular, proteomic and functional in
vitro and in vivo assays. Initial cell sources will include immortalized
cell lines and patient derived xenograft lines, with eventual adaptation
to primary patient samples. Using numerous techniques, we have qualified
these cells based upon marker expression (flow cytometry, RT-PCR), dye
exclusion, drug response, and limited dilution assays. Future experiments
will confirm stemness with limited dilution tumorigenicity assays in
vivo. Initial data suggest poor correlation of canonical CSC marker
expression with clonogenic growth in cell lines, supporting the need for
unbiased and functional isolation methods. These expanded populations of
CSCs may be used to identify novel CSC markers and/or targets, mechanisms
of resistance and screen and develop novel therapeutics Our ultimate
goals are to be able to use our novel culture platforms and methods to
expand CSCs for real time precision medicine applications to identify
novel therapies in real time that can eradicate the CSC population and
improve outcomes of patients with SCLC.

