Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral immune checkpoint antagonists targeting PD-L1/VISTA or
PD-L1/Tim3 for cancer therapy


Recent successes in achieving highly durable clinical responses with
antibodies to immune checkpoint receptors such as CTLA4 and PD1 have
transformed the outlook for cancer therapy. While these antibody-based
therapies show impressive clinical activity, they suffer from the
shortcomings including the need to administer by intravenous injection,
failure to show response in majority of patients and immune-related
adverse events (irAEs) due to the breaking of immune self-tolerance.
Sustained target inhibition as a result of a long half-life (>15-20 days)
and >70% target occupancy for months may be factors contributing to irAEs
observed.We sought to discover and develop small molecule immune
checkpoint antagonists capable of targeting PD-L1 and another immune
checkpoint pathway. We reasoned that such therapeutic agents will be
amenable for oral dosing, likely show greater response rate due to dual
antagonism and allow better management of irAEs due a shorter
pharmacokinetic profile.A focused library of compounds mimicking the
interaction of checkpoint proteins was designed and synthesized.
Screening and analysis of the resulting library led to the identification
of hits capable of functional disruption of the checkpoint protein(s)
signaling depending upon the pockets of sequence similarity of
interacting proteins. Further optimization resulted in compounds
targeting PD-L1/VISTA or PD-L1/TIM-3 with desirable physico-chemical
properties and exposure upon oral administration..The ability of
compounds to disrupt specific immune checkpoint pathways was confirmed
though functional studies. Identified lead compounds exhibit potent
activity when tested in assays to rescue lymphocyte proliferation and
effector functions inhibited by respective ligands/proteins. In a panel
of functional assays, the selected lead compounds showed selectivity
against other immune checkpoint pathways including CTLA4, LAG3 and BTLA.
Lead compounds exhibited sustained immune PD in vitro and in vivo
suggesting that drug efficacy may extend beyond drug clearance. Lead
compounds exhibited significant efficacy in syngeneic pre-clinical tumor
models of melanoma, breast carcinoma and colon cancers upon once a day
oral dosing. In repeated dose toxicity studies, the most advanced
compound, AUPM-170, a dual antagonist of PD-L1 and VISTA, was well
tolerated at >100x of the efficacious doses.The data demonstrating the
inhibition of PD-L1 and another immune checkpoint pathway (VISTA or Tim3)
resulting in activation of T cells and anti-tumor activities support
further development of these orally bioavailable agents. IND-enabling
studies with one of the lead compounds, AUPM-170, are underway towards
advancing it to the clinic.

