Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Claudin-1 expression promote TNF-a-induced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and growth in colorectal adenocarcinoma cells


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important mechanism in
colorectal cancer progression and malignancy. Importantly, inflammatory
mediators are critical constituents of the local tumor environment and an
intimate link between colon cancer progression and inflammation in now
validated. Notably, we and others have previously reported key role of
the deregulated claudin-1, a tight junction protein, in colon
carcinogenesis including colitis-associated colon cancer (CAC). Of
interest, the increase in claudin-1 expression in CAC was found to be
associated with the inflammatory epithelium. We have further demonstrated
that inflammation induced by DSS (Dextran Sodium Sulfate) administration
promotes colon cancer in APCmin/Claudin-1 transgenic mice. However, what
role claudin-1 plays in inflammation-induced colon cancer remains
unclear. In current study, we tested the causal significance of claudin-1
expression in inflammation-associated colon cancer using colon cancer
cells subjected to TNF-, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, treatment. HT29
colon adenocarcinoma cells cultured in the presence of TNF- (10ng/ml),
demonstrated a sharp decrease in E-cadherin expression and an increase in
Vimentin expression versus control cells suggesting TNF- treatment
induced EMT. Also, significant increase in cell proliferation and wound
healing was observed in TNF- treated cells at 24 and 48 hours of TNF-
treatment (versus control cells). Interestingly, TNF- treatment also
upregulated (and delocalized) claudin-1 expression in a time-dependent
manner. An increase in the phosphorylation of Erk1/2 and Src, signaling
associated with colon cancer survival and transformation, in TNF- treated
cells further correlated with our published observations that claudin-1
expression promotes these signaling pathways in colon cancer cells. In
support, shRNA-mediated inhibition of claudin-1 expression in HT-29 cells
largely abrogated the effects of TNF- treatment including proliferation,
p-erk and p-Src expression. Also, TNF- induced EMT was largely suppressed
in the absence of claudin-1 expression. Taken together, our data confirm
the previously described key role of claudin-1 in regulating tumorigenic
abilities of colon cancer cells and further highlights a key role of
claudin-1 in inflammation-induced colorectal cancer growth and
progression. We predict claudin-1 expression can serve as a biomarker to
predict CAC progression and malignancy.

