Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of ubiquitin-specific peptidase 18 (USP18) causes cold
sensitive mice by destabilizing the critical regulator of thermogenesis:
uncoupling protein-1 (UCP-1)


USP18 is the major ISG15 (Interferon-Stimulated Gene 15) deconjugase that
removes ISG15 from substrate proteins. We recently reported that USP18
null mice spontaneously develop leiomyosarcomas. Intriguingly, these
USP18 null mice are also markedly cold sensitive as compared to their
wild-type littermates. When briefly exposed to cold stimuli, USP18 null
mice significantly (P USP18 is the major ISG15 (Interferon-Stimulated
Gene 15) deconjugase that removes ISG15 from substrate proteins. We
recently reported that USP18 null mice spontaneously develop
leiomyosarcomas. Intriguingly, these USP18 null mice are also markedly
cold sensitive as compared to their wild-type littermates. When briefly
exposed to cold stimuli, USP18 null mice significantly (P < 0.05)
decreased their body temperature. In contrast, wild-type mice exposed to
the same experimental conditions exhibited transient changes in their
body temperature. We sought to elucidate the engaged mechanism.
Expression profiles of critical thermogenic regulatory proteins were
examined by immunoblot analyses of brown fat tissues of USP18 null mice.
Strikingly, UCP-1 expression was substantially reduced in these tissues
of USP18 null versus wild-type mice. To independently confirm that
reduced UCP-1 expression was caused by loss of USP18, stable knock-down
of USP18 was independently achieved in a panel of murine cell lines by
use of transfected small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs). The obtained results were
compared to that of transfected control vectors. USP18 down-regulation by
different shRNAs markedly reduced UCP-1 protein as compared to controls.
As expected, engineered gain of USP18 expression in the same murine cell
lines stabilized UCP-1 protein. We explored if UCP-1 destabilization was
due to its complex formation with the ubiquitin-like protein ISG15. This
was the expected experimental outcome since USP18 is the distinct
deconjugase that removes ISG15 from complexed proteins.
Immunoprecipitation assays were performed to establish this direct
association. These studies revealed a complex formed between ISG15 and
UCP-1 protein. Thus, engineered loss of USP18 in mice led to cold
sensitive mice from repression of UCP-1. As a consequence of its complex
with ISG15, the thermogenic regulator UCP-1 was destabilized. Taken
together, this study extends prior work by showing a previously
unrecognized link between USP18 and regulation of thermogenesis. This
defines a novel role for the USP18 protease in metabolism.

