Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ewing sarcoma cells harboring a translocation that retains EWSR1
exon 8 require HNRNPH1 to express the in-frame oncogenic fusion
transcript EWS-FLI1


The primary oncogenic event in 85% of Ewing sarcomas is a
t(11:22)(q24:q12) translocation. This translocation generates a fusion
gene containing the 5 end of the EWSR1 gene and the 3 end of the FLI1
gene referred to as EWS-FLI1. The exact genomic breakpoints within the
EWSR1 and FLI1 genes vary, but typically occur within introns and require
the splicing machinery to generate an in-frame EWS-FLI1 transcript. In an
estimated 40% of EWS-FLI1 driven tumors, the generation of an in-frame
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript requires alternative splicing. In particular,
translocations that retain exon 8 of EWSR1 generate an out-of-frame
transcript unless this exon is removed. In this study, we demonstrate
that Ewing sarcoma cells harboring a genomic breakpoint that retains exon
8 of EWSR1 require HNRNPH1 to express an in-frame EWS-FLI1 mature
mRNA.Using a genome-wide RNAi screen, we identified several proteins
involved in RNA processing as required for the activity of EWS-FLI1,
including the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H1 (HNRNPH1). The
role of HNRNPH1 in alternative splicing led us to hypothesize that ES
cells are dependent on HNRNPH1 for the expression of the EWS-FLI1
transcript. Analysis of the expression of EWS-FLI1 following HNRNPH1
silencing in Ewing sarcoma cell lines representing different
translocation breakpoints and transcript isoforms showed that only Ewing
sarcoma cell lines retaining EWSR1 exon 8 at a genomic level (TC32 and
SKNMC cells) are dependent on HNRNPH1 expression. Silencing of HNRNPH1 in
TC32 or SKNMC cells, results in the expression of an out-of-frame
EWS-FLI1 transcript that cannot express the EWS-FLI1 oncogenic
transcription factor. This leads to the reversal of expression of
EWS-FLI1 gene targets and cell death. Ewing sarcoma cell lines that
harbor a translocation upstream of EWSR1 exon 8 (TC71 and RD-ES) exhibit
none of these molecular or phenotypic changes upon HNRNPH1 silencing.We
next employed an RNA pull-down and PCR strategy to identify putative
binding sites for HNRNPH1 on the EWS-FLI1 pre-mRNA. This analysis showed
enrichment for the binding of EWSR1 exon 8 by HNRNPH1. Towards the 3 end
of EWSR1 exon 8 we identified two G-rich sequences, a motif typically
bound by HNRNPH1. To determine if HNRNPH1 binds one or both of these
sites, we developed an in vitro protein-RNA-oligomer binding assay. This
assay confirmed the binding of HNRNPH1 to both G-rich sites in EWSR1 exon
8. Current studies are focused on using the protein-RNA-oligomer binding
assay to fully map the interaction of HNRNPH1 with sequences within EWSR1
exon 8 and understand the molecular mechanism to target it. These results
demonstrate a sequence-specific, breakpoint-dependent vulnerability in
Ewing sarcoma that has the potential to be exploited as a therapeutic
target and suggests a novel strategy to target fusion oncogenes.

