Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of estrogen receptor transcription by the
PI3K pathway in breast cancer


Mutations in the PIK3CA gene are the most frequent genomic alterations in
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. Direct pharmacological
inhibition of PI3K signaling is therefore an attractive clinical strategy
and a number of PI3K pathway inhibitors are currently under clinical
development. Unfortunately, although the majority of ER-positive
PIK3CA-mutant patients respond, mechanisms of resistance to these
inhibitors inevitably emerge. By studying both mouse models and human
samples, our laboratory has previously uncovered that inhibition of PI3K
pathway increases ER transcriptional activity, which in turn renders
cells more susceptible to endocrine therapy. The mechanisms by which ER
and PI3K signaling pathway regulate each other in breast cancer cells,
however, remain elusive.To better understand the cross-talk between the
PI3K pathway and the ER transcriptional program, we developed an unbiased
transposon activation mutagenesis screen with the goal of identifying
modulators of resistance to PI3K inhibitors in ER-positive tumors. Among
the genes identified, we found a number of key regulators of ER function
including the pioneer transcription factors FOXA1 and PBX1. We further
confirmed that FOXA1 and PBX1 expression and transcriptional activity was
enhanced upon PI3K inhibition and validated these observations in both
xenograft models and samples from patients undergoing treatment with the
PI3K inhibitor BYL719. Moreover, chromatin imunoprecipitation
(ChIP)-sequencing against ER and FOXA1 demonstrated that these factors
occupy the same genomic regions, and their binding is increased upon PI3K
inhibition. Silencing FOXA1 or PBX1 impaired the activation of the
ER-dependent transcriptional program following PI3K blockade and
sensitized cells to PI3K inhibition.To better understand the role of
FOXA1 and PBX1 in the ER-PI3K crosstalk, we have then studied in detail
the chromatin changes upon BYL719 treatment using transposase-accessible
chromatin using high-throughput sequencing (ATAC-seq) in breast cancer
cells. Epigenomic profiling using ATAC-seq is also being done on patient
samples collected before BYL719 administration (pre-treatment) and during
therapy (on-treatment). ATAC-seq and RNA-seq data from the same patients
will be integrated using novel computational approaches.These analyses
will help to dissect the ER-dependent epigenetic changes occurring upon
PI3K inhibition and how the cells use these chromatin modifications to
adapt to the pharmacological stress. Elucidating the interconnection
between the PI3K pathway and ER activity may uncover novel mechanisms of
resistance to either PI3K inhibitors or endocrine therapy in ER-positive
breast cancer patients.

