Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxicity and efficacy probability intervals design for phase I
dose-finding in oncology trials


We propose a toxicity and efficacy probability interval (TEPI) design for
dose-finding in phase I oncology studies. This approach incorporates
efficacy outcomes to inform dosing decisions to optimize both efficacy
and safety. Decision rules can be prespecified, allowing for transparency
to clinicians and non-statisticians. The TEPI design is an extension over
the modified toxicity probability interval (mTPI) design, which uses only
dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) data for dose escalation. The TEPI method is
motivated by recent promising data from cancer immunotherapies, for which
response or a biomarker for response can be observed in the same interval
as a DLT.The TEPI method is based on a two-way decision table constructed
by combining the target probability intervals of DLT and efficacy. It
uses a beta/binomial hierarchical model to compute the posterior
probabilities of intervals for toxicity and efficacy. The dosing decision
depends on the joint unit probability mass of toxicity and efficacy data,
which follows the Bayes rule under independent beta prior distributions.
TEPI can pre-calculate all dosing actions for any possible combination of
toxicity and efficacy outcome at a certain time point during a trial. For
example, dose escalation or de-escalation decisions at time of 6, 9, and
12 treated patients are provided in Table 1.In the current era of potent
novel agents in oncology, phase I trials that simultaneously optimize
antitumor activity and safety may accelerate development of these
therapies. The proposed TEPI method recognize this needs, and is
appealing to clinicians because all dose escalation or de-escalation can
be prespecified. Simulation studies have been performed to evaluate the
performance of TEPI, and compared to other designs.
Table 1. The letters in cells are computed based on the decision rules
under the TEPI method and represent different dose-finding actions. EU:
Unacceptable efficacy; DU: Unacceptable safety. Target toxicity
probability = 0.3 and target response rate probability = 0.5.

