Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semaphorin 3A normalizes the tumor vasculature and impairs tumor
progression in a Nrp-1-independent manner


It is widely described that tumor vessel normalization, occurring in
response to certain anti-angiogenic therapies, represents a remarkably
advantageous anti-cancer strategy (1). We have demonstrated that
Semaphorin 3A (Sema3A), an axon guidance cue part of class 3 semaphorins
family, is an endogenous angiogenic inhibitor able to efficiently impair
tumor progression, prolong the survival and normalize the tumor
vasculature in different mouse models of spontaneous tumorigenesis (2).
Moreover, we recently showed that Sema3A, by extending the normalization
window and abrogating tumor hypoxia, overcame the resistance to the
anti-angiogenic therapy inhibiting metastasis dissemination (3).Stemming
from these findings we sought to investigate the molecular mechanisms of
vessel normalization and metastasis inhibition induced by Sema3A.
Interestingly, by confocal microscope and western blot analysis, in a
co-culture systems of human endothelial cells (ECs) and pericytes grown
in contact, we observed that Sema3A dramatically down-modulated its
receptor Nrp-1 in both cell types, with the consequent over-expression of
PDGF-B and Ang-1, known to promote vessel maturation. Moreover, a wide
screening of different genes and pathways modulated in the ECs/pericyte
co-cultures revealed that the most modulated was the HGF/Met pathway. In
fact, we observed that c-Met phosphorylation was impaired in FACS-sorted
ECs co-cultured with human pericytes, compared to ECs grown as single
layer. To better investigate the specific role of Sema3A in modulating
HGF/Met activation in vessels, we detected a strong inhibition of
HGF-induced Met phosphorylation in Nrp-1 silenced ECs induced by Sema3A,
suggesting that this semaphorin could directly interfere with Met
signaling. Notably, Sema3A impaired HGF-induced Met phosphorylation, not
only in ECs, but also in several Nrp-1-silenced gastric, lung and
pancreatic tumor cell lines, inducing apoptosis and blocking the
invasiveness. Finally, treating an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) with adeno-associate virus (AAV)-8
expressing Sema3A, we observed a strong inhibition of tumor growth, a
dramatic reduction of liver metastasis and a normalized and perfused
tumor vessels phenotype. Remarkably, we found that Sema3A strongly and
specifically inhibited Met activation in both tumor cells and vessels, in
parallel to a down-modulation of Nrp-1.We conclude that Sema3A normalizes
the tumor vasculature and blocks cancer progression in a
Nrp-1-independent manner, in part by inhibiting HGF/Met
pathway.References1. Jain RK, et al. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:605-22. 2.
Maione F., et al. J. Clin. Invest. 2009; 119:3356-72. 3. Maione F., et
al. J. Clin Invest. 2012; 122:1832-48.

