Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZEB2 drives cell motility and metastasis in ER+ breast cancer
cells through a novel, E-cadherin independent pathway


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women, with the
second highest mortality rate. The overwhelming majority of breast cancer
deaths are a direct result of distant metastatic spread to vital organs
such as lung, bone, and brain. The zinc finger transcription factor ZEB2
has been implicated as a driver of cancer cell motility, tissue invasion
and metastasis in a number of diverse malignancies, but its role in
breast cancer is not completely understood. We chose to examine the
effects of direct overexpression of ZEB2 in the MCF-7 cell line, a
luminal and estrogen receptor positive (ER+) derived breast cancer line.
MCF-7-ZEB2 cells demonstrated significantly increased migration and
invasion as well as an altered morphology in vitro compared to that of
vector. Additionally, MCF-7-ZEB2 cells exhibited increased lung
metastasis in vivo when implanted in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model.
ZEB2 function in metastasis has canonically been attributed to
transcriptional repression of the cell junction protein E-Cadherin. Here
we establish that in ER+ breast cancer cells, ZEB2 fails to repress
E-cadherin and promotes cell motility and metastasis through the
induction of an E-cadherin independent signaling cascade. Next generation
RNA sequencing analysis of the MCF-7-ZEB2 cells compared to vector
revealed alteration of the MAPK signaling cascade, evidenced by enhanced
expression of key motility and MAPK associated genes, including PLAU,
EGF, ACTA2, and MMP9. Pharmacological inhibition of MAPK pathway
completely abrogated ZEB2 induced migration, cell morphology changes and
expression of target motility genes, confirming a necessary role for MAPK
signaling in ZEB2-driven cell motility in ER+ breast cancer. Together
these results indicate that the ZEB2 transcription factor drives motility
in breast cancer cells through a novel MAPK dependent pathway, warranting
further investigation into the mechanisms involved in ZEB2 action.
Elucidating the pathways involved in ZEB2 function which are specific to
ER+ breast cancer is an important step in understanding the processes
underlying metastasis and has the potential to yield new therapeutic
targets.

