Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G1T38, a novel, oral, potent and selective CDK4/6 inhibitor for
the treatment of Rb competent tumors


The development of therapeutically effective inhibitors of the cyclin
dependent kinase (CDK) family has been challenging due to a poor
understanding of target and structural biology leading to the development
of drugs that are toxic with limited efficacy. Recently, the first highly
selective CDK4/6 inhibitor, palbociclib, was approved by the FDA for use
in combination with letrozole as a first line treatment in patients with
ER+/ HER2- metastatic breast cancer. While this first approved CDK4/6
inhibitor is highly efficacious, it causes severe myelosuppression during
daily treatment resulting in at least a 7 day treatment holiday in every
28 day cycle to allow recovery of neutrophil counts. This leads to an
increased risk of febrile neutropenia, potential tumor growth during the
treatment holiday, and emergence of drug resistance. CDK4/6-induced
myelosuppression is the result of on-target inhibition of hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cell proliferation causing a narrow therapeutic
window between tumor efficacy and neutropenia. Thus, a next generation
CDK4/6 inhibitor will need to produce a potent, selective G1 arrest in Rb
competent tumors while minimizing the effect on the bone marrow.With a
new understanding of CDK4/6 biology, we have generated compounds with
unique properties that maintain tumor efficacy while minimizing
inhibition of bone marrow proliferation. Here we describe G1T38, a novel,
oral, potent, and selective CDK4/6 inhibitor. Biochemical profiling
demonstrates G1T38 is a competitive, nanomolar inhibitor of CDK4/6 with
highly selectivity for CDK4-cyclin D1 and CDK6-cyclin D3. Kinome
profiling exhibits on-target selectivity across 468 independent kinases
at 100 nM, with no significant activity against other cell cycle or
mitotic kinases. G1T38 elicits a precise G1 arrest profile along with
loss of Rb phosphorylation in Rb competent cells with no impact in Rb
deficient cells up to three orders of magnitude above the biochemical
IC50. In cell proliferation assays, G1T38 exhibits a low EC50 (3 M in Rb
null cells. In vivo, daily oral treatment with G1T38 causes significant,
durable growth inhibition of tumors in a HER2/neu GEMM and in MCF7
xenograft breast cancer models. G1T38 is cleared from the plasma but
significantly accumulates in tumors. The level of G1T38 in the tumor
correlates with significant reductions in Rb phosphorylation and tumor
cell proliferation. Additionally, daily oral dosing of G1T38 in mice,
rats and dogs for up to 28 days has shown a dose dependent decrease in
neutrophils without severe neutropenia.These data demonstrate that the
unique pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of G1T38 allow it
to be highly efficacious against tumors while having a mild effect on the
bone marrow, thus making it optimal for use as a daily oral
antineoplastic agent.

