Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting nuclear export for triple-negative breast cancer therapy


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) comprise the most aggressive
subtype of breast cancer. They rapidly acquire resistance to chemotherapy
and are also refractory to endocrine therapy and HER2 inhibitors. In
fact, no targeted therapies are currently available against these tumors.
Genome sequencing studies have shown that TNBCs are exceedingly
heterogeneous in genetic mutations as well as copy number variations.
Yet, TNBC almost invariably harbor inactivating mutations in TP53, which
seems to be a crucial event in the pathogenesis of these tumors. We
recently performed a series of siRNA lethality screens in vitro (N = 11
cell lines) to identify, in an unbiased way, recurrent vulnerabilities
that could be harnessed as novel targets for TNBC therapy. Hits were
genes whose silencing triggered massive cell death in 30% of TNBC lines
tested. The screens re-discovered mitosis as a frequent Achilles heel of
these tumors (antimitotic drugs are currently a mainstay of TNBC
therapy), supporting the validity of the approach. The nuclear transport
gene RAN also scored among the most frequent TNBC selective dependencies.
Moreover, TNBC cell lines were exquisitely sensitive to selinexor
(KPT-330), a first-in-class inhibitor of exportin 1 (XPO-1) currently in
phase 2 trials, both in vitro and in vivo. TNBC cells treated with
selinexor died of apoptosis. In contrast, normal human primary breast
epithelial progenitors (BPE) underwent cell cycle arrest (but not death)
upon selinexor treatment, and were able to resume proliferation upon drug
removal. The efficacy of selinexor across different TNBC models varied,
suggesting that additional factors, beside the TNBC status, are at play.
Preliminary data based on a genome-wide CRISPR screen for genes and
networks conferring sensitivity to selinexor using a p53-mutant TNBC cell
line (MDA-MB-231) implicated a number of TP53-related genes as key
mediators of response. Together, these data support the notion that
p53-mutant TNBC coopt nuclear export function to silence TP53-associated
networks and that XPO-1 inhibitors could be a viable strategy to tackle
TNBC in the clinic.

