Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complete workflow for detection of low frequency somatic mutations
from cell-free DNA using Ion Torrent platforms


Research detecting of somatic mutations in circulating cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) using research blood samples from subjects previously diagnosed
with cancer provides a potential non-invasive approach to monitor cancer
status and evaluate cancer evolution in the future. However, most of the
existing mutation detection methods show insufficient sensitivity to
detect cfDNA mutations since only small amount of mutant gene fragments,
derived from tumor cells, is present in a large amount of normal
circulating DNA background.We demonstrated a complete workflow that
includes blood collection, cfDNA isolation, library preparation,
sequencing, and data analysis to enable detection of rare DNA variants in
blood plasma samples. Blood samples were collected using Streck DNA tubes
followed by plasma preparation and cfDNA isolation using MagMAX Cell-Free
DNA Isolation Kit. Library preparation was performed using Oncomine lung
cfDNA kit. Barcoded libraries were pooled and sequenced on Ion Torrent
Next Generation Sequencing Platforms. Sequencing data was analyzed in
Torrent Suite using variantCaller-cfDNA plugin. 150 biomarkers relevant
to non-small cell lung cancer were interrogated in one sequencing run.We
demonstrated detection sensitivity at 0.1% frequency using engineered
mutants that were spiked into control DNA samples. The workflow was
tested on a set of research samples from matched tumor FFPE and blood
plasma collected from research subjects with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). About 1 mL of plasma was processed using the workflow described
above. RecoverAll Multi-Sample RNA/DNA Isolation Workflow was used to
isolate DNA from FFPE samples, followed by library preparation,
sequencing and data analysis using the same workflow described above.
Summary of variant calls from matched cfDNA and FFPE tumor samples are
presented here. Results indicate high sensitivity of the workflow and
expected levels of concordance between variants detected in the two types
of research samples.In this study, we developed a highly sensitive and
reliable research workflow to detect rare somatic mutations in
circulating cfDNA samples. Significant overlapping of mutations
discovered in FFPE tumor and cfDNA samples suggests that this workflow
may be used to monitor tumor dynamics in NSCLC and potentially other
tumors in the future.Disclaimer: For research use only. Not for use in
diagnostic procedures.

