Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rescue of exhausted CD8 T cells by PD-1 targeted therapies is
CD28-dependent


T cell exhaustion was first described in mice during chronic lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection and later shown to occur in
humans during persistent infections and cancer. Sustained expression of
the inhibitory receptor programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) is a hallmark of T
cell exhaustion. Therapeutic blockade of PD-1 rescues proliferation,
cytokine production and cytotoxicity of exhausted T cells. PD-1 targeted
therapies have shown efficacy for multiple cancer types and changed the
landscape of cancer treatment, but the requirements for T cell rescue by
blockade of the PD-1 pathway remain elusive. T cell activation ensues
when positive signals overcome negative signals. CD28 is the most
prominent positive co-receptor for T cell activation, and human CD8 T
cells become CD28neg upon continuous stimulation. We analyzed tumor
specimens from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients by flow
cytometry and found heterogeneous CD28 expression on tumor-infiltrating
CD8 T cells. In most NSCLC patients, CD28neg cells were prevalent among
CD8 T cells co-expressing inhibitory receptors (such as PD-1 and Tim-3).
To address the role of the CD28/B7 pathway on CD8 T cell rescue by PD-1
targeted therapies, we used the LCMV chronic infection model. When B7
signals were impeded by CTLA-4-Ig or B7 blocking antibodies, blockade of
the PD-1 pathway failed to rescue virus-specific CD8 T cells. To
investigate a cell intrinsic requirement of CD28 on exhausted CD8 T
cells, we used an adoptive transfer strategy of cells genetically
deficient in CD28. We found that CD28-deficient LCMV-specific CD8 T cells
do not expand after blockade of the PD-1 pathway. Furthermore, to ensure
appropriate development and differentiation of CD8 T cells, we used mice
in which the CD28 gene can be conditionally deleted. We confirmed that
CD28neg exhausted CD8 T cells failed to proliferate after blockade of the
PD-1 pathway even when CD28 gene deletion was induced on already
exhausted T cells. These data demonstrate that CD28 engagement is
required for CD8 T cell rescue, and CD28 status may constitute a
predictive biomarker for PD-1 targeted therapies.

