Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of IRF5 induces spontaneous murine mammary tumorigenesis


Despite significant research efforts, breast cancer is still the most
common malignancy in women and the most common cause of cancer death
worldwide. A major challenge in breast cancer treatment is disease
heterogeneity that is contributed by many factors including intrinsic
cell factors, microenvironment, angiogenesis and tumor-specific immune
responses. Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a transcription
factor that controls inflammatory and immune responses. Analysis of over
3,000 human breast cancer tissues revealed that high expression of IRF5
correlates with increased survival and lower incidence of metastasis,
whereas the lower quartile of IRF5 expression is a significant marker of
poor prognosis for recurrence-free survival. These data support a tumor
suppressor role for IRF5. To examine how loss of IRF5 expression may play
a role in spontaneous mammary tumorigenesis, we generated Irf5 knockout
(ko) mice in a BALB/C background. In mammary glands harvested from
one-year-old female virgin ko mice (n = 15), we found an increased
incidence (16%) of mammary carcinoma in situ as compared to their
wild-type littermates (4%; n = 18). Of interest, the number of tumor
bearing mice was significantly higher (38%) in retired ko female breeders
(n = 8); however, there were no abnormalities detected in one-year-old
male ko virgins or breeders (n = 6). Cellular and molecular analysis of
female ko and wild-type littermates revealed that Irf5 deficiency
enhanced mammary epithelial cell proliferation as indicated by an
increased number of Ki67 expressing cells, and resulted in abnormal
hyperbranching, which may contribute to mammary tumorigenesis. Irf5 ko
breeders also showed impaired mammary gland involution after weaning,
which has been shown to facilitate mammary tumor formation in humans.
Taken together, these findings demonstrate that IRF5 is a gender-specific
tumor suppressor in breast cancer. In this ongoing study, we are further
investigating the intrinsic and extrinsic (microenvironment) role of IRF5
in mammary tumor initiation and progression.

