Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of cadmium induced prostate carcinogenesis


Cadmium is known carcinogen that causes damages to multiple organs.
Cadmium acts as an agonist and activates androgen receptor (AR) in
prostate epithelial cells which in turn promotes the carcinogenesis of
prostate. Studies have indicated that occupational exposure of cadmium is
a risk factor for prostate cancer and hence there is an immediate need to
prevent cadmium induced prostate cancer in occupational workers. Various
reports have shown that inhibition of AR signaling by AR inhibitors
suppressed cadmium induced prostate carcinogenesis. So, the present study
focuses to identify dietary agent which can effectively prevent cadmium
induced prostate cancer and to dissect the mechanism of action on
malignant transformed cells. We have disclosed one such compound, 6-(3,
9-dihydroxy-2-prenylcoumestan (Psoralidin) (Pso) a non-toxic, orally
bioavailable compound, which effectively targets only prostate cancer
cells and innocuous to healthy cells. Our results have shown cadmium
transformed prostate epithelial cells (CTPE) exhibits high proliferative
and high colony forming ability in soft agar assays. However, treatment
of CTPE cells with Pso resulted in growth inhibition, without causing
toxicity to normal prostate epithelial cells (RWPE-1). Finally, in vivo
experiments showed that oral administration of Pso (20 mg/kg/BW)
effectively suppresses the growth in CTPE xenografts, at physiologically
achievable doses without any toxicity. The pathological findings suggest
that CTPE tumors exhibits epithelial and mesenchymal transition (EMT)
phenotype and infiltrating margins into the surrounding muscle and
adipose tissue. However, Psoralidin treated tumors showed a decrease in
tumor size with a significant central necrosis (up to 60% of the tumor
size). More specifically, margins of Psoralidin treated tumors are less
infiltrative and becoming more well circumscribed. We have also noticed
that the mesenchymal component is not present and the only viable tumor
is the epithelial one after Pso treatment. Altogether, our results
confirm that consumption of natural compounds such as Psoralidin may play
an important role in the chemoprevention for cadmium induced prostate
carcinogenesis.

