Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical activity and immune correlates from a phase Ib study
evaluating atezolizumab (anti-PDL1) in combination with FOLFOX and
bevacizumab (anti-VEGF) in metastatic colorectal carcinoma


Genetic and epigenetic alterations can distinguish cancer cells from
their normal counterparts, allowing tumors to be recognized as foreign by
the immune system. The immune system's ability to detect and destroy
these abnormal cells is the foundation of cancer immunotherapy. In order
for this to occur immune cells must traffic and persist in the tumors.
Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1; also called B7-H1 or CD274), which is
expressed on many cancer and tumor-infiltrating immune cells, plays an
important part in blocking immune-mediated tumor cell destruction by
binding B7.1 (CD80) and programmed death-1 (PD-1), which is a negative
regulator of T-lymphocyte activation. PD-L1 blockade has previously been
shown to increase CD8+ T cell infiltration and PD-L1 protein levels, as
well as the expression levels of immune genes in tumors. Vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) is a secreted factor that
specifically acts on endothelial cells to stimulate angiogenesis and has
also been shown to exert immunosuppressive effects. Although some
cytotoxic agents have been proposed to induce immunogenic cell death, the
effects of chemotherapy and anti-angiogenic therapy on the tumor immune
milieu have not been extensively studied. This study was designed to
evaluate the safety, activity and biomarkers of combined FOLFOX treatment
combined with PD-L1 and VEGF-A inhibition in 1L colorectal (CRC) patients
using the humanized antibodies atezolizumab (anti-PD-L1) and bevacizumab
(anti-VEGF-A), respectively. RECIST (v1.1) responses by the cutoff date
of 09/01/2015 were observed in 52% (95% CI 30.6-73.2) of the patients (n
= 23) with a median progression free survival of 14.1 months (95% CI
8.7-17.1) and a median duration of response of 11.4 months (95% CI
7.6-15.9). No unexpected toxicities were observed. We found that CD8+ T
cells and PD-L1 expression by IHC were increased in tumors following
administration of FOLFOX alone as well as after combined administration
of FOLFOX, atezolizumab and bevacizumab. Elevations in cytotoxic T-cell
signatures (e.g. CD8A, IFN, GZMB, EOMES) with treatment were also noted
in several of the patient tumors. Patients with elevations in
tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells consistent with increased expression of
cytotoxic T-cell signatures and PD-L1 exhibited sustained responses or
prolonged disease control. These data suggest that the combination of
FOLFOX, atezolizumab, and bevacizumab promote immune-related activity in
CRC potentially resulting in enhanced efficacy.

