Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marijuana use and serum testosterone concentrations among U.S.
males


Background: Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) of young men can be
histologically divided into nonseminomas and seminomas. Although TGCTs
are thought to be hormonally-related, very few risk factors have been
identified. Recently, however, marijuana use has been linked to risk of
nonseminoma, which has peak incidence at a younger age (25 years) than
does seminoma (35 years). Whether marijuana may be related to nonseminoma
via an effect on testosterone concentrations is unknown. Thus, an
analysis of U.S. males was conducted, using data from the 2011-2012
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) of the NCHS,
CDC.Methods: Data from 2409 males aged >20 years were included in the
analysis. Serum total testosterone (T) concentrations, determined using
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, were log transformed for
statistical analyses. Marijuana use was categorized as: never, current
(use on at least one day in prior 30 days) and past (no use within prior
30 days). Regular use was defined as use at least once a month for > 1
year. Covariates included age, body mass index, race/ethnicity, cigarette
smoking status and time of day of phlebotomy. Adjusted mean T
concentrations were compared among marijuana use categories using
weighted multiple linear regression analysis accounting for the complex
sample design of NHANES. In addition to the overall analysis, models were
stratified by age (20-30 years, >30 years).Results: Mean T concentration
did not differ between never- and ever-users of marijuana (p = 0.62), but
did differ between never-users and regular-users (2.56 ng/mL vs 2.59
ng/mL, p = 0.03) and between never-users and current-users (2.60 ng/mL, p
= 0.007). In the analysis restricted to men >30 years of age, significant
differences in mean T concentration were evident among never-users and
current-users (2.55 ng/mL vs 2.60 ng/mL, p = 0.003). Significant
differences were also seen with increasing duration of use as mean T
concentrations were higher among men who used marijuana regularly for >5
years. In the analysis of men 20-30 years of age, no significant
differences in mean T concentration by marijuana use were
seen.Conclusion: These results suggest that regular use and current use
of marijuana are associated with higher T concentrations among U.S. men,
particularly men > 30 years of age. As nonseminomas are more common in
younger men than in older men, the results may indicate that the
association between marijuana use and nonseminoma is not due to an effect
of marijuana on circulating T concentrations.

