Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNAI1 regulates the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway to promote
tumorigenesis and oncogene-induced senescence escape in lung cancer


Lung cancer is the deadliest and most common malignancy worldwide. Tumor
invasion and metastasis influence the dismal 16% overall 5-year survival.
Evidence suggests malignancies commandeer epithelial plasticity programs
like the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to promote
tumorigenesis, tumor progression, and metastasis. Furthermore, EMT has
recently been linked to alterations in cancer metabolism, which can
engender adaptation to environmental stress while supporting the
macromolecular demand of rapid proliferation. Thus it is important to
better understand the emerging roles of EMT in regulating cancer
metabolism. SNAI1 is a master EMT regulator and is aberrantly
overexpressed in many cancers including lung cancer. To investigate the
role of SNAI1 in tumorigenesis, we created a novel inducible
autochthonous mouse model. Our model reveals SNAI1 overexpressing mutant
Kras mice generate identifiable tumors twice as fast (median = 14 weeks)
as mice overexpressing mutant Kras alone (median = 30 weeks). To identify
possible mechanisms of SNAI1-accelerated tumorigenesis, we used mRNA
expression profiling. We identified significantly altered gene signatures
related to metabolic reprogramming. Specifically, SNAI1 upregulates the
hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP) in mutant Kras-driven mouse lung
tumors. SNAI1 elevates protein and mRNA of the rate limiting step (GFPT2)
and final step (UAP1) of this pathway. This SNAI1-driven promotion of the
HBP was recapitulated in vitro using human non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) SNAI1 isogenic cell lines. NSCLC mRNA expression data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) also showed SNAI1 expression in patient tumor
samples correlate with a significant tendency towards co-expression with
HBP genes (Fisher's exact test, pLung cancer is the deadliest and most
common malignancy worldwide. Tumor invasion and metastasis influence the
dismal 16% overall 5-year survival. Evidence suggests malignancies
commandeer epithelial plasticity programs like the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) to promote tumorigenesis, tumor progression, and
metastasis. Furthermore, EMT has recently been linked to alterations in
cancer metabolism, which can engender adaptation to environmental stress
while supporting the macromolecular demand of rapid proliferation. Thus
it is important to better understand the emerging roles of EMT in
regulating cancer metabolism. SNAI1 is a master EMT regulator and is
aberrantly overexpressed in many cancers including lung cancer. To
investigate the role of SNAI1 in tumorigenesis, we created a novel
inducible autochthonous mouse model. Our model reveals SNAI1
overexpressing mutant Kras mice generate identifiable tumors twice as
fast (median = 14 weeks) as mice overexpressing mutant Kras alone (median
= 30 weeks). To identify possible mechanisms of SNAI1-accelerated
tumorigenesis, we used mRNA expression profiling. We identified
significantly altered gene signatures related to metabolic reprogramming.
Specifically, SNAI1 upregulates the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP)
in mutant Kras-driven mouse lung tumors. SNAI1 elevates protein and mRNA
of the rate limiting step (GFPT2) and final step (UAP1) of this pathway.
This SNAI1-driven promotion of the HBP was recapitulated in vitro using
human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) SNAI1 isogenic cell lines. NSCLC
mRNA expression data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) also showed
SNAI1 expression in patient tumor samples correlate with a significant
tendency towards co-expression with HBP genes (Fisher's exact test,
p<0.05). Functionally, the final metabolite generated by the HBP,
UDP-GlcNAc, is an essential nucleotide sugar found in a plethora of N-
and O-linked glycosylations, regulating protein stability and activity.
Here we show SNAI1 promotes flux through the HBP to promote increased
total levels of O-GlcNAcylated proteins in lung tumors in vivo. In so
doing, modulation of the HBP and specific glycosylations may impact cell
death and senescence, suggesting a novel targetable EMT-HBP axis.
Numerous oncogenes, including c-Myc and SNAI1 itself, are known to be
stabilized by O-GlcNAcylation. This link is becoming of increasing
importance in cancer biology, as half of the body of literature on
O-GlcNAcylation and cancer has been published in the past three years.
Together, our data suggest heightened protein O-GlcNAcylation, mediated
by SNAI1 and the HBP, serves as a novel means by which EMT contributes to
mutant Kras-induced lung tumorigenesis and tumor progression.

