Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome of glioma growing in the brain is simulated by tumor
cells cultured under low oxygen pressure


IntroductionStudies using cultured tumor cells are frequently used to
generate large scale data. However, the discrepancy between culture media
conditions and host microenvironment factors prevent adequate translation
to the clinical reality. Since culturing tumor cells in atmospheric
oxygen pressure (20% O2) significantly differs from oxygen pressure
within different organs (5-7% O2). We investigated whether the
transcriptome of glioma cells cultured under oxygen concentration that is
similar to the lesion in the brain (0.5-2% O2) can simulate the
transcriptome of tumors growing in vivo.Materials and MethodsHuman
glioma, LN229, cells were cultured in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS under
20%, 6% and 1% oxygen pressure. Glioma growing in the brain was
established by stereotactic injection of 1105 LN229 cells into the brain
of nude mice, subcutaneous tumors were established by injection of 1105
cells. Gene microarray was performed using Illumina Human
HT-12_v4_BeadChip microarray and data were collected by using an Illumina
bead Array Readerconfocal scanner (BeadStation 500GXDW; Illumina). Array
data processing and analysis were performed using Illumina BeadStudio
software. All statistical analysis was performed using BRB Arraytools
Version 4.4.1 under the R language environment. Cluster analysis was
performed and Heat Map was generated by Tree view.ResultsBrain and
subcutaneous tumors were harvested 3 weeks post injection. RNA was
extracted and processed for gene microarray that identified 2187 genes as
brain specific transcriptome. Determination of common genes (same
direction) between the transcriptome of glioma growing in the brain and
cells growing in culture under 20%, 6%, and 1% O2 identified 23, 5, and
174 specific genes, respectively. Ingenuity pathway analysis and gene set
enrichment analysis of the 174 common genes (from cells growing in 1% O2)
revealed cluster of genes related to cancer and neurologic diseases, cell
death/survival, cell-to-cell signaling. Up-regulation of genes associated
with survival and resistance such as AKT, MAPK, NFB1A, VEGF, and GSTA5
were also commonly identified in glioma growing in the brain and LN229
cells cultured under 1% oxygen.ConclusionCulturing glioma cells under
different oxygen pressures induces different transcriptomes and cells
cultured under 1% O2 express transcriptome most similar to cells growing
in the brain. These data demonstrate that, to simulate clinical
relevance, the oxygen tension of cultures should approximate those found
in organs.

