Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of chronic low dose aspirin treatment in the mouse AOM/DSS
model of colon carcinogenesis


Although early detection and treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC) have
improved in recent years, it remains a significant healthcare problem
with high morbidity and mortality. Published data indicate that long-term
intake of low dose aspirin reduces the risk of CRC, however the molecular
mechanisms underlying this effect are still unclear. The aim of this
study was to investigate the efficacy of low dose equivalent aspirin
treatment in a mouse colon carcinogenesis model, including evaluation of
potential mechanistic contributors.An initial PK/PD study in healthy mice
indicated that aspirin 25 mg/kg/day given via drinking water had a
similar PD effect - reduction in plasma thromboxane B2 (TXB2), as an
indicator of cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) inhibition - as did 5-day low-dose
aspirin treatment (100 mg/day) in healthy human volunteers.Male and
female C57BL/6J mice were treated with the carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM)
10 mg/kg once i.p. combined with three 5-day cycles (at 14 day intervals)
of dextran sodium sulphate (DSS) 2% in drinking water. Aspirin treatment
was started concomitant with AOM administration and continued for 12
weeks, at which time the data outlined below were obtained.Aspirin 25
mg/kg/day significantly reduced tumor burden in 3 independent experiments
(total tumor number reduced by 43 - 51%; tumor area per mouse reduced by
59 - 65%; mean tumor area reduced by 22 - 27%). Increasing the dose to 50
mg/kg/day did not show better inhibition of tumorigenesis.Aspirin-induced
reduction in tumorigenesis in this model was accompanied by reduction in
systemic plasma TXB2 by about 70%, indicating reduced platelet
activation. TXB2 production by colon explants was also reduced, by
30-50%. Aspirin treatment reduced inflammatory activity (fecal blood;
IL-1 and IL-6 production by colon explant cultures; iNOS-positive tumor
macrophage infiltration). Immunohistological analysis of tumor tissue
showed no reduction in proliferation (BrdU staining) by aspirin but there
was a trend towards increased apoptosis (caspase-3 positive cells) and a
significant reduction in CD31-positive microvessel density. Aspirin
treatment did not result in significant modulation of the Wnt/-catenin,
NF-B or HIF-1 pathways as assessed by mRNA expression of several of their
target genes in tumor tissue.The results show that aspirin can inhibit
tumor development in this established model of colon carcinogenesis,
primarily by reducing tumor number with a less marked effect on the size
of individual tumors. This effect is associated with COX-1 inhibition of
a similar magnitude to that seen with low dose aspirin in humans. The
influence of aspirin on intestinal inflammation and platelet activation
as well as on tumor cell apoptosis and tumor angiogenesis might all
contribute to the beneficial effects seen in this model. Additional
studies are planned to further elucidate aspirin's mechanism of action in
inhibiting tumor development.

