Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SHP-1 determines the radiosensitivity of liver cancer cell and
dovitinib acts as a novel radiosensitizer in hepatocellular carcinoma via
targeting SHP-1/STAT3 signaling


BackgroundHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most lethal human
malignancies and curative therapy is not an option for most patients.
There is growing interest in the potential benefit of radiotherapy
(RT)-integrated therapy. This study aimed to investigate the biological
impacts of a novel tumor suppressor Src homology 2 (SH2)
domain-containing phosphatase 1 (SHP-1) and its downstream effecter,
STAT3, in regulating the radiosensitivity of HCC cells. Furthermore, we
explored the efficacy and mechanism of an investigational drug,
dovitinib, used in combination with RT.Material and methodsTo understand
the impacts of SHP-1/STAT3 signaling affects radiosensitivity, HCC cells
with ectopic expression of STAT3, SHP-1 and a catalytic mutant SHP-1 were
treated with or without radiotherapy and analyzed by flow cytometry and
colony formation assay. Furthermore, five HCC cell lines (PLC5, Hep3B,
SK-Hep1, HA59T and Huh-7) were treated with dovitnib, RT or both. The in
vitro and in vivo effects of above-mentioned treatments were
analyzed.ResultsBy sub-G1 analysis and colony formation, we found that
HCC cell with ectopic expression of SHP-1 was much more sensitive to
RT-induced apoptotic effects, while overexpression of STAT3 or
catalytic-dead mutant SHP-1 restored RT-induced reduction of HCC cell
survival. Next, we investigated the effects of dovitinib, which showed
that dovitinib treatment resulted in SHP-1-mediated downregulation of
p-STAT3 and promoted potent apoptosis of HCC cells. Ectopic expression of
STAT3, or inhibition of SHP-1 diminished the effects of dovitinib on HCC
cells. Furthermore, by ectopic expression and purified recombinant
proteins of various mutant forms of SHP-1, the N-SH2 domain of SHP-1 was
found to be required for dovitinib treatment.Importantly, we found that
dovitinib potentiated the in vitor and in vivo effects of RT in HCC cells
through affecting the SHP-1/STAT3 signaling.ConclusionsSHP-1/STAT3
signaling is critically associated with the radiosensitivity of HCC
cells. A combination therapy with RT and the SHP-1 agonist, such as
dovitinib, resulted in enhanced in vitro and in vivo anti-HCC effects.

