Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astrocytes and endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) influence
the migration and drug response of glioblastoma cells in a 3D culture
model


Glioblastoma, a brain cancer with low prognosis, is characterized by
rapid infiltration and drug resistance that leads to tumor reappearance.
Cell-extrinsic factors, such as the development of a supportive
microenvironment and synergistic relationships between normal cells and
GBM play an important role in the tumor successful progression. Despite
the importance of the microenvironment as a regulator of tumor response,
there is a lack of predictive in vitro models that represent the
dimensionality and characteristics of the glioma microenvironment. To
this end, we developed a 3D in vitro model that recapitulates the
composition and physical features of the GBM microenvironment by
generating a composite matrix of a hyaluronan supported by collagen.
Human astrocytes and endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) were
incorporated into the matrix and co-cultured with GBM cells to evaluate
the effect of normal cells on the GBM 3D cell migration and drug
response. Time-lapse microscopy was used to evaluate the 3D migration
distance, velocity and persistence of GBM cell lines GBM10, GBM43 and
GBAM1 (CD133+) during 18h after drug treatment with temozolomide and a
STAT3-inhibitor. Survival of GBM cells was also evaluated 18h and 72 h
after drug treatment. All results were compared to standard monolayer
culture. Presence of astrocytes and ECFCs increased GBM net migration
distance and velocity in the 3D model and in 2D monolayer culture.
Additionally, viability of GBM after drug treatment was higher when
astrocytes and ECFCs were present in the 3D model compared to only GBM 3D
culture and standard monolayer culture. Our results support the
importance of the 3D-microenvironment as modulator of tumor response and
provide a tunable in vitro platform for primary brain tumor studies aimed
to compliment in vivo model observations.

