Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of INCB059872, a novel FAD-directed LSD1 inhibitor that
is effective in preclinical models of human and murine AML


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease characterized by the expansion
of a hematopoietic stem cell like population caused in part by a block of
myeloid differentiation. In AML, an altered epigenetic landscape,often
arising from genetic lesions in epigenetic regulators, enforces an
oncogenic expression profile and suppresses myeloid differentiation.
Lysine specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) catalyzes the demethylation of
lysine 4 and 9 of histone H3 through an FAD-dependent redox process.
Aberrant LSD1 activity has been proposed to maintain oncogenic programs
and prevent differentiation of multiple subtypes of AML. Here, wedescribe
INCB059872, a potent, selective and orally bioavailable inhibitor of LSD1
that achieves inhibitory activity through the formation of covalent
FAD-adducts. INCB059872 inhibited cellular proliferation and induced
cellular differentiation as measured by induction of CD86 and CD11b
myeloid differentiation markers in a panel of human AML cell lines and
primary human AML cells ex vivo. In vivo, pharmacodynamic (PD) assays
confirmed the sustained induction of CD86 in human AML xenograft models,
consistent with the mechanism of FAD-directed inhibition of LSD1. Oral
administration of INCB059872 significantly inhibited tumor growth of
human AML xenograft models as a single agent at doses exhibiting
significant PD effects in vivo. Efficacy was further evaluated in the
murine retroviral MLL-AF9 disseminated leukemia model that recapitulates
hallmarks of human AML. INCB059872 significantly prolonged the median
survival of MLL-AF9 expressing leukemic mice compared with vehicle
treated animals. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that INCB059872 induced
cell differentiation of murine blast cells, reduced blast colonies, and
normalized clinical hematological parameters to those of non-leukemic
mice. Notably, in both human AML xenografts and the murine MLL-AF9
leukemic model, maximal efficacy could be achieved with both daily (QD)
and alternative-day (QoD) dosing regimens of INCB059872, consistent with
the prolonged PD effects observed. Collectively, these studies
demonstrate the key role that LSD1 activity can play in preventing
leukemic cell differentiation, and support the therapeutic potential of
INCB059872 in the treatment of human AML.

