Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of circulating tumor cells from renal cell
carcinoma patients by a multi-parameter flow cytometry assay


BACKGROUND: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is one of the top ten causes of
cancer death in the United States. The last ten years have shown a
dramatic increase in the number of available treatment options, however
metastatic RCC remains largely incurable. The classes of drugs that have
been developed can be divided into agents that target the Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) pathway (Sunitinib, Sorafenib,
Pazopanib, Axitinib, Bevacizumab), those that target the mammalian Target
of Rapamycin (mTOR) pathway (Everolimus, Temsirolimus) and immune based
therapies (IL-2 and PD-1 inhibition). There are currently limited
biomarkers to guide clinical decisions, mainly due to the lack of tumor
cells for longitudinal molecular analysis. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
are potential a source of tumor cells that can be identified from a blood
draw for serial analysis. CTCs have not been reliably detected in RCC due
to the significant heterogeneity and high rate of false positive events
in this disease when EpCAM has been used. We sought to identify RCC CTCs
with alternative markers, such as carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) which is
found in greater than 90% of clear cell RCC tumors.METHODS AND RESULTS:
To evaluate for the presence and subtypes of CTCs from patients with RCC,
we utilized a multi-parametric flow cytometry assay. We evaluated
heterogeneity across subpopulations of putative CTCs with Epithelial Cell
Adhesion Molecule (EpCAM), Carbonic Anhydrase IX (CAIX), Carbonic
Anhydrase XII (CAXII), PAX8, and Cytokeratin (CK). Negative controls for
immune and endothelial events were performed with markers for CD45, CD14,
CD34, CD11b and CD61. We tested twenty blood samples from patients with
RCC at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute and University of Wisconsin
Carbone Cancer Center. CTC frequency in RCC ranges from 0-5410 CAIX+/CK+
events with a median of 24.5 putative CTCs/7.5mL of blood. A subset of
patients with radiographic progression had a higher number of CTCs with a
median of 295.2 CTCs/7.5 mL. A range of 1-231 EpCAM+/CK+ events were
identified with a median of 5.5 CTCs/7.5mL. There was low frequency of
events being CAIX+/EpCAM+/CK+, with a median of 1 CTC/7.5mL of blood.
Assay specificity was dramatically improved through the combination of
multiple positive markers with stains for immune and endothelial cells
given frequent non-specific staining for cytokeratin in RCC blood
samples.CONCLUSIONS: CTCs can be identified in patients with RCC using
non-traditional markers. CAIX is a more sensitive marker than EpCAM to
identify putative CTCs from patients with RCC. Specificity in the assay
is critical given the high frequency of false positive events identified
if only CD45 is used as a marker for immune cells. Our investigation is
ongoing for further molecular characterization of orthogonal endpoints in
identified CTCs. Future directions include longitudinal monitoring of
CTCs during treatment with VEGF inhibitors.

