Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Yes1 is the key molecule for the resistance to trastuzumab in
breast cancer, and dasatinib overcomes the resistance


Background: Overexpression of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) was observed in approximately 15-23% of breast cancers and they
are classified as HER2-positive breast cancer. Trastuzumab is a
therapeutic drug for the first choice for HER2-positive breast cancer,
showing good response. However, acquired resistance to trastuzumab is one
of the critical clinical issues in breast cancer treatment, especially in
the patients with recurrent breast cancer. Therefore, it is necessary to
develop the effective therapy to overcome the resistance. In this study,
we established a trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cell line from a
trastuzumab-sensitive cell line with HER2 amplification (BT-474). We
analyzed the mechanisms of resistance to trastuzumab and demonstrated the
anti-tumor effect of dasatinib.Methods: Trastuzumab-resistant breast
cancer cell line (BT-474-R) was established by treating BT-474 cells for
long-term exposure with increasing doses of trastuzumab (from 0.1 g/mL up
to 40 g/mL). Expression and activation of HER2 and its related molecules
were investigated using western blotting and real-time PCR. Cell
viability was evaluated using MTS assay. Cell cycle was analyzed using
flow cytometry.Results: Proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Yes1,
which is one of the Src family members, was amplified, overexpressed and
activated in BT-474-R. HER2 and Akt were also activated. Silencing of
Yes1 by siRNA induced BT-474-R to recover sensitivity to trastuzumab.
Pharmaceutical inhibition of Yes1 by Src inhibitor dasatinib was also
effective to recovery sensitivity to trastuzumab in BT-474-R. Combination
treatment of dasatinib and trastuzumab induced down-regulation of
signaling molecules such as HER2 and Akt. Moreover, these combination
treatments induced G1-phase cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis.Conclusion:
Yes1 plays an important role in acquired resistance to trastuzumab in
HER2-positive breast cancer. Our data also suggest that pharmacological
inhibition of Yes1 may become the new strategy to overcome resistance to
trastuzumab.

