Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of DNA methyltransferases and efficacy of
novel DNMT inhibitors in leukemia xenografts


Background. DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 1 plays an important role in
tumorigenesis and is responsible for maintenance and propagation of DNA
methylation patterns, and DNMT3A and DNMT3B are involved in de novo DNA
methylation. 4-Thio-5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-T-dCyd) and
4-thio-2-deoxycytidine (T-dCyd) are novel DNMT inhibitors in development.
In this investigation, we test the hypothesis that DNMTs are
differentially modulated by DNMT inhibitors that may contribute to
treatment efficacy. Methods. Animals (5 per group) bearing HL-60 leukemia
cell xenografts were treated with saline or aza-T-dCyd at 2 mg/kg with
and without 100 mg/kg tetrahydrouridine (ThU) for 5 days weekly for 2
weeks and cycle repeat after 9-day rest. Two other groups were dosed with
T-dCyd at 4 mg/kg and decitabine at 0.75 mg/kg, respectively. Tumor
growth was assessed by measuring tumor size. Expression of DNMT1, DNMT3A
and DNMT3B was examined by immunohistochemistry in paraffin-embedded
tumors resected at day 11. Results. Expression of DNMT1 was high, DNMT3B
intermediate, and DNMT3A at low levels in saline control group.
Significant growth delay was achieved in the aza-T-dCyd (86%) and
aza-T-dCyd plus ThU cohorts (45%), compared with the controls. In the
aza-T-dCyd treated xenografts, histological examination confirmed a
significant reduction (77%) in tumor area (P = 0.002). Expression of
DNMT1 and DNMT3B (n = 2 in aza-TdCyd group) was reduced in aza-T-dCyd
cohort (P = 0.01 and P = 0.04) as well as aza-T-dCyd in combination with
ThU group (P = 0.01 and P = 0.03). In contrast, no growth inhibition but
decrease in DNMT3A and DNMT1 were observed by dosing with decitabine.
There were neither delays for tumor growth nor changes of all three DNMTs
by T-dCyd treatment with the dose administered. Conclusions. Aza-T-dCyd
and aza-T-dCyd plus ThU treatments result in significant tumor growth
inhibition in HL-60 leukemia xenografts. The anti-tumor activity is
associated with simultaneous inhibition of the two drug targets DNMT1 and
DNMT3B. The preclinical results provide compelling evidence to advance
aza-T-dCyd for clinical development and perhaps in the context of
companion biomarker approach.

