Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-603 acts as a tumor suppressor in triple-negative breast
cancer and inhibits cell proliferation, invasiveness and tumorigenesis by
targeting elongation factor 2-kinase (eEF2K)


Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) is characterized by heterogeneous
disease due to its unique molecular profile, aggressiveness, distinct
metastatic patterns and lack of molecular targets such as ER, PR and
HER2/neu for effective targeted therapies including tamoxifen and
herceptin reduced sensitivity to chemotherapies, representing unmet
therapeutic challenge. Eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase (eEF2K) is
an atypical calcium/calmodulin dependent serine/tyrosine kinase that
regulates protein synthesis through phosphorylation of EF2. Recently, we
reported that eEF2K promotes TNBC cell proliferation, colony formation,
migration/invasion, angiogeneis and tumorigenesis and drug resistance by
inducing PI3K/Akt, mTOR, IGF1R, Src/FAK, C-myc,, Bcl-2, CyclinD1, and
VEGF (Tekedereli 2012). We also demonstrated that in vivo therapeutic
targeting of eEF2K by systemically administered liposomal eEF2KsiRNA
nanoparticles significantly inhibited growth of highly aggressive
MDA-MB-231 tumor xenografts in and enhanced the efficacy of standard
chemoagents (ie, doxorubicin, paclitaxel), representing a potential
molecular target in TNBC. However, currently the transcriptional
regulation of eEF2K is unknown. Here, we report that eEF2K expression is
highly upregulated in TNBC cells and associated with poor patient
survival and clinical outcome in these patients.. Thorough extensive
analysis of databases and predictive algorithms, and in vitro and in vivo
correlation studies we identified that miR-603 inversely correlated with
eEF2K and demonstrated miR603 as the first microRNA that directly binds
to the 3-UTR of eEF2K gene and suppresses its expression, though gene
reporter assays. Introduction of mutations to the miR-603 binding site
completely reversed eEF2K expression in gene reporter assays. We also
showed that ectopic expression of miR-603 in TNBC cell lines resulted in
the inhibition of cell growth, colony formation, migration and invasion
of TNBC cells, recapitulating the effects of eEF2K inhibition by siRNA.
Systemic administration of miR-603 mimics incorporated in liposomal
nanoparticles (0.3 mg/kg once a week for 4 weeks) in an orthotopic
xenograft TNBC mouse model led to significant inhibition of eEF2K protein
expression and tumor growth. Analysis of the tumors after the end of
study reveled that miR-603-induced downregulation of eEF2K expression was
correlated with Src and Akt. In conclusion, our findings suggest for the
first time that miR-603 function as a tumor suppressor and loss of its
expression contributes to upregulation of eEF2K, tumor growth and
progression of TNBC and miR-603 based gene targeting strategy may be used
to control eEF2K in TNBC, representing a novel molecularly targeted
therapy.

