Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-8, VEGF and IGF-1 play the important role in ARHI
mediated-tumor dormancy in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. One of the most
important factors contributing to poor outcomes is the ability of drug
resistant ovarian cancer cells to remain dormant for years after
treatment, only to grow progressively and kill their host. Judging from
sites of recurrence, most dormant ovarian cancer cells are found on the
surface of the peritoneal cavity, often in small, poorly vascularized
collagenous scars observed at second look operations. Previously, we
reported that more than 80% of persistent, dormant drug resistant ovarian
cancers express ARHI and are undergoing autophagy. Autophagy can protect
or kill tumor cells depending upon the context. Our group has found that
autophagy and tumor dormancy can be regulated by an imprinted tumor
suppressor gene, ARHI (DIRAS3), which is downregulated in 60% of ovarian
cancers. Re-expression of ARHI in cell culture produces cell death within
72 hours, whereas re-expression of ARHI in xenografts produces cell
growth arrest and tumor dormancy. When ARHI levels are reduced after 6
weeks of induction, xenografts grow promptly. Our current experiments
were designed to determine whether survival of autophagic cells in vivo
requires permissive levels of VEGF, IL-8 and IGF-1 in the tumor
microenvironment. In cell culture, co-incubation of VEGF, IGF-1 and IL-8
with SKOv3-ARHI cells, increased AKT activity, reduced ARHI-mediated
autophagy formation and decreased autophagic cell death. SKOv3-ARHI cells
grown subcutaneously in nude mice exhibited higher levels of AKT activity
and lower levels of autophagy than cells grown in cell culture. When
cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were obtained from xenografts, the
nuclear fractions showed increased phospho-AKT, and decreased levels of a
transcription factor EB (TFEB) and low mRNA expression of LC3, suggesting
survival factors in tumor environment may stimulate AKT, downregulate
expression of TFEB and inhibit formation of autophagy. Treatment with
anti-VEGF, anti-IL-8 and anti-IGF-1 antibodies, individually and in
combination, inhibited survival factors-mediated AKT activation and
slowed the outgrowth of dormant autophagic ovarian cancer cells.
Treatment of dormant xenografts with the same monoclonal antibodies
against VEGF, IL-8 and IGFR not only delayed outgrowth when DOX is
withdrawn, but cured a fraction of mice. Re-expression of ARHI reduced
expression of IGF-1 receptor, but not VEGF and IL8 receptors. Treatment
ovarian cancer cells with VEGF, IL-8 and IGF-1 reduced ARHI's ability to
induce autophagy and to inhibit AKT. These preclinical studies support
that the possibility that treatment with a combination of anti-VEGF,
anti-IL8 and anti-IGF-1 antibodies could prevent outgrowth of dormant
cells in patients with ovarian cancer. Furthermore, these results suggest
that survival factors are required to limit autophagic death.

