Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation high capacity DNA damage detection assay for
chemotherapy and genotoxic compound screening


The mechanism of action of many classes of chemotherapeutic agents
involves either the repression of DNA repair or an increase in DNA
damage. However the measurement of DNA damage levels within a cell has
been notoriously difficult and current methods to asses DNA damage
potential of new chemotherapeutics have major technical flaws. The single
cell gel electrophoresis (SCGE) assay is a long-standing method for
measuring levels of DNA damage within a cell. The principle of SCGE is
that DNA damage can cause DNA strand breaks in cells. These breaks cause
the relaxation of the compact highly supercoiled DNA. The application of
an electric field while the cells are embedded in agarose allows damaged
DNA to migrate faster than intact DNA. The more breaks in the DNA, the
further it will travel in the agarose resulting in the formation of a
comet tail, the size and length of which directly correlates to the
amount of DNA damage. The SCGE method benefits from both technical
simplicity and high sensitivity. The major drawback is the assay is
extremely laborious, lacks appropriate controls and has poor
reproducibility. We have recently overcome these drawbacks by developing
a 96-well plate format of the SCGE, aptly named CometChip. The CometChip
uses micro-pillar technology to create an agarose 96-well chip where each
well has approximately 300 micro-wells used to capture individual cells.
Using this technology we can incorporate multiple treatments, controls
and time points on a single CometChip which can then be rapidly analyzed
using a fluorescence based imaging instrument. The utility of the new
technology was tested using 75 different chemical compounds considered
either genotoxic, non-genotoxic or unknown. The compounds were tested on
two lymphocyte cell lines with different p53 status to compare the
accumulation and repair of DNA damage. We report that the CometChip gives
highly reproducible and accurate results without loss of sensitivity. In
the high throughput screening approach using multiple CometChip
apparatus, we estimate the throughput of the assay to be approximately
10,000% greater than doing traditional slide based comet analysis. The
massive increase in processivity brings new opportunity for large-scale
compound screening. The increased sensitivity coupled with large sample
sizes will allow researchers the option to measure minor changes in DNA
damage with unparalleled accuracy.

