Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring CHD1 during prostate cancer progression


Adenocarcinomas of the prostate consist of a collection of malignancies
with distinct molecular underpinnings. Linking molecular background to
clinical behaviour, i.e. tumour progression and response to therapy has
not yet been fully established. This is in large measure due to a paucity
of well-annotated patient cohorts, which cover the evolution from
localized, hormone nave to metastatic castration resistant prostate
cancer. Deletions in the gene Chromodomain Helicase DNA Binding Protein 1
(CHD1) are among the most frequent genomic alterations in prostate
cancer. CHD1 is a ATPase-dependent helicase mediating a variety of
biological processes by modifying chromatin structure. In hormone
sensitive prostate cancer, loss of CHD1 has been associated with
increased genomic instability and aggressiveness. Here we monitor CHD1
status during the progression from hormone sensitive (HSPC) to castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). To molecularly stratify this patient
subgroup we correlate CHD1 status with markers of prostate cancer
including AR, ERG, PTEN and Ki67. Finally, we analyze the impact of
alterations in CHD1 on outcome and response to therapy of CRPC patients.
We retrospectively identified 52 patients of whom HSPC and CRPC tissue
was available for immunohistochemical analysis of CHD1, ERG, PTEN, AR and
Ki67 as well as for CHD1 fluorescence in situ hybridization. Relationship
with outcome was analyzed using univariate Cox regression and log-rank
analyses. By using Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in a cohort of 52 men who developed CRPC, we
show that the frequency of loss of CHD1 does not change during disease
progression (7.7% in HSPC vs 9.6% in CRPC). Homozygously deleted tumors
demonstrate a tendency towards poorer prognosis but this observation
lacks statistical power in our cohort. Interestingly, in patients that
show CHD1 protein expression in their hormone nave sample, a decrease of
expression in the matched CRPC sample correlates with poorer overall
survival (OS) (p = 0.03). Although preclinical data suggest a role for
CHD1 in androgen receptor (AR) activity, CHD1 expression did not
correlate with AR protein level. Additionally, Ki67 expression did not
show correlation with CHD1 levels of expression. Further molecular
stratification confirms a known mutual exclusive relationship with the
expression of the ERG transcription factor (p = 0.048). Clinically,
although decreased CHD1 protein expression during disease progression
correlated with worse outcome (overall survival (p = 0.03) and survival
from diagnosis of CRPC (p = 0.02)), no significant impact on survival
after docetaxel or abiraterone treatment was measured.Here we monitor
CHD1 deletion during prostate cancer progression. Our results show that
this genomic marker defines a distinct molecular subgroup of prostate
cancer. In addition, loss of CHD1 protein expression during disease
progression is associated with poorer clinical outcome.

