Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apelin/Apj pathway for targeting ovarian tumor microenvironment


Introduction: Ovarian cancer generates unique tumor microenvironment
(TME) that promotes and enhances tumor progression and metastasis.
Current therapy option for modulating ovarian TME is antiangiogenic
therapy but its clinical benefit is limited; thus, alternative drug
targets are needed for therapeutic durability. Apelin and its cognate
receptor APJ is known to have roles in glucose metabolism, cardiovascular
functions, and angiogenesis. We found that apelin/APJ are highly
overexpressed in human ovarian tumors, but their functional role is
unclear. We also found a significant upregulation of apelin/APJ in tumors
that progressed after antiangiogenic therapy in preclinical ovarian
cancer models. Our objective is to determine the functional roles and
mechanisms of apelin/APJ pathway on promoting ovarian tumor angiogenesis
and progression.Methods: We examined autocrine and paracrine functions of
apelin/APJ signaling on cell proliferation, migration, and tube formation
using human ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3Apln and SKOV3Apj) and endothelial
cells (HUVECApj). Phosphoproteome array was performed to evaluate the
apelin/APJ downstream signaling. We characterized the effect of apelin or
APJ overexpression on tumor development and response to VEGFR inhibitor
in vivo. To confirm the clinical relevance of apelin/APJ in ovarian TME,
we measured soluble apelin levels in patients ascites and APJ expressions
in human ovarian tumors using an immunohistochemistry.Results: Apelin
(10-100 ng/ml) induced mitogenic and chemoattractant effects on both
cancer and endothelial cells. These effects were more prominent under
hypoxic condition, reflecting the significance of apelin/APJ axis in TME.
The aplein-mediated proliferative and migratory effects were inhibited by
a pharmacological APJ inhibitor (ML-221) in a dose-dependent manner. High
APJ expression resulted in enhanced pro-angiogenic activity in HUVEC.
Overexpression of apelin/APJ also led to reduced response to
antiangiogenic treatment in both HUVEC and cancer cells. Apelin signaling
induces phosphorylation of AKT, STAT, CREB, PRAS 40, and AMPK2 in SKOV3
cells. Our xenograft study indicates APJ-overexpressing tumors showed
reduced response to sorafenib treatment compared to those control tumors.
We found that APJ is mainly expressed in tumors and some extent in
stromal component of human ovarian tumors. The median soluble apelin
levels in ascites were 187 pg/ml (6.3 - 4,000 pg/ml).Conclusions: Our
results suggest that apelin/APJ may play an important role in promoting
angiogenesis and progression in ovarian cancer and serve as an attractive
pathway targeting ovarian TME.

