Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of druggable transcriptional outliers in urothelial
carcinoma


Background: Urothelial carcinoma (UC) is a major public health problem
affecting new 75,000 patients and resulting in 15,000 deaths annually.
Despite a variety of genetic and epigenetic alterations described in UC,
few therapeutically exploitable drivers have been identified and
validated. We hypothesized that transcriptional outliers from primary
tumor biopsies could reveal such therapeutically exploitable weaknesses.
Identification of these druggable outliers would be critical for
individualized therapy of patients with UC. Methods: In order to identify
transcriptional outliers we calculated Z-scores for a set of 72 druggable
cancer-related genes from RNA sequencing data from our Institute of
Precision Medicine (IPM) cohort of advanced platinum-resistant UC. We
performed similar outlier analyses on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
cohort of UC and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database of
urothelial cell lines. Common outliers between IPM and CCLE datasets or
between TCGA and CCLE datasets were nominated for further in-vitro
testing. Sensitivity scores of cell lines for 130 drugs were extracted
from the publicly available cell line browser database and the variance
these sensitivity scores across (640) cell lines was calculated. The
drugs targeting the outlier genes (real sensitivity z-score) were
compared to the mean z-scores of randomly chosen drugs associated with
those genes (control sensitive z-score). To investigate the mechanisms
underlying comparison of outliers methylation patterns of the promoter
regions of outlier genes were examined. Results: 6 druggable outlier
genes were common between IPM and CCLE cohorts, and 15 outlier genes
between CCLE and TCGA cohorts. Common outliers included FGFR3, KIT, BCL2,
ABL1, and SMO. The presence of outlier genes in cell lines correlated
with higher sensitivity to drugs predicted to target these genes in
comparison to randomly selected drugs (pBackground: Urothelial carcinoma
(UC) is a major public health problem affecting new 75,000 patients and
resulting in 15,000 deaths annually. Despite a variety of genetic and
epigenetic alterations described in UC, few therapeutically exploitable
drivers have been identified and validated. We hypothesized that
transcriptional outliers from primary tumor biopsies could reveal such
therapeutically exploitable weaknesses. Identification of these druggable
outliers would be critical for individualized therapy of patients with
UC. Methods: In order to identify transcriptional outliers we calculated
Z-scores for a set of 72 druggable cancer-related genes from RNA
sequencing data from our Institute of Precision Medicine (IPM) cohort of
advanced platinum-resistant UC. We performed similar outlier analyses on
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort of UC and the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) database of urothelial cell lines. Common outliers
between IPM and CCLE datasets or between TCGA and CCLE datasets were
nominated for further in-vitro testing. Sensitivity scores of cell lines
for 130 drugs were extracted from the publicly available cell line
browser database and the variance these sensitivity scores across (640)
cell lines was calculated. The drugs targeting the outlier genes (real
sensitivity z-score) were compared to the mean z-scores of randomly
chosen drugs associated with those genes (control sensitive z-score). To
investigate the mechanisms underlying comparison of outliers methylation
patterns of the promoter regions of outlier genes were examined. Results:
6 druggable outlier genes were common between IPM and CCLE cohorts, and
15 outlier genes between CCLE and TCGA cohorts. Common outliers included
FGFR3, KIT, BCL2, ABL1, and SMO. The presence of outlier genes in cell
lines correlated with higher sensitivity to drugs predicted to target
these genes in comparison to randomly selected drugs (p<0.05). In vitro
cell viability assays confirmed sensitivity of RT112 and RT4 cell lines
to Dovitinib, an FGFR3 inhibitor as predicted by our algorithm. Outlier
genes were frequently involved in gene fusions, amplification or DNA
hypomethylation (pBackground: Urothelial carcinoma (UC) is a major public
health problem affecting new 75,000 patients and resulting in 15,000
deaths annually. Despite a variety of genetic and epigenetic alterations
described in UC, few therapeutically exploitable drivers have been
identified and validated. We hypothesized that transcriptional outliers
from primary tumor biopsies could reveal such therapeutically exploitable
weaknesses. Identification of these druggable outliers would be critical
for individualized therapy of patients with UC. Methods: In order to
identify transcriptional outliers we calculated Z-scores for a set of 72
druggable cancer-related genes from RNA sequencing data from our
Institute of Precision Medicine (IPM) cohort of advanced
platinum-resistant UC. We performed similar outlier analyses on The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort of UC and the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) database of urothelial cell lines. Common outliers
between IPM and CCLE datasets or between TCGA and CCLE datasets were
nominated for further in-vitro testing. Sensitivity scores of cell lines
for 130 drugs were extracted from the publicly available cell line
browser database and the variance these sensitivity scores across (640)
cell lines was calculated. The drugs targeting the outlier genes (real
sensitivity z-score) were compared to the mean z-scores of randomly
chosen drugs associated with those genes (control sensitive z-score). To
investigate the mechanisms underlying comparison of outliers methylation
patterns of the promoter regions of outlier genes were examined. Results:
6 druggable outlier genes were common between IPM and CCLE cohorts, and
15 outlier genes between CCLE and TCGA cohorts. Common outliers included
FGFR3, KIT, BCL2, ABL1, and SMO. The presence of outlier genes in cell
lines correlated with higher sensitivity to drugs predicted to target
these genes in comparison to randomly selected drugs (p<0.05). In vitro
cell viability assays confirmed sensitivity of RT112 and RT4 cell lines
to Dovitinib, an FGFR3 inhibitor as predicted by our algorithm. Outlier
genes were frequently involved in gene fusions, amplification or DNA
hypomethylation (p<0.02). Conclusions: Identification of druggable
transcriptional outliers can elucidate novel oncogenic dependencies and
aid in selecting precision therapies for UC patients.

