Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of tetra-branched NT4 peptide theranostics


The tetra-branched peptide NT4 is a potential cancer theranostic, which
very selectively binds to human cancer tissues in different malignancies
and can efficiently and selectively deliver drugs or liposomes for cancer
cell imaging or therapy, in vitro and in vivo. By using NT4 conjugated to
methotrexate or 5FdU we obtained significant reduction of tumor growth in
xenografted nude mice. Very recently we reported that conjugation of
paclitaxel to NT4 leads to increased therapeutic activity of the drug in
an orthotopic model of breast cancer in mice and produces tumor
regression which is not achieved with unconjugated paclitaxel in
identical experimental conditions. We demonstrated that NT4 specifically
binds to sulfated glycosaminoglycans and LRP receptors on cancer cells
and tissues.Considering the role of sulfated glycosaminoglycans in cancer
cell interaction with the extracellular matrix, we have analyzed the
effect of NT4 in cancer cell adhesion and migration on different
supports. NT4 inhibits adhesion and migration of different human cancer
cell lines, strongly affecting directionality of cell movement.We have
also constructed and validated a novel theranostics nanodevices, by
conjugation of NT4 to quantum dots, for selective diagnosis and imaging
of different human carcinomas.Thanks to their high cancer selectivity and
versatile chemical conformation, NT4 peptides can be exploited for
constructing cancer theranostics, which may also reduce tumor
aggressiveness and metastatic potential by inhibiting cancer cell
migration.References:Falciani, C. et al. Cancer selectivity of
tetrabranched neurotensin peptides is generated by simultaneous binding
to sulfated glycosaminoglycans and protein receptors. J Med Chem. 2013,
56, 5009-18.Brunetti, J. et al. Tumor-selective peptide-carrier delivery
of Paclitaxel increases in vivo activity of the drug. Scientific Reports.
DOI:10.1038/srep17736.

