Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of an antibody independent tool for patient selection:
RNA in situ hybridization detects Met expression levels predictive for
response to Met inhibition by Bay 853474


This study was performed in order to validate RNA in situ hybridization
(RNA ISH) as tool for patient selection. Met expression was analyzed in a
matched sample set of FFPE versus fresh frozen tumor samples comprising
20 cases of gastric cancer. Classical immunohistochemistry using the
antibody SP44 and RNA ISH (RNAscope by ACD) were used to detect c-met
expression in FFPE material. The results were confirmed by
sandwich-immunoassays on Met and its phosphorylation on tyrosine 1349
(MSD) as well as mass spectrometry. The level of functional relevance was
determined by testing a set of cell lines comprising some with genomic
amplification of the met gene as well as some non-amplified lines showing
different expression levels. Among gastric cancer cell lines only those
with met amplification respond to treatment with the small molecule Met
inhibitor Bay 853474. The cell line result generates a responder
hypothesis that can be used to define a cutoff for clinical samples. 2 of
the 20 investigated clinical samples were shown to have high level Met
expression by RNA ISH and IHC that could be confirmed by
sandwich-immunoassays also showing high level of functional activity by
phosphotyrosine 1349. Met expression in these cases was also confirmed by
mass spectrometry. Expression levels and functional activity in these 2
cases were in the range that predicts response to treatment as
established with gastric cancer cell lines. Determination of predictive
biomarkers by immunohistochemistry can be limited due to lack of high
quality antibodies of sufficient specificity. Due to its high
specificity, RNA in situ hybridization is a technique that can be used to
confirm the findings obtained by immunohistochemistry and may potentially
even replace immunohistochemistry it if no suitable antibodies are
available or not specific enough e.g. to discriminate between closely
related protein isoforms. We show the biological relevance of RNA in situ
hybridization on FFPE samples by correlation with immunohistochemistry,
ELISA based approaches and mass spectrometry. RNA ISH is shown to be
specific and sensitive enough to identify cases of functionally relevant
MET overexpression levels in gastric cancers and can be used to select
patients for treatment.

