Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and validation of a novel checkpoint target
preferentially expressed in the tumor microenvironment


Immunotherapeutic approaches targeting a single immune checkpoint,
programmed death ligand 1, have resulted in unprecedented response rates
and survival benefit across multiple cancer histologies. The efficacy of
PD-1 blockade is augmented when delivered in combination with other
immune checkpoints, specifically anti-CTLA-4, despite a significant
increase in toxicity. The current challenge is identification of novel
immunomodulatory targets with equivalent efficacy to PD1 blockade as
monotherapy, and which can be applied in combination with anti-PD1 with a
superior therapeutic index.As the majority of autoimmune toxicity occurs
in healthy, non-malignant tissue, we developed a novel high throughput
RNA screen to identify new immune checkpoint targets preferentially
expressed in the tumor microenvironment. Across numerous tumor types
including tumors targeted by monoclonal antibodies (Abs), ie rituximab,
trastuzumab, among others, the screen reproducibly identified a list of
novel targets for immunotherapy which through a secondary screen were
refined for cell surface expression. By this approach we selected a novel
type II transmembrane glycoprotein (TIITG) with dual function as an
ectoenzyme and in signal transduction. Further experiments in-vitro and
ex-vivo from tumor biopsies confirmed upregulation of the target on
tumor-infiltrating, activated, immune cells including but not limited to
innate immune effectors. In-vitro and in-vivo murine models using
agonistic antibodies to the TIITG demonstrated (1) augmentation of
natural killer cell spontaneous and antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, (2)
inhibition of myeloid derived suppressor cell and regulatory T cell
function, and (3) enhancement in depth and breadth of the adaptive
response including post vaccination. Antagonistic Abs had minimal to no
effect on the immune response, while agonistic Abs augmented type
1-cytokines (IFNg and TNFa) and cytotoxic markers, including CD107a,
perforin, and granzyme. Surprisingly, in a murine autoimmune toxicity
model established with prior immune checkpoint agonists, agonists of the
TIITG elicited no apparent adverse effects, autoimmune or otherwise.
Finally, human xenograft models support antitumor activity across over a
dozen tumor histologies as monotherapy in addition to synergy with
anti-PD1.In summary, using a novel screening technique we uncovered
promising immune targets for cancer therapy. The first of which, TIITG,
has completed lead selection and is being prepared to enter a
first-in-human clinical trial.

