Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting an unconventional kinase-invasion axis in breast cancer
metastasis


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is associated with poor survival,
metastatic recurrence, increased mortality, and has few viable
therapeutic options. Given the high mortality associated with metastasis
of this disease, discovery of therapeutics targeting the metastasis axis
is imperative. Kinases have been demonstrated to have an essential role
in regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process
involved in the initiation of cancer metastasis. Elucidating specific
signaling pathways that promote EMT has the potential to provide novel
targeting strategies in the treatment of TNBC. Here we demonstrate a
partially non-selective polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) inhibitor, GSK346294,
is capable of EMT reversal in phenotypically mesenchymal TNBC cell lines,
as evidenced by enhanced E-cadherin expression and loss of cellular
migration potential. Structurally analogous but highly specific PLK
inhibitors did not exhibit similar EMT changes, which led us to
investigate off-target kinases inhibited by GSK346294. Follow-up kinase
profiling studies revealed members of the NEver-in-mitosis-related Kinase
family (NEK5 and NEK9) as additional kinases inhibited by GSK346294,
leading us to investigate their individual roles in the progression of
EMT. NEK5 overexpression in a non-invasive breast cancer cell line
increased both migration and invasion in trans-well assays. Additionally,
enhanced NEK5 expression altered the TNBC gene expression profile,
enhancing expression of genes associated with growth factor signaling
(MET, EGFR) and the mesenchymal gene signature (SLUG, VIM). To date, no
studies exist which delineate the regulatory roles of NEK5 and NEK9 in
EMT or cellular invasion/motility. Further investigation into the
function of NEK5 and/or NEK9 in the metastatic progression may provide
novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of TNBC, the implication of
which could impact the treatment and management of neoplastic disease and
metastasis beyond breast cancer.

