Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of hepatocyte growth factor, genistein and daidzein
concentrations as a biomarker for gastric cancer risk: A nested
case-control study


Backgrounds: Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) induces ERK pathway which is
associated with carcinogenesis by promoting cell proliferation.
Inhibition of ERK signal transduction pathways by genistein, one of the
isoflavones, has been reported by several in vitro studies. Therefore,
gastric cancer risk by HGF and isoflavone concentrations was evaluated in
this study.Methods: Nested case-control study with 93 gastric cancer
cases and 1:1 matched controls was conducted within the Korean
Multi-center Cancer Cohort (KMCC). HGF and ISF (genistein, daidzein,
equol) concentrations in plasma were measured with enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay, respectively.
Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) on gastric
cancer risk according to HGF and ISF level was calculated using
conditional logistic regression models.Results: Compared to the group
with low level of HGF (Backgrounds: Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
induces ERK pathway which is associated with carcinogenesis by promoting
cell proliferation. Inhibition of ERK signal transduction pathways by
genistein, one of the isoflavones, has been reported by several in vitro
studies. Therefore, gastric cancer risk by HGF and isoflavone
concentrations was evaluated in this study.Methods: Nested case-control
study with 93 gastric cancer cases and 1:1 matched controls was conducted
within the Korean Multi-center Cancer Cohort (KMCC). HGF and ISF
(genistein, daidzein, equol) concentrations in plasma were measured with
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay,
respectively. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) on
gastric cancer risk according to HGF and ISF level was calculated using
conditional logistic regression models.Results: Compared to the group
with low level of HGF (<315pg/mL) and high level of genistein
(212.5nmol/L), the group having high level of HGF and lower level of
genistein was associated with increased gastric cancer risk (OR = 5.08,
95% CI = 1.39-18.57). Elevated gastric cancer risk in the subjects having
high HGF level and low daidzein level than subjects with low HGF and high
daidzein levels was also shown (OR = 3.67, 95% CI = 1.18-11.45). There
was significant interaction between HGF and genistein levels on gastric
cancer was found (p for interactionBackgrounds: Hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF) induces ERK pathway which is associated with carcinogenesis by
promoting cell proliferation. Inhibition of ERK signal transduction
pathways by genistein, one of the isoflavones, has been reported by
several in vitro studies. Therefore, gastric cancer risk by HGF and
isoflavone concentrations was evaluated in this study.Methods: Nested
case-control study with 93 gastric cancer cases and 1:1 matched controls
was conducted within the Korean Multi-center Cancer Cohort (KMCC). HGF
and ISF (genistein, daidzein, equol) concentrations in plasma were
measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and time-resolved
fluoroimmunoassay, respectively. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (95% CIs) on gastric cancer risk according to HGF and ISF level
was calculated using conditional logistic regression models.Results:
Compared to the group with low level of HGF (<315pg/mL) and high level of
genistein (212.5nmol/L), the group having high level of HGF and lower
level of genistein was associated with increased gastric cancer risk (OR
= 5.08, 95% CI = 1.39-18.57). Elevated gastric cancer risk in the
subjects having high HGF level and low daidzein level than subjects with
low HGF and high daidzein levels was also shown (OR = 3.67, 95% CI =
1.18-11.45). There was significant interaction between HGF and genistein
levels on gastric cancer was found (p for interaction<0.01). Continual
increase in gastric cancer risk according to the counts of risky status
by HGF, genistein, and daidzein levels was found (p for trend =
0.03).Conclusion: Our study suggests that combination of HGF, genistein
and daidzein concentrations has potential as a biomarker for gastric
cancer risk.

