Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered signal transduction in Isocitrate Dehydrogenase (IDH)
mutated glioblastomas and implication on precision medicine


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common form of primary brain cancer and
remains one of the most devastating of human diseases. One recurrent
physiologic states in glioblastoma is defined by mutation of the
Isocitrate Dehydrogenase (IDH) genes. IDH genes encode enzymes that
catalyze oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate. Nearly all IDH
mutations in GBM involve substitution of arginine 132 of IDH1 with
histidine (IDH1-R132H). The mutant protein loses the capacity to carry
out its innate function and instead produces 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG).
The aberrant production of 2HG, in turn, alters the epigenetic landscape
in these GBM cells. While it is clear that IDH1 mutated GBMs harbor a
distinct cell state, the signaling cascades contributing to this biology
remain poorly understood.Using published mRNA signatures associated with
EGFR activation, we demonstrate that IDH mutated GBMs harbored decreased
EGFR signaling using four different GBM cohorts, including the Chinese
Glioma Genome Atlas(CGGA; n = 155), the REMBRANDT dataset (n = 288), The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; n = 406), and the UCSD cohort (n = 25).
Further analysis revealed that IDH mutated clinical specimens and cell
lines harbored lowered mRNA levels for EGFR and H-Ras. These suppressions
were associated with increased deposition of the repressive histone
markers, H3K9me3 and H3K27me3, in the EGFR and H-Ras promoter regions.
Finally, the exogenous expression of IDH1-R132H conferred resistance to
the EGFR inhibitor, Gefitinib, suggesting IDH1 mutation as a predictive
biomarker for EGFR inhibitor response in GBM patients.We further analyzed
mRNA signatures associated with p53 activation and DNA damage
accumulation in IDH mutated GBMs. We found that that IDH mutated
specimens exhibited lowered level of signatures associated with p53
activation, suggesting decreased DNA damage accumulation. We subsequently
determined whether this state of lowered DNA damage accumulation is
associated with altered sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. Exogenous
expression of IDH1-R132H in multiple glioblastoma and glial lines
conferred increased resistance to temozolomide (TMZ). This resistance is
associated with decreased accumulation of -H2AX. Consistently, we found
that in a prospective glioblastoma registry of 274 GBM patients, IDH
mutation is associated with poor response to TMZ (pGlioblastoma (GBM) is
the most common form of primary brain cancer and remains one of the most
devastating of human diseases. One recurrent physiologic states in
glioblastoma is defined by mutation of the Isocitrate Dehydrogenase (IDH)
genes. IDH genes encode enzymes that catalyze oxidative decarboxylation
of isocitrate. Nearly all IDH mutations in GBM involve substitution of
arginine 132 of IDH1 with histidine (IDH1-R132H). The mutant protein
loses the capacity to carry out its innate function and instead produces
2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG). The aberrant production of 2HG, in turn, alters
the epigenetic landscape in these GBM cells. While it is clear that IDH1
mutated GBMs harbor a distinct cell state, the signaling cascades
contributing to this biology remain poorly understood.Using published
mRNA signatures associated with EGFR activation, we demonstrate that IDH
mutated GBMs harbored decreased EGFR signaling using four different GBM
cohorts, including the Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas(CGGA; n = 155), the
REMBRANDT dataset (n = 288), The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; n = 406), and
the UCSD cohort (n = 25). Further analysis revealed that IDH mutated
clinical specimens and cell lines harbored lowered mRNA levels for EGFR
and H-Ras. These suppressions were associated with increased deposition
of the repressive histone markers, H3K9me3 and H3K27me3, in the EGFR and
H-Ras promoter regions. Finally, the exogenous expression of IDH1-R132H
conferred resistance to the EGFR inhibitor, Gefitinib, suggesting IDH1
mutation as a predictive biomarker for EGFR inhibitor response in GBM
patients.We further analyzed mRNA signatures associated with p53
activation and DNA damage accumulation in IDH mutated GBMs. We found that
that IDH mutated specimens exhibited lowered level of signatures
associated with p53 activation, suggesting decreased DNA damage
accumulation. We subsequently determined whether this state of lowered
DNA damage accumulation is associated with altered sensitivity to DNA
damaging agents. Exogenous expression of IDH1-R132H in multiple
glioblastoma and glial lines conferred increased resistance to
temozolomide (TMZ). This resistance is associated with decreased
accumulation of -H2AX. Consistently, we found that in a prospective
glioblastoma registry of 274 GBM patients, IDH mutation is associated
with poor response to TMZ (p<0.001).In contrast to EGFR and p53
signaling, where IDH mutation is associated with pathway suppression, we
found an association between elevated MYC expression and IDH mutation in
both clinical specimens and cell-line models. Moreover, exogenous
IDH1-R132H expression is associated with increased sensitivity to agents
that suppress MYC expression, including LSD1 inhibitors. These results
suggest potential therapeutic opportunities to target IDH mutated GBMs
through epigenetic modulation of MYC expression.

