Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen deprivation therapy potentiates the efficacy of vascular
targeted photodynamic therapy of prostate cancer xenografts


Focal therapies for prostate cancer offer the possibility of less side
effects than more aggressive interventions for organ-confined tumors.
Vascular targeted photodynamic therapy (VTP) is being investigated in
phase II and phase III clinical trials, and relies upon rapid, free
radical-mediated destruction of tumor vasculature following
photoactivation of a systemic prodrug. In a phase II trial, >80% of
patients did not have detectable cancer in prostate biopsies taken 6
months after VTP treatment. Although these early results are encouraging,
VTP efficacy could potentially be improved upon by combining with other
therapies. Using the LNCaP-AR prostate cancer model system, we employed
microarrays and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to identify potential
druggable pathways active in tumors exposed to VTP. Three to six hours
post-VTP, androgen responsive gene sets were enriched, suggesting that
the androgen receptor (AR) may be a viable target in combination with
VTP. We tested this hypothesis in mice bearing LNCaP-AR xenograft tumors
by using the AR pathway inhibitors degarelix (to achieve pharmacological
castration) or enzalutamide (AR antagonist), alone or in combination with
VTP. Degarelix was administered as a single 0.5-1 mg dose 3 days prior to
initiation of VTP, while enzalutamide was given daily for two weeks total
both before and after VTP. Serum measurements of prostate specific
antigen (PSA) were used as a readout of AR activity. Compared to either
AR pathway inhibitor or VTP used alone, degarelix or enzalutamide in
combination with VTP significantly inhibited tumor growth. A sharp
decline in serum PSA confirmed AR inhibition. Combined degarelix plus VTP
treated tumors displayed intense TUNEL staining 7 days post-treatment,
supporting an increased apoptotic frequency underlying the effect on
tumor inhibition. In prostate cancer treated with VTP, compensatory acute
upregulation of pro-survival AR signaling may occur. These findings may
warrant investigation of combination with androgen deprivation therapy in
future clinical trials utilizing VTP for prostate cancer.

