Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TfhX13 cells link breast cancer immune suppression and adaptive
memory


Background:Previously, we identified PD-1hiCD200hiCD4+ follicular helper
T (Tfh) cells infiltrating human breast cancer (BC TIL) as principal
producers of the B cell chemoattractant CXCL13 and correlated their
presence with improved patient outcome. Our recent efforts have focused
on understanding the relationship between Tfh, Th1 and Treg BC TIL,
investigating the role(s) that CXCL13+CD4+ TIL play in tumor immunity and
determining the condition(s) that favor their
differentiation.Methods:Ten-color flow cytometry was used to characterize
CD4+ TIL subpopulations in fresh tissues. Confocal microscopy was
employed to study the in situ interaction between CXCL13+CD4+ T cells and
B cells. CXCL13 was induced in normal PBMC in vitro.Results:Our data
reveal that an exacerbated Treg response accompanies high CXCL13
expression within the activated CD4+ TIL compartment in BC. Th1
responses, using IFN- expression as a barometer, are limited. CXCL13+CD4+
TIL display both similar and distinct characteristics compared to their
tonsillar counterparts. Tumor bed-localized CXCL13+ TIL, external to
tertiary lymphoid structure (TLS) germinal centers (GC), are abundant in
some tumors with extensive lymphoid infiltrates. Based on our
observations, we designate the CXCL13+CD4+ TIL as TfhX13 cells.A
combination of PD-1 and ICOS can clearly segregate the CD4+ TIL into
three distinct subpopulations: PD-1loICOSlo, PD-1hiICOSint and
PD-1intICOShi. The PD-1hiICOSint TIL are enriched in TfhX13 and Th1 cells
while the PD-1intICOShi TIL are principally FoxP3hi Treg. A linear
correlation is observed between these two TIL subpopulations in 90% of BC
while the remaining 10% contain an unbalanced, higher level of
PD-1intICOShi Treg. qRT-PCR data confirmed the significant positive
prognostic value of CXCL13 gene expression with ICOS expression signaling
the adverse effects of Treg cell dominance observed in some BC. TfhX13
TIL abundance appears to parallel both a GC and post-TLS memory B cell
presence. Confocal microscopy revealed TfhX13 TIL interact directly with
B cells and plasma cells, potentially guiding B cell migration through
the tumor and promoting TLS formation with functional GC. Finally, we
show that IL-2 deprivation is critical for inducing CXCL13 while TGF-1
treatment reduces IFN- and increases FoxP3 expression in normal CD4+ T
cells.Conclusion:IL-2 consumption by Treg cells was shown to be essential
for murine Tfh cell development and a subsequent GC response. Supported
by this observation, our data indicate that TfhX13 cell differentiation
is an important element of the Tfh cell program and suggests their
propagation in BC occurs in response to Treg accumulation. CXCL13
expression may activate adaptive memory responses dependent upon in situ
B cell maturation and thereby initiate a secondary attempt at protective
anti-tumor immunity in the face of Treg-mediated immune suppression.

