Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteasome subunit composition contributes to unusually poor
sensitivity of H727 cells to carfilzomib


Background: While proteasome inhibitors (PIs) have significantly improved
the survival of multiple myeloma (MM) patients, significant subsets of MM
patients do not respond to the PI- based therapy. Currently, mechanisms
of de novo PI resistance in these patients remain completely unknown. In
this study, we aim to identify previously unexplored mechanisms of de
novo carfilzomib (Cfz) resistance using H727 cancer cells with poor
sensitivity to carfilzomib.Results: Our carfilzomib sensitivity
investigation in a panel of 16 cancer cell lines revealed that H727 lung
cancer cells are markedly resistant to Cfz compared to other cell lines.
H727 cells displayed no detectable P-glycoprotein (P-gp) expression and
subsequently were not sensitized by reversin 121 (a P-gp inhibitor) to
Cfz, ruling out the involvement of P-gp in the resistance of H727 cells
to Cfz. Interestingly, we found that H727 cells are killed by PYR-41
(ubiquitin activating enzyme E1 inhibitor) and WP-1130 (deubiquitinase
inhibitor) as effectively as Cfz- sensitive H23 cells, suggesting that
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is essential in H727 cells as in H23 cells.
In addition, knock-down of proteasome 7 subunit, a component required for
the assembly of a proteasome -ring and thereby a 20S proteasome complex,
resulted in an almost complete cell death, indicating that the proteasome
is indispensable for the survival of H727 cells. Intriguingly, despite
their poor sensitivity to Cfz, H727 cells were highly sensitive to other
structurally distinguished PIs such as bortezomib, epoxomicin, and
UK-101. Finally, exposure of H727 cells to interferon- (IFN-), which has
been widely used as a biochemical tool to switch cellular proteasome
catalytic subunit composition to the one containing immunoproteasome
subunits, sensitized H727 cells to Cfz (Changing IC50 values from 1,355
nM to 185 nM). On the contrary, IFN- pretreatment did not affect the
sensitivity of H23 cells to Cfz.Conclusion: We report that H727 cells
have a poor sensitivity to carfilzomib (or de novo resistance to Cfz),
and that previously reported resistance mechanism involving P-gp
upregulation does not play a role. Given our data presented here, we
conclude that de novo Cfz resistance of H727 cells may be attributed to
distinguished proteasome subunit composition. We believe that our
investigation using cancer cell line models may provide important
insights into understanding the mechanisms of de novo PI resistance in
clinic.

