Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ATP6V1C2 (a vacuolar-ATPase gene) is a novel early
prognosticator for colorectal cancer


Background: Vacuolar (v) -ATPases are expressed in certain tissues and
cell types, and hypothesized to detoxify intracellular environments by
expelling protons across plasma membranes, thereby contributing to
acidified extracellular environments of solid tumors. Acidic
microenvironments suppress anti-cancer cytotoxic T-cells and activate
metalloproteinases, promoting tumor cell survival, motility and invasion.
Scarce nutrients, hypoxia, and accelerated metabolism that favor pathways
that produce excess intracellular protons by promoting glycolysis and
lactic acid fermentation, lead to selection of tumor cells that adapted
to and countered toxic/acidic cytoplasm. It is unclear whether colorectal
cancers (CRCs) upregulate proton-expelling mechanisms, and whether
associated genes are prognostic biomarkers.Aim: We hypothesized that
adaptations through upregulation of proton transporting genes is
prognostic for CRC. This study aims to identify transcriptional
adaptations that CRCs undergo in response to acidic microenvironments and
evaluate their prognostic value in multiple cohorts of CRC
patients.Methods: Comprehensive microarray data from 222 CRCs obtained
from The Cancer Genome Atlas were used to screen for genes upregulated in
CRCs vs. normal mucosae, and stage III and IV vs. early staged tumors.
Filtered genes involved in metabolite transport were tested for their
ability to predict survival using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis with a
stringent median cutoff. A second cohort was used to corroborate initial
findings. A third cohort of matching polyps and adenomas was used to
determine if candidate gene upregulation can be detected in pre-cancerous
lesions. Functional analysis was performed using siRNA knockdown to
determine if the candidate gene is critical for CRC
proliferation.Results: Progressive upregulation of ATP6V1C2 from early to
late stage CRCs was detected in two separate multinational patient
cohorts, where its high expression was correlated with shorter overall
survival. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis
confirmed that ATP6V1C2 expression successfully discriminated between
cancerous and non-cancer tissues. Fisher's exact test confirmed that high
ATP6V1C2 expression correlated with advanced depth of invasion (T stage),
and distant and liver metastasis. ATP6V1C2 expression was increased in
pre-cancerous polyps. SiRNA knockdown of ATP6V1C2 inhibited cell
proliferation in high expressing cell lines (HCT116 and HCT15) but not in
low expressing RKO and HT29.

