Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Remarkably stable sex-ratio in sporadic kidney cancer incidence


Background: Patterns of sex-disparity in cancer incidence can provide
clues on risk factors and susceptibility to the disease. While known
kidney cancer genetic syndromes follow an autosomal dominant inheritance
and equally affect males and females, kidney cancer occurs predominantly
outside a syndromic context (97% of cases are sporadic) and more commonly
in males than females.Methods: We used cancer registry data from 10
registries around the world, from countries showing large variations in
kidney cancer incidence in 2012 (from 5.2 to 16.7/100,000 person-years)
and with at least 20 years of registration. Using age-standardized
incidence rate (on the World population), we compared the male-to-female
sex-ratio in incidence rates across registries and over time. We also
evaluated whether the sex-ratio varied by categories of age at diagnosis.
Finally, we compared the kidney cancer-specific mortality after diagnosis
in males and females in 2,969 cases using Cox regression model.Results
and interpretation: From 1985 to 2005, the sex-ratio was on average 2.0
and showed little variation across countries: it was 1.7 in Iceland; 1.8
in Australia and Finland; 1.9 in the UK and Norway; 2.0 in Singapore,
Estonia, the Czech Republic, and the USA; and 2.1 in Slovenia. The
sex-ratios were also remarkably stable in all registries over time,
arguing against the role of known risk factors such as tobacco smoking to
which the proportion of exposed women has evolved drastically in the last
50 years. In line with the autosomal dominant inheritance, sex-ratio was
on average 1.0 in younger ages and progressively increased to stabilize
from around 40 years old on. In particular the ratio remained stable at
older ages, which suggests that estrogen levels are unlikely to account
for the lower risk experienced by women. In contrast to the observed
difference in incidence, our survival analysis showed similar survival
rates in both sexes after adjustment for age and stage at
diagnosis.Conclusion: Our results suggest that the difference in kidney
cancer incidence rates between males and females are not due to varying
prevalence of known risk factors or a protection by sex hormones. While
the susceptibility to the disease varies, the tumor behavior seems
similar in males and females as shown by similar survival rates.

