Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of immune tolerance mechanisms in pulmonary squamous
cell and adenocarcinomas - how to interfere beyond PDL1 blockade


Introduction: Immunotherapy has emerged as a new tool to treat patients
with NSCLC. Programmed death ligand 1 (PDL1) expressed on carcinoma cells
serve as a marker predicting the response of anti-PDL antibody therapy.
However, the results of clinical studies are conflicting as patients
might profit from therapy despite not expressing PDL1 on their tumors,
and also some tumors expressing PDL1 do not respond to therapy. It is
evident that NSCLC cells use other mechanisms of immunotolerance.Methods:
Surgically removed specimen of lung cancer are evaluated for infiltrating
innate as well as specific immune cell in tumor centers and invasive
front. In addition bronchoalveolar lavage is taken simultaneously and
evaluated by flow cytometry for the same immune cells as the tissues.
These cell types are evaluated: dendritic cells (classical, plasmocytoid,
monocytoid), macrophages (M1 and M2), lymphocytes of Bcell lineage,
lymphocytes of Tcell lineage, regulatory Tcells, natural killer cells. In
addition tumor cells and lymphocytes are studied for their expression of
PD1, PDL1, and PDL2, respectivelyResults and discussion: Within lung
cancer several different mechanisms of inducing immune tolerance emerged:
PD1-PDL1 interaction of tumor cells and CD8 lymphocytes, plasmocytoid as
well as monocytoid dendritic cell induced downregulation of cytotoxic
Tcell action, influx of myeloid derived cells inducing immune tolerance
against tumor cells, M2 macrophage polarization with enhancement of
stroma remodeling for tumor cell invasion and reduced Tcell reaction,
increase of Treg cells inducing immune tolerance. Some of these
mechanisms are seen in combination with PD1-PDL1 induced immune
tolerance. This might explain, why some patients do not benefit from
anti-PDL1 therapy. BAL emerged as a powerful tool in the evaluation of
the immune reaction in NSCLC patients and might be a tool for evaluation
of immune responses as well as a diagnostic tool to evaluate resistance
mechanisms.

