Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mutational landscape of mucinous carcinomas of the breast


Background: Mucinous breast carcinoma (MBC) is a special histologic type
of breast cancer, comprising approximately 2% of all invasive breast
carcinomas. Morphologically, MBCs are characterized by clusters of tumor
cells floating in large amounts of extracellular mucin. MBCs are
preferentially of low histologic grade and estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive and HER2-negative. MBCs have been shown to lack the
hallmark 1q gains and 16q losses found in low-grade ER-positive invasive
ductal carcinomas of no special type (IDC-NSTs). Here we sought to
characterize the mutational landscape and copy number alterations (CNA)
of MBCs by whole exome sequencing analysis.Material and Methods: Frozen
sections from 25 pure MBCs (n = 13 mucinous A (paucicellular), n = 12
mucinous B (hypercellular)) were subjected to microdissection to ensure a
tumor cell content >85%. In addition, five cases of mixed mucinous
carcinomas composed of mucinous and IDC-NST components were included in
this study. In these cases, the MBC and IDC-NST components were
microdissected separately. DNA samples extracted from microdissected
tumors and matched normal counterparts were subjected to whole exome
sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Somatic single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) were identified using MuTect and somatic insertions and deletions
(indels) were identified using Strelka and Varscan2. Somatic CNAs were
defined using FACETS. Mutational frequencies in MBCs were compared to
those of luminal IDC-NSTs from The Cancer Genome Atlas.Results: A median
of 26 (range 5-71) non-synonymous SNVs and indels were identified per
MBC. GATA3, mutated in 28% of cases, was the only significantly mutated
gene as defined by MutSigCV (qBackground: Mucinous breast carcinoma (MBC)
is a special histologic type of breast cancer, comprising approximately
2% of all invasive breast carcinomas. Morphologically, MBCs are
characterized by clusters of tumor cells floating in large amounts of
extracellular mucin. MBCs are preferentially of low histologic grade and
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and HER2-negative. MBCs have been shown
to lack the hallmark 1q gains and 16q losses found in low-grade
ER-positive invasive ductal carcinomas of no special type (IDC-NSTs).
Here we sought to characterize the mutational landscape and copy number
alterations (CNA) of MBCs by whole exome sequencing analysis.Material and
Methods: Frozen sections from 25 pure MBCs (n = 13 mucinous A
(paucicellular), n = 12 mucinous B (hypercellular)) were subjected to
microdissection to ensure a tumor cell content >85%. In addition, five
cases of mixed mucinous carcinomas composed of mucinous and IDC-NST
components were included in this study. In these cases, the MBC and
IDC-NST components were microdissected separately. DNA samples extracted
from microdissected tumors and matched normal counterparts were subjected
to whole exome sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Somatic single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) were identified using MuTect and somatic
insertions and deletions (indels) were identified using Strelka and
Varscan2. Somatic CNAs were defined using FACETS. Mutational frequencies
in MBCs were compared to those of luminal IDC-NSTs from The Cancer Genome
Atlas.Results: A median of 26 (range 5-71) non-synonymous SNVs and indels
were identified per MBC. GATA3, mutated in 28% of cases, was the only
significantly mutated gene as defined by MutSigCV (q<0.1). Compared to
IDC-NSTs of luminal molecular subtype, MBCs were found to harbor
significantly fewer mutations in TP53 (3% vs 19%, pBackground: Mucinous
breast carcinoma (MBC) is a special histologic type of breast cancer,
comprising approximately 2% of all invasive breast carcinomas.
Morphologically, MBCs are characterized by clusters of tumor cells
floating in large amounts of extracellular mucin. MBCs are preferentially
of low histologic grade and estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and
HER2-negative. MBCs have been shown to lack the hallmark 1q gains and 16q
losses found in low-grade ER-positive invasive ductal carcinomas of no
special type (IDC-NSTs). Here we sought to characterize the mutational
landscape and copy number alterations (CNA) of MBCs by whole exome
sequencing analysis.Material and Methods: Frozen sections from 25 pure
MBCs (n = 13 mucinous A (paucicellular), n = 12 mucinous B
(hypercellular)) were subjected to microdissection to ensure a tumor cell
content >85%. In addition, five cases of mixed mucinous carcinomas
composed of mucinous and IDC-NST components were included in this study.
In these cases, the MBC and IDC-NST components were microdissected
separately. DNA samples extracted from microdissected tumors and matched
normal counterparts were subjected to whole exome sequencing on an
Illumina HiSeq2000. Somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) were
identified using MuTect and somatic insertions and deletions (indels)
were identified using Strelka and Varscan2. Somatic CNAs were defined
using FACETS. Mutational frequencies in MBCs were compared to those of
luminal IDC-NSTs from The Cancer Genome Atlas.Results: A median of 26
(range 5-71) non-synonymous SNVs and indels were identified per MBC.
GATA3, mutated in 28% of cases, was the only significantly mutated gene
as defined by MutSigCV (q<0.1). Compared to IDC-NSTs of luminal molecular
subtype, MBCs were found to harbor significantly fewer mutations in TP53
(3% vs 19%, p<0.001) and PIK3CA (6% vs 41%, pBackground: Mucinous breast
carcinoma (MBC) is a special histologic type of breast cancer, comprising
approximately 2% of all invasive breast carcinomas. Morphologically, MBCs
are characterized by clusters of tumor cells floating in large amounts of
extracellular mucin. MBCs are preferentially of low histologic grade and
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and HER2-negative. MBCs have been shown
to lack the hallmark 1q gains and 16q losses found in low-grade
ER-positive invasive ductal carcinomas of no special type (IDC-NSTs).
Here we sought to characterize the mutational landscape and copy number
alterations (CNA) of MBCs by whole exome sequencing analysis.Material and
Methods: Frozen sections from 25 pure MBCs (n = 13 mucinous A
(paucicellular), n = 12 mucinous B (hypercellular)) were subjected to
microdissection to ensure a tumor cell content >85%. In addition, five
cases of mixed mucinous carcinomas composed of mucinous and IDC-NST
components were included in this study. In these cases, the MBC and
IDC-NST components were microdissected separately. DNA samples extracted
from microdissected tumors and matched normal counterparts were subjected
to whole exome sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Somatic single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) were identified using MuTect and somatic
insertions and deletions (indels) were identified using Strelka and
Varscan2. Somatic CNAs were defined using FACETS. Mutational frequencies
in MBCs were compared to those of luminal IDC-NSTs from The Cancer Genome
Atlas.Results: A median of 26 (range 5-71) non-synonymous SNVs and indels
were identified per MBC. GATA3, mutated in 28% of cases, was the only
significantly mutated gene as defined by MutSigCV (q<0.1). Compared to
IDC-NSTs of luminal molecular subtype, MBCs were found to harbor
significantly fewer mutations in TP53 (3% vs 19%, p<0.001) and PIK3CA (6%
vs 41%, p<0.001). Mucinous subtypes A and B did not differ in terms of
mutations and/ or CNAs, whereas MBCs of mixed phenotype harbored a
greater extent of genomic instability. While MBC and IDC-NST components
of mixed MBCs shared the majority of the somatic genetic alterations,
indicating their clonal relatedness, mutations and CNAs restricted to
either the MBC or the IDC-NST components were also identified.
Furthermore, CNA analysis confirmed our previous observations that MBCs,
contrary to low-grade ER-positive IDC-NSTs, lack concurrent copy number
gains of 1q and 16p and losses of 16q.Conclusions: Our data suggest that
the repertoires of somatic mutations and gene CNAs of MBCs are distinct
from those of luminal IDC-NSTs, and that MBCs are an entity distinct from
low-grade ER-positive IDC-NSTs not only at the morphologic but also at
the genetic level.

