Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new, highly sensitive ALK antibody improves the screening of
rearranged-ALK by IHC


All non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients are recommended to be
screened for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-rearrangement despite its
low occurrence (All non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients are
recommended to be screened for anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK)-rearrangement despite its low occurrence (< 7%). This is due to
recent advances in treatment for patients with ALK-positive NSCLC with
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors Crizotinib and Ceritini. Current
rearranged-ALK testing includes fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Despite the high sensitivities and
specificities, the limitations of the first two assays include
time-consuming, infeasible, and specialized techniques that make them
unsuitable for the routine screening for which IHC has been proposed.
However, the biggest obstacle to detecting rearranged-ALK in lung cancer
patients by IHC is the lack of highly sensitive ALK antibodies that
detect the extremely low abundance of ALK in patients. To overcome this
limitation, we have developed an ALK mouse monoclonal antibody (clone
OTI1A4) with higher sensitivity in comparison to a rabbit ALK antibody
(clone D5F3). Moreover, OTI1A4 identified ALK-positive NSCLC samples
(16/16 cases) and showed negative staining for ALK-negative samples
(11/11 cases) previously validated by FISH (10/16 ALK-positive cases) or
qPCR (10/16 ALK-positive cases). This indicated the potential advantage
of using clone OTI1A4 over FISH or qPCR to detect ALK rearrangements.
Lastly, there was 100% concordance between OTI1A4 and D5F3 in detecting
ALK-rearranged NSCLC samples previously confirmed by FISH (76
ALK-positive and 438 ALK-negative samples). These results support the
possibility that ALK clone OTI1A4 could be used for routine screening of
patients with ALK-positive NSCLC by IHC.

