Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spliceosome inhibition as novel strategy against diffuse malignant
peritoneal mesothelioma


Background: Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma (DMPM) is an
aggressive tumor of the lining of the abdomen, characterized by late
clinical symptoms and poor prognosis. Systemic chemotherapy together with
cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic therapy has been
introduced as the best treatment option, resulting in an overall 5-year
survival rate of approximately 50%. To further increase survival, novel
drugs targeting key molecular factors in DMPM are warranted. Analogous to
pleural mesothelioma, such a factor may be alternative splicing which can
be modulated by inhibiting the SF3B subunit of the spliceosome. This
strategy is an emerging therapeutic opportunity for a number of solid
tumors and hematological malignancies. In particular, the spliceosome
inhibitor Pladienolide B (PB) has low nanomolar IC50 values against a
range of cancer cell lines and leukemic cells, but no data are available
regarding its antitumor efficacy in DMPM.Aims: This study investigates
(1) the activity of PB (alone or in combination with standard
chemotherapeutics) in primary peritoneal mesothelioma cells through in
vitro and in vivo assays, and (2) the molecular mechanisms of splicing
inhibition through whole-genome RNA-seq and PCR of selected genes
involved in apoptosis and invasion.Methods: The antiproliferative effect
of PB was investigated using the SRB assay on two primary mesothelioma
cell cultures (MESOII and STO), obtained from resected tumors with
well-annotated clinical characteristics. Further in vitro studies were
performed to evaluate the pro-apoptotic and anti-invasive activities,
while splicing profiles of treated and untreated cells were determined
with RNA-seq.Results: PB impaired DMPM cell growth in a dose-dependent
manner, with IC50 values of 1.57 0.30 nM in MESOII and 1.18 0.16 nM in
STO (n = 3, mean standard deviation).The specific activity on the
spliceosome was demonstrated by PB induced time- and dose-dependent
alterations of splicing patterns for several apoptotic genes, such as
Mcl-1, Bcl-X, Fas, and for the pro-metastatic tyrosine kinase receptor
RON, which was shifted to its un-spliced and non-functional variant. In
addition, RNA-seq showed several differentially expressed alternatively
spliced genes in PB treated samples. The DMPM cells have also been
genetically engineered to express Firefly- and Gaussia- luciferases,
enabling monitoring of tumor growth inhibition by PB in in vivo
orthotopic models.Conclusions: These data provide evidence that PB has a
strong antitumor activity against relevant models of DPMP, associated
with modulation of splicing, induction of apoptosis and inhibition of
invasion. RNA-seq represents a powerful tool for the identification of
alternatively spliced genes that could serve as useful diagnostic markers
as well as potential therapeutic targets for DMPM.

