Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular Survivin uptake by cancer cells via
receptor-mediated endocytosis


The tumor microenvironment is a crucial player in tumorigenesis,
proliferation, and survival. Communication between its various components
through microvesicular trafficking is central to the interaction between
tumor cells and the surrounding milieu. Exosomes, nanovesicles released
by all cell types, carry various proteins and nucleic acids. Once
released into the extracellular environment, exosomes are taken up by
surrounding cells or the exosomes travel in various bodily fluids to
reach distant parts of the body. Those exosomes derived from tumor cells
contain proteins and nucleic acids essential to the development and
maintenance of tumors. One such protein, Survivin, a member of the
Inhibitor of Apoptosis (IAP) protein family, has been identified in
virtually all cancer cells. Survivin function is closely linked with
subcellular location. Nuclear Survivin plays a key role in cell division
and cell cycle regulation as a member of the chromosome passenger
complex. Cytosolic and mitochondrial Survivin primarily facilitate the
inhibition of apoptosis. Recent research has identified a unique pool of
Survivin in the extracellular environment. Functions tied to this
location are as yet undefined, however, evidence suggests that this
population may contribute to increased proliferation, invasiveness and
therapeutic resistance when taken into recipient cancer cells.Using
tandem affinity purification we have identified a relationship between
Survivin and TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1), as well as transferrin receptor 2
(TfR2). Both of these receptors play a role in endocytosis of
extracellular proteins. Transferrin receptors are upregulated on cancer
cells to facilitate the increased iron demand of proliferating cells. We
therefore hypothesize that exosomal Survivin is taken up by adjacent
cancer cells via receptor-mediated endocytosis. We have shown that in the
presence of antibodies to these receptors, there is a decreased uptake of
extracellular Survivin (from conditioned media). Results were similar
when conditioned media was introduced to HeLa cells with siRNA knockdowns
of each receptor, as well as to CHO cells deficient in these receptors.
We conclude that uptake of extracellular Survivin into cancer cells is
dependent upon these two endocytosis receptors. The relationship of
Survivin and exosomes in the extracellular environment is indicative that
exosomes transport Survivin out of tumor cells and into the surroundings.
These results suggest that exosomal Survivin enters cancer cells by way
of receptor-mediated endocytosis. Understanding this mechanism of
signaling between cancer cells shows the potential intercellular
trafficking of oncoproteins may play in tumor maintenance and
progression. It also provides us with a novel means to combat the
resulting enhanced aggressive nature of the disease.

