Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genes associated with neuronal development, including splicing
regulatory factors, increase in expression across epithelial-mesenchymal
transition


The program by which epithelial cells lose their polarity and close
contacts with neighboring cells and acquire migratory and invasive
properties is known as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Initially
identified as a critical developmental process, EMT is now understood to
occur during cancer, where it has been shown to confer resistance to
senescence and apoptosis. Previous work indicates that cancer cells that
escape the site of the primary tumor hijack at least a portion of the EMT
program to increase their invasive properties and metastasize. Earlier
work in the field has focused on cell signaling and transcriptional
regulation changes that lead to EMT, but changes in the gene expression
and post-transcriptional regulation of the cell have only recently become
the focus of study. We characterized gene expression and splicing across
EMT in the luminal epithelial MCF7ras SLUG+SOX9 breast cancer cell line
by collecting samples at 2-day intervals across its 6-day transition and
profiling the RNA by RNA-seq. We found over 4,000 significantly changing
genes, and that the majority of gene expression and splicing changes
occurred in the first two days of the transition, with few changes noted
between days 4 and 6. Genes that changed could be broadly categorized
into those whose expression decreased, increased, or peaked in the middle
of the transition before decreasing. Intriguingly, genes whose expression
increased during EMT were enriched for gene ontology terms related to
cell signaling and neuronal development. We specifically observed
increased expression of mRNAs encoding splicing factors and other
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) associated with neuronal development, in
contrast to the majority of RBPs whose expression decreases in EMT. We
are currently exploring various aspects of this program, including
effects of increased expression of the neuronal-associated splicing
regulatory factor quaking (QKI). These may include downregulation of the
Notch pathway via effects on splicing of NUMB, a Notch inhibitor. We are
currently validating the role of QKI on this and other RNA processing
changes and will report our findings.

