Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of proto-oncogene PELP1 in breast cancer stem cell
maintenance and therapy resistance


BACKGROUND: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are known to evade hormonal therapy
and regrowth of tumor cells from cancer stem cells is a major clinical
problem. Histone methyltransferase G9a/EHMT2 plays a critical role in
stem cell maintenance. Proline, glutamic acid, and leucine rich protein
(PELP1) is a proto-oncogene, functions as a coregulator of nuclear
receptors, and is prognostically linked to shorter breast cancer
survival. Recent studies from our lab discovered that PELP1 interacts
with G9a/EHMT2. The objective of this study is to develop small molecular
inhibitors that block PELP1 interactions with G9a/EHMT2.METHODS: We
isolated CD44high/CD24low CSCs from three breast cancer cell lines (ZR75,
MCF7, T47D) using FACS. Cells were analyzed for spheroid formation,
morphological changes, immunofluorescence for differentiation markers,
protein (Western) and RNA (RT-qPCR) analysis. Expression of
differentiation markers K19 and K14 and stem cell markers CD133, CD44,
Id1, Nestin, Musashi-1, SOX2, Notch2, and OCT1 was determined. Effect of
inhibitors on the cell viability of breast cancer cells was determined
using cell titer glow assays. Xenograft studies were used to determine
the in vivo efficacy of the inhibitors.RESULTS: Using yeast based genetic
screen, we identified a small peptide inhibitor (PIP1) that interferes
PELP1 interaction with G9/EHMT2. Utilizing Hit-Ligand interaction site
with the PELP1 hot spot residues based on 3D alignment and shape, we have
identified 61 potential hits from Ligand-Based screening using a 10,000
Diverse Set. Screening of these 61 potential hits using MTT based cell
viability assays identified three small organic molecule inhibitors
(peptidomimetics) as leads. All three peptidomimetics showed activity
similar to PELP1 peptide inhibitor 1 (PIP1) in MTT assays and in
biochemical assays disrupted PELP1 interaction with G9a/EHMT2.
Peptidomimetic treatment inhibited the proliferation of tamoxifen and
letrozole resistant cells. In mechanistic studies, we found that
knockdown of PELP1 inhibited stem cell maintenance. In FACS analysis of
ZR75, ZR75-PELP1 and ZR75-PELP1KD cells, the percentage of
CD44high/CD24low cells correlated with PELP1 status. In mammosphere
assays, PELP1 targeting peptidomimetics significantly inhibited the
formation of mammospheres. Further, in self-renewal assays,
peptidomimetic-treated cells had decreased self-renewal capacity. In
xenograft assays using ZR-75 cells, PELP1 inhibitor significantly reduced
the tumor growth.CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our studies have discovered
an essential role for PELP1 in breast cancer stem cell maintenance and
identified the PELP1-G9a/EHMT2 axis as a potential therapeutic target for
reducing stemness. Further, the novel small molecule inhibitors of PELP1
could be used for therapeutic targeting of breast cancer stem cells and
therapy resistance.

