Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased hypoxia in a HER2+ breast cancer model following
trastuzumab therapy


Introduction: Hypoxic tumors demonstrate treatment resistance with an
increased risk of metastasis. Therefore, alleviating hypoxia has
potential to improve efficiency of combination therapies. The primary
goal of this study is to quantify alterations in hypoxia in response to
trastuzumab in a murine model of HER2+ breast cancer through imaging and
histology.Experimental Design: Mice were implanted subcutaneously with
BT474 breast cancer cells (107) and randomly assigned into treated (10
mg/kg trastuzumab) or control (saline) groups. After tumors reached 250
mm3, animals (n = 32) were utilized to identify longitudinal changes in
functional vascular through an intravenous injection of Hoechst 33342
nuclear stain (immediately prior to sacrifice) and hypoxia through
pimonidazole intravenous injection (one hour prior to sacrifice). Tumors
were extracted for immunofluorescence between days 0 through 7. Tumor
sections were flash frozen and stained with anti-pimonidazole and
propidium iodide (nuclear counterstain). Additionally, a set of tumors (n
= 36) were sacrificed for immunohistochemistry (days 0 through 7),
formalin fixed and stained for CA-IX. All stained sections were scanned
in high resolution (20) and quantitatively analyzed with Leica SCN400
software. Another cohort of animals (n = 10) were imaged with 18F-FMISO
(fluoromisonidazole) PET between days 0 through 7 and quantified via mean
tracer concentration (%ID/g).Results: Immunohistochemistry revealed
significantly increased hypoxia in the control group compared to treated
on days 3 (p = 0.03) and 7 (p = 0.002), as measured through CA-IX
staining. Additionally, on day 4, functional vascular delivery was
increased while hypoxia (pimonidazole) decreased in treated tumors
compared to control. 18F-FMISO PET imaging corroborated histology
findings with significantly decreased hypoxia in treated tumors compared
to control tumors on day 7 (-47%; pIntroduction: Hypoxic tumors
demonstrate treatment resistance with an increased risk of metastasis.
Therefore, alleviating hypoxia has potential to improve efficiency of
combination therapies. The primary goal of this study is to quantify
alterations in hypoxia in response to trastuzumab in a murine model of
HER2+ breast cancer through imaging and histology.Experimental Design:
Mice were implanted subcutaneously with BT474 breast cancer cells (107)
and randomly assigned into treated (10 mg/kg trastuzumab) or control
(saline) groups. After tumors reached 250 mm3, animals (n = 32) were
utilized to identify longitudinal changes in functional vascular through
an intravenous injection of Hoechst 33342 nuclear stain (immediately
prior to sacrifice) and hypoxia through pimonidazole intravenous
injection (one hour prior to sacrifice). Tumors were extracted for
immunofluorescence between days 0 through 7. Tumor sections were flash
frozen and stained with anti-pimonidazole and propidium iodide (nuclear
counterstain). Additionally, a set of tumors (n = 36) were sacrificed for
immunohistochemistry (days 0 through 7), formalin fixed and stained for
CA-IX. All stained sections were scanned in high resolution (20) and
quantitatively analyzed with Leica SCN400 software. Another cohort of
animals (n = 10) were imaged with 18F-FMISO (fluoromisonidazole) PET
between days 0 through 7 and quantified via mean tracer concentration
(%ID/g).Results: Immunohistochemistry revealed significantly increased
hypoxia in the control group compared to treated on days 3 (p = 0.03) and
7 (p = 0.002), as measured through CA-IX staining. Additionally, on day
4, functional vascular delivery was increased while hypoxia
(pimonidazole) decreased in treated tumors compared to control. 18F-FMISO
PET imaging corroborated histology findings with significantly decreased
hypoxia in treated tumors compared to control tumors on day 7 (-47%;
p<0.0001).Conclusion: Trastuzumab has been shown to decrease hypoxia, as
measured through gold-standard immunofluorescence. Additionally, this
trastuzumab-induced improvement in tumor hypoxia can be measured via
clinically relevant, noninvasive imaging (18F-FMISO PET). Temporarily
improving the tumor's functional vasculature and decreasing hypoxia
during trastuzumab treatment has potential to enhance the effectiveness
of combination therapies. Identifying windows of improved vascular and
cellular normalization with noninvasive medical imaging provide
opportunity to decrease resistance to standard-of-care treatments and
optimize therapeutic timing and regimens.

