Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of estrogen receptor-modulated association between
immune activities and patient survival in breast cancer


In breast cancer, estrogen receptor (ER) is a crucial biomarker for
subtyping and predicting patients prognosis. Nonetheless, its modulation
of immune-related genes and survival was rarely discussed. Addressing
this, in the present study we devised a comprehensive analysis to compare
the survival associations of immune genes between ER+ and ER- breast
tumors. Specifically, we modeled immune activities by a gene set
enrichment analysis of 31 immunologic gene sets defined by a recent
study. Whole-genome expression profiles and ER status of 279 breast
cancer patients (245 ER+ and 34 ER-) were downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GSE4922); another dataset was incorporated for
validation (GSE2034).Nine immunologic gene sets were significantly
predictive of relapse-free survival (RFS) in a ER+ specific manner (Cox
P-values0.05 in ER-). In order to investigate the modulation of ER in
gene set interactions, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficients
between gene sets in ER+ and ER- cohorts, respectively. The gene sets
formed two coexpression clusters in ER+ patients (all correlation
coefficients>0.7); one cluster was composed of protective gene sets (with
hazard ratios 0.05 in ER-). In order to investigate the modulation of ER
in gene set interactions, we calculated the Pearson correlation
coefficients between gene sets in ER+ and ER- cohorts, respectively. The
gene sets formed two coexpression clusters in ER+ patients (all
correlation coefficients>0.7); one cluster was composed of protective
gene sets (with hazard ratios <1) of dendritic cells, T cell regulatory,
eosinophil, and mast cell, and the other included risk gene sets of CD4,
CD8, and effector memory CD4. Interestingly, no significant intra-cluster
correlation appeared in the ER- condition. We also identified
inter-cluster inverse correlation between mast cell and CD8 or effector
memory CD4 in ER+ patients (correlation coefficients0.6 and 0.6 and
<-0.45 for intra- and inter-cluster pairs, respectively). To further
dissect the functional relevance of these ER-modulated immune activities,
we performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to identify
differentially activated biological functions between patients with high
and low enrichment scores of an immunologic gene set. GSEA revealed
significant associations with breast cancer grades, subtypes, and
metastasis.In conclusion, using a gene set framework we comprehensively
investigated the involvement of ER in modulating between immune
activities and prognosis. Further biological investigations into our
findings are warranted.

