Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE)
compound, shows synergistic anti-tumor activity when combined with PD-1
blockade in a mouse model of colon cancer


Introduction: Selinexor is an oral, first-in-class SINE compound that
specifically binds to the primary nuclear exporter XPO1/CRM1. XPO1
exports over 200 cargos, including major tumor suppressor proteins
(TSPs), leading to their functional inactivation. Inhibition of XPO1
results in nuclear retention of TSPs and restores their normal functions.
Interestingly, XPO1 also mediates the export of NFAT1c, STAT1 and STAT3,
which have been implicated in regulation of the inhibitory T-cell
receptor PD-1 (NFAT1c, STAT3) and its ligand, PD-L1 (STAT1). Therefore,
we hypothesized that selinexor treatment will result in up-regulation of
PD-1 and PD-L1, making tumor cells more amenable to
immunotherapy.Methods: The effect of selinexor on PD-1 and PD-L1 gene
expression was tested in human normal donor leukocytes and in tumor cells
[HCT-116(colon), PC-3 (prostate) and MDA-MB-468 (breast)], respectively
by quantitative PCR. A Colon26 syngeneic mouse model of CRC was generated
and animals were assigned to the following treatment groups: (i) vehicle,
(ii) selinexor at sub-therapeutic dose of 5 mg/kg (M/W/F), (iii) Anti
PD-1 (BioXCell), 100ug biwk and (iv) selinexor + anti-PD-1 combination.
Tumor growth, weight loss and signs of toxicity were monitored for 45
days. Xenografts were harvested, RNA and DNA were collected and tumors
were analyzed microscopically and by immunohistochemestry (IHC).Results:
In-vitro studies showed that selinexor induces PD-1 gene expression by
2-fold in normal donor leukocytes as early as 4 hrs after treatment
initiation and that this change is sustained for at least 24 hrs. A
similar effect was measured on PD-L1 gene expression induction in
HCT-116, PC-3 and MDA-MB-468 tumor cells. In-vivo, the combination was
well tolerated and no weight loss or signs of toxicity were evident.
Selinexor-anti-PD-1 combination therapy exhibited a synergistic effect on
percent Tumor Growth Inhibition (%TGI) were the selinexor-treated group
and the anti-PD-1-treated group alone were very similar with mean%TGI
measuring 27% and 24% respectively, and the combination group measuring a
mean%TGI of 67%. Importantly, 4-out-of-10 mice in the combination group
did not have detectable tumors at day 22 and these mice were also tumor
free at the end of the study, at day 45. IHC analysis showed overall
enhanced effect of the combination treatment on induction of apoptosis
and reduced proliferation as well as effect on specific T-cell checkpoint
regulatory molecules.Conclusion: Selinexor induces PD-1 and PD-L1 gene
expression, sensitizing tumor cells to immunotherapy. Selinexor
synergizes with anti-PD-1 to inhibit tumor cell proliferation and to
induce apoptosis in-vivo. These data provide rational support for study
of selinexor/ anti-PD-1 combination in clinical trials.

