Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prion-like protein Doppel is a selective therapeutic target for
tumoral angiogenesis


Regulating growth factor signaling in a controlled and site-specific
manner is the main hurdle that current antiangiogenic treatment
modalities face. Here we show that the prion-like protein, doppel, is
uniquely found in tumoral endothelial cells (TEC) but not in the normal
ECs. Tissue sections containing primary human tumor (lung and colon) and
normal tissues were used to study doppel protein expression. Strong
expression and clear co-localization of doppel protein with CD34, a
classical endothelial marker, was observed in both lung and colon cancer
tissues compared to normal tissues. To evaluate doppel expression at the
molecular level, we isolated TECs from different tumors derived from
mouse xenografts. Extensive analysis showed that doppel was highly and
ubiquitously expressed in the vasculature of squamous, breast, lung, and
colon cancers. To elucidate the role of doppel in TEC during tumor
angiogenesis, we generated a gain-of-function EC model to express doppel
in ECs. Inducible overexpression of doppel in ECs correlates with high
vessel formation in a spheroid-based EC transplantation technique. To
integrate doppel expression with the canonical angiogenic circuits, we
studied the mechanism by which doppel regulates angiogenesis. We
evidently observed that doppel co-localized and formed complexes with
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2). Also, doppel
prolonged the surface residency of VEGFR2 and amplified the
responsiveness of VEGF to VEGFR2. Genetic deletion of doppel in TEC not
only depleted membrane residency but also induced internalization and
degradation of VEGFR2. This indicates that doppel blocking can lead to
effective control of VEGF-signaling in TECs and selective inhibition of
tumor angiogenesis. Based on the functional role of doppel in
angiogenesis and tumor growth inhibition, we generated doppel knockout
mice on immunogenic C57BL6 mice. Tumor growth was inhibited in both
hetero (Dpl+/-) and homo (Dpl-/-)-type mice compared to their wild-type
littermate controls when syngeneic cancer cell lines including melanoma
(B16f10) and lymphoma (EL4) or allogeneic colon cancer CT26 cell line
were inoculated. Moreover, we developed doppel targeting monoclonal
antibodies. Anti-doppel antibodies, 5C7 and 4D6, were effective against
both murine CT26 and human HCT116 colon cancer cell lines. Our studies
thus demonstrate the success of doppel targeting in inhibiting
pathological tumor growth and establish doppel-VEGFR2 interactions as a
specific molecular and therapeutic target in tumoral angiogenesis.

