Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal autophagy is required for the growth of cutaneous melanoma


Through degrading bulk cytoplasmic materials into intermediate building
blocks, autophagy refuels metabolism and maintains homeostasis under
starvation and stress conditions. The context-dependent role of autophagy
in cancer cells during tumorigenesis and tumor progression has been
explored over the past decade; however, studies of autophagy in relation
to the tumor microenvironment are still lacking. In this study, we
investigated the role of autophagy in the cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs), a major component of the microenvironment that is important for
the growth and development of cutaneous melanoma. Analysis of clinical
biopsies revealed high levels of autophagy in fibroblasts that surrounded
melanoma cells, but not in the non-tumor adjacent area. Fibroblasts
co-cultured with any of multiple melanoma cell lines, but not
melanocytes, also showed increased autophagic flux, which requires
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-) signaling. Knocking down
autophagy-related (ATG) genes ATG5 or ATG7 in fibroblasts did not impair
their proliferation in vitro, but inhibited the growth of co-engrafted
melanoma cells in vivo. Further, by introducing intradermal melanoma
allografts into mice that harbored fibroblast-specific Atg7 deletion, we
observed remarkable tumor growth retardation. In order to mimic
anti-autophagy therapy for patients, we generated mice that allowed
conditional Atg7 depletion in their entire bodies, and found significant
tumor growth suppression. Atg7 knockout mice contained elevated plasma
levels of immune cell attractants, including CXCL9, CXCL10 and MCP-1. By
inhibiting these cytokines/chemokines with atorvastatin, tumor growth in
Atg7 knockout mice was completely rescued; while, there was no effect of
atorvastatin on control mice. Taken together, our data show that through
modulating the tumor microenvironment, stromal autophagy plays an
important role during melanoma growth and development. Our findings
indicate that stromal autophagy may represent a valuable therapeutic
target that might induce less side effects and systemic toxicity.

