Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-individual variation in circulating miRNA expression levels
in human plasma samples


Circulating miRNAs as possible non-invasive biomarkers for disease risk
assessment and cancer early diagnosis has attracted increasing interest.
Little information, however, is available regarding the intra-individual
variation of circulating miRNA levels. We measured miRNA expression in
repeated plasma samples that were collected 6 to 12 months apart from 53
healthy individuals participating in a sub-study nested in the Shanghai
Women's and Shanghai Men's Health Studies. Total RNA, including miRNA,
was isolated from plasma using Qiagen's miRNeasy Serum/Plasma Kit. Three
synthetic spike-in RNA oligos (osa-miR414, cel-miR248, and ath-miR159a)
were added to control for variances in the starting material and the
efficiency of RNA extraction. NanoString's Human v2 miRNA Expression
Assay, which includes CodeSets of probes specific for 800 common human
miRNAs, was used for the miRNA assays. The derived miRNA counts were
first corrected by subtracting the background counts and then were
normalized by using the average count from three spike-in oligos andthe
top fifty miRNAs that gave most significant hybridization signals. The
intra-individual variation was evaluated by an intra-class correlation
coefficient (ICC). A total of 185 miRNAs were detected in at least 10% of
samples. The detectable rate varied for each miRNA, with 69 and 44 miRNAs
being detected in 50% and 75% of samples, respectively. The median ICC
was 0.46 for all of the 185 detectable miRNAs. Among them, 41% (75
miRNAs) had an ICC 0.5, and 42 miRNAs had an ICC 0.6. The ICC is higher
for miRNAs with higher expression levels and higher detection rates, when
compared to their counterparts with lower expression or detection rates.
In summary, we found that 185 miRNAs were expressed in at least 10% of
plasma samples, and 69 miRNAs in 50% of samples from healthy Chinese men
and women, and that 75 of these miRNAs had an ICC 0.5. These results
suggest that common circulating miRNAs can serve as reliable biomarkers
for epidemiological and clinical research.

