Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutaminase inhibition with CB-839 enhances anti-tumor activity of
PD-1 and PD-L1 antibodies by overcoming a metabolic checkpoint blocking T
cell activation


Recent studies have highlighted the importance of the tumor metabolic
environment for controlling immune activation. T-cells activated through
the TCR/CD28 receptor switch to a highly glycolytic metabolism and
increase their requirement for glucose and glutamine. Consequently,
limited availability of glucose or glutamine can block T-cell activation
and proliferation. Likewise, immune checkpoints proteins, PD-1 and
CTLA-4, suppress T cell metabolism by inhibiting glycolysis, glutamine
uptake and glutaminolysis (Patsoukis et al Nat Comm. 2015). Chang et al
(Cell. 2015) recently demonstrated that glucose consumption by tumors
restricts glucose availability and blocks activation of T cells, and that
treatment with CTLA-4, PD-1, or PD-L1 antibodies can re-activate T cell
glycolysis.CB-839 is a glutaminase inhibitor currently in Phase 1 trials
in patients with solid and hematological malignancies. CB-839 blocks
glutamine consumption in tumors and causes a significant elevation of
tumor glutamine levels. Therefore, we hypothesized that CB-839 might
enhance the activity of immune checkpoint inhibitors via metabolic
modulation of the tumor microenvironment. We first confirmed that T- cell
proliferation is dependent on glutamine but is only minimally inhibited
by CB-839. In the absence of glutamine, splenic mouse T cells stimulated
with anti-CD3/CD28 had reduced glucose consumption and did not
proliferate. In contrast, CB-839 treatment did not mimic the effects of
glutamine withdrawal on T-cells. CB-839 had no effect on glucose
consumption by activated T-cells and only a minimal effect on
proliferation. We also confirmed in the OVA vaccinia model that CB-839
had minimal effects on CD4 and CD8 T-cell proliferation in vivo, while
the non-specific glutamine inhibitor DON caused a dramatic reduction in
the number of CD4 and CD8 T-cells.To determine if CB-839 could enhance
the anti-tumor efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors, we treated mice
bearing syngeneic CT26 colon carcinoma tumors with anti PD-1 or anti
PD-L1 alone or in combination with CB-839. The addition of CB-839 to
either anti PD-1 or anti PD-L1 treatment enhanced anti-tumor activity,
augmenting tumor regression and promoting survival. Depletion of CD8+
T-cells from CT26 tumors reversed the anti-tumor effects of PD-L1 and
CB-839, demonstrating that the combination targets CD8+ T-cells in the
immune microenvironment.These data are the first demonstration that
modulation of glutamine metabolism in tumors can enhance the activity of
checkpoint inhibitors and provide a rationale for combining CB-839 with
immune checkpoint inhibitors in the clinic. Overall, these data highlight
a new therapeutic approach to treating cancer by targeting tumor
metabolism as a means of enhancing the efficacy of immunotherapy.

