Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation engineered toxin bodies: CD38, PD-L1 and HER2
targeted ETBs


Molecular Templates is developing engineered toxin bodies (ETBs), potent
recombinant immunotoxins that combine the specificity of an antibody
fragment with the powerful direct cytotoxicity of the Shiga-like toxin A
subunit to specifically kill target expressing cells. Once delivered to
appropriate cells, the Shiga toxin A subunit inhibits protein synthesis
and promotes apoptosis of tumor cells. Bacterial or plant derived toxin
moieties have the potential to induce an immune response, commonly
limiting repeat dosing of immunotoxins. Our next-generation ETB scaffold
has been modified to overcome this limitation through genetic engineering
to systematically and comprehensively reduce B and CD4+T cell
epitopes.Molecular Templates has developed a proprietary epitope class
switching technology designed to both reduce the anti-drug response and
promote the anti-tumor response by replacing naturally occurring CD4+ T
cell epitopes with CD8+ T cell epitopes. We have found that a combination
of surface remodeling and epitope class switching combined in one protein
results in powerful reductions in the anti-drug response against ETBs
after repeat administration. This de-immunized next-generation scaffold
retains the potency and specificity of the unmodified ETB. Additionally,
the engineering of CD8+ T cell epitopes on the ETB scaffold can allow for
foreign antigen presentation in complex with MHC class I on the tumor
cell surface. This antigen presentation may recruit activated cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) to the tumor microenvironment thereby adding an
additional mechanism of action to the direct cell kill activity of the
ETBs.The second generation ETB scaffold has been combined with multiple
target binding domains, including scFvs that target CD38, PD-L1 and HER2.
CD38 is a validated target for multiple myeloma, and our CD38 targeted
ETB has shown potent activity in vitro and in vivo. Pre-clinical studies
have shown effective combination of the CD38 targeted ETB with standard
of care agents such as IMiDs. Additionally, we have developed a PD-L1
targeted ETB that can be used against various PD-L1 expressing
malignancies including Hodgkin's lymphoma and melanoma. HER2 is a well
characterized target in breast cancer that persists in many patients
after HER2 targeted treatment relapse; a novel MOA to this target may
impart additional clinical benefit. The potency, reduced immunogenicity,
unique mechanism of action and immune modulating activities of ETBs in
this second generation scaffold allows for these agents to fit in well in
a refractory setting as well as in combination with other agents in the
growing field of immuno-oncology.

