Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Live-imaging the interface between homeostasis and cancer
initiation


While cancer-associated mutations are most frequently found within
tumors, it has been established that these same mutations can be present
in even phenotypically normal organs, such as the skin. This raises the
question as to how the switch from normal to malignant is initiated
within the interface between homeostasis and cancer. One challenge to
understanding the initiating events towards malignancy is the inability
to follow the same cells over time in an intact mammal. Specifically,
this roadblock hinders the ability to understand both the role of
specific cells and how their location contributes to their growth,
whether that growth be normal or cancerous. To overcome this, we have
established a novel live imaging approach to track cellular behaviors in
normal, healthy skin. This approach has previously enabled our lab to
demonstrate that location dictates the fate and behaviors of hair
follicle stem cells during skin regeneration (Rompolas et al. Nature
2013). We are now utilizing this approach to capture the emergence of the
cellular behaviors that lead to Hras-driven skin tumors in live mice.To
begin to characterize the initiating events of skin cancer, we utilized a
model of oncogenic Hras (HrasG12V), which has been established to give
rise to skin papillomas. Using targeted, inducible genetic drivers, we
activated HrasG12V at low levels and restricted the activation to the
cycling, stem-cell rich portion of the hair follicle. Strikingly, we have
observed that the presence of HrasG12V cells within the cycling portion
of the hair follicle are not only tolerated, but can also be eliminated,
supporting the idea that the surrounding wild-type tissue has the
capability to both integrate and overcome the presence of a single
oncogenic hit. Furthermore, within this targeted genetic system, we found
that the initial position of the mutant cell impacted the resultant
phenotype of the tissue. To next understand these behaviors at the
cellular level, we utilized a viral approach to directly activate and
fluorescently tag HrasG12V at clonal levels throughout the skin
epithelium allowing us to observe interactions between wild-type and
mutant cells. Furthermore, within the upper portion of the hair follicle
and epidermis, which (unlike the cycling portion) is immune permissive,
we observed the release of exosomes by mutant cells and their subsequent
clearing by both epithelial and immune cells. Currently, we are
introducing a second mutation, loss of TGF signaling, to the oncogenic
Hras system which is a mutational combination well established to produce
cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma (cSCC). This system will provide us
with a spectrum of phenotypes from wild-type, to benign yet aberrant
(papillomas), to malignant (cSCC) and allow us to interrogate how
interactions among different cell types (wild-type, single mutants, and
double mutants) within particular niches influence the overall fate of
the tissue to initiate disease.

