Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-function analysis of twist1-e2a transcriptional activity
in kras-driven non-small cell lung cancer


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States and
in the world. Although a large fraction of non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC) are dependent on defined oncogenic driver mutations, little
progress has been made in the treatment of patients with the most common
driver mutation, mutant KRAS. We previously demonstrated that inhibition
of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, TWIST1, in KRAS
mutant, EGFR mutant, and MET amplified/mutant NSCLC can induce either
oncogene induced senescence or apoptosis. However, the key functions of
TWIST1 that are required for its transcriptional activity in cancer are
unknown.In the current study, we engineered domain-specific mutations in
TWIST1 to determine the impact of altered DNA binding, dimerization and
post-translational modifications on its transcriptional activity by
luciferase reporter assays. Testing the promoter activity at three
TWIST1-regulated loci involved in tumorigenesis, YBX1, SNAI2, and FLIP,
we found that DNA binding and nuclear localization were uniformly
required for TWIST1 transcriptional function. However, phosphorylation,
TWIST1 box function, and ability to form homo- versus hetero- dimers
impacted TWIST1 activity in a locus-specific manner. Previous studies
have demonstrated that TWIST1 dimerizes with the E2A proteins, E12 and
E47. We have shown that silencing of E2A phenocopies loss of TWIST1 in
NSCLC and that formation of the TWIST1-E2A heterodimer results in a
reciprocal stabilization of the binding partner. Therefore, we sought to
determine how differential dimerization by TWIST1 might modulate
tumorigenic gene expression. We utilized tethered TWIST1 dimers with
either TWIST1 or the E2A proteins to form TWIST1-TWIST1 (homodimer),
TWIST1-E12 or -E47 (heterodimers), and tested their transcriptional
activities at several TWIST1-regulated promoters. We found that
TWIST1-E2A heterodimers could enhance TWIST1 transcriptional activity
compared to that of the TWIST-TWIST homodimer. In addition, we determined
that the TWIST-E2A heterodimer is degraded by harmine, a harmala alkaloid
that we have shown degrades TWIST1, whereas the TWIST-TWIST homodimer is
resistant to harmine degradation. This suggests that the TWIST1-E2A
heterodimer is the key target of harmine. Furthermore, we have found that
overexpression of the TWIST1, E2A proteins, or the TWIST1-E2A heterodimer
is able to partially rescue harmine induced cytotoxicity in KRAS mutant
NSCLC. Taken together, these data suggest that E2A is essential for
TWIST1 mediated tumorigenesis and that targeting of the TWIST1-E2A axis
may be an effective therapeutic strategy against oncogene-driven NSCLC.

