Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of the primary cilium in the Hedgehog pathway in
colorectal cancer cells


Background: The Hedgehog (HH) pathway is involved in the maintenance of
numerous cell types both during development and in the adult. Often
deregulated in cancers, its involvement in colorectal cancer has come
into view during the last few years, although its role remains poorly
defined. In most tissues, the HH pathway is highly connected to the
primary cilium (PC), an organelle not expressed in the normal colonic
epithelium which recruits the functional components and regulates the
pathway.Aims: Since the intestinal epithelium is known to be a
non-ciliated tissue, the HH pathway as related to the PC has not been
explored. We investigated the presence of PC in colon cancer tumors and
cell lines. Our hypothesis is that PC formation controls the HH
activation that has been reported in numerous colon cancer
studies.Materials and methods: We used cellular models to look at HH
activation, focusing on the final effector Gli1. The link between PC and
the HH pathway was shown by the recruitment of the Smo receptor in the
PC. We looked for PC in a subset of 63 tumors from a Tissue Micro Array
and in 4 colorectal cell lines by immunofluorescence using two well-known
markers, acetylated -tubulin and polyglutamylated tubulin. 3D
deconvoluted pictures were obtained to characterize the shape and size of
PC. Using cellular models we investigated HH pathway expression by qPCR.
We assessed the functional link between HH pathway and PC through
localization of the Smo receptor in the PC using
immunofluorescence.Results: We observed the presence of the PC in the
epithelium of primary colorectal tumors at all stages but not in their
normal counterparts. Using human colorectal cancer cell lines we found a
clear correlation between the presence of the PC and the expression of
the final HH effector, GLI1, and provide evidence of a functional link
between the two by demonstrating the recruitment of the SMO receptor to
the PC membrane.Conclusion: We conclude that the PC directly participates
in the HH pathway in colorectal cancer cells which is the first
observation of PC expression in tumors arising from a non-ciliated
tissue. Functional studies are required to determine the mode of action
of this organelle in carcinogenesis.

