Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Applicability of integrative tumor response assays for recurrent
colorectal cancer


IntroductionDrug response assays use autologous viable tumors to evaluate
susceptibility to specific agents in vitro. Histoculture drug reponse
assay (HDRA) is a representative methyl thiazolyl-diphenyl-tetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay, which has the advantage of more correctly reflecting
the in vivo microenvironment. Many studies showed 66-92% of accuracy
rates for clinical correlation of chemotherapy in solid tumors including
colorectal cancer (CRC). However, in recurrent cases of metastatic CRC,
there is no usable assay to predict second-line chemo-sensitivity. Thus,
authors invented novel technique, the integrative tumor response assay
(ITRA), can identify drug responses for both first- and second-line
chemotherapy simultaneously. We investigated the chemo-sensitivity to
clinically used regimens using ITRA of samples from patients with
metastatic CRC, and compared their chemo-sensitivity with the observed
clinical response.MethodsA total of 129 patients with metastatic CRC were
prospectively enrolled. First-stage HDRAs were performed using
5-fluorouracil with leucovorin and oxaliplatin (FX) or irinotecan (FR).
Second-stage HDRAs (ITRA) were done for survived cells after first-stage
HDRA, using FX, FR, and their combinations with bevacizumab and
cetuximab. The inhibition rate of tumor growth (IR) cut-off value for a
positive response was determined to be 30%. For clinical validation,
treatment responses of chemotherapy were evaluated using the Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST). The primary endpoint of
this study was a correlation between the ITRA results and the clinical
response in the response rate (RR). This was defined as positive for the
effect of chemotherapy for tumor responses between complete response (CR)
and partial response (PR).ResultsAmong 129 used samples, ITRA failure was
9 (7%), due to deficient volume of samples. Out of 79 evaluated
first-line chemotherapeutic regimes, RR was 53% (42/79). The correlation
rate of HDRA for first-line chemotherapy was 70.9% (56/79), with a 71.4%
(30/42) of sensitivity and 70.3% (26/37) of specificity. For 42 cases
completing second-line chemotherapy, RR was 43% (18/42). The accuracy
rate of ITRA for second-line chemotherapy was 61.9% (26/42), with a 44.4%
(8/18) of sensitivity and 75% (18/24) of specificity.ConclusionsITRA
might be further developed to be a feasible and useful technique for
predicting therapy efficacy and selecting the appropriate anticancer
regimen for individual patients despite its relatively low accuracy.

