Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A regulatory triad consisting of BMI1, let-7i miRNA and ERK3
kinase in controlling cancer cell invasiveness


Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 3 (ERK3) is an atypical
mitogen-activated protein kinase, whose biological activity is tightly
regulated by its cellular abundance. ERK3 expression is upregulated in
multiple cancer types, including head and neck cancers. Importantly, our
recent finding revealed a critical role for ERK3 in promoting cancer cell
invasiveness. However, little is known about the molecular regulation of
ERK3 level in cancers. Here we identify a pathway which regulates ERK3
expression and cell invasiveness of head and neck cancers, comprising the
oncogenic polycomb group protein BMI1 and the tumor suppressive miRNA
let-7i.To study the regulation of ERK3, we performed several
loss-of-function and gain-of-function assays in head and neck cancer cell
lines, including OECM1 and Fadu. Stable knockdown of BMI1 greatly reduced
ERK3 protein level, whereas overexpression of BMI1 significantly
increased ERK3 level, demonstrating a positive regulation of ERK3 by
BMI1. Interestingly, we found that this regulation is mediated by the
miRNA let-7i, whose transcription is repressed by BMI1, a component of
the polycomb repressive complex 1. ERK3 mRNA is directly targeted by
let-7i miRNA, which was demonstrated by the assay using a luciferase
reporter containing the 3UTR of ERK3 mRNA downstream of luciferase gene.
Mutation of the let-7i binding site in ERK3 3UTR abolished the negative
regulation of let-7i on ERK3. Further, let-7i mimic decreased ERK3
expression and let-7i inhibitor increased ERK3 expression in head and
neck cancer cells. To determine the functional significance of this
regulation, we investigated their role in cancer cell invasiveness by
performing trans-well migration/invasion assays. Importantly, ERK3
depletion abolished BMI1-induced increase in cancer cell migration and
invasion, so was by let-7i mimic. Finally, we examined by
immunohistochemistry the expression of both BMI1 and ERK3 in head and
neck tumor specimens and found that ERK3 expression is positively
correlated with BMI1.All together, we unravel a novel regulatory
mechanism for ERK3 by the BMI1/let-7i axis, which together controls head
and neck cancer cell invasiveness.

