Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib has opposite roles to regulate the myeloid-derived
suppressor cells in tumors and peripheral blood


Recent studies indicate that sunitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
could decease accumulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) in
tumors and also in peripheral blood. This study aims to investigate the
behavior and dynamic profile of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in tumor
tissues and peripheral blood of sunitinib-treated mice bearing prostate
adenocarcinoma TRAMP-C1 tumors. To this end, 3106 TRAMP-C1 tumor cells
were inoculated at shank muscle of C57BL6/J mouse and sunitinib was
administered by intraperitoneal injection of a daily dose of 20mg/kg into
mice bearing 4 mm diameter tumor. Comparing to tumors in untreated group,
sunitinib administration slightly delayed tumor growth delay for 2 days,
but significantly decreased micro-vascular density and induced chronic
hypoxia in tumors, resulting in the specific accumulation of CD11b+Gr-1+
MDSCs at the tumor necrotic region within CA-IX positive chronic hypoxic
area. Flow cytometry was used to analyze the change of CD11b+ myeloid
cells within tumor tissues and peripheral blood. Results showed that
sunitinib treatment decreased the percentage of CD11b+Ly6G-LyC-
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), but increased the percentage of
CD11b+Ly6G-Ly6C+ monocytic MDSCs (M-MDSCs) while had no effect on
CD11b+Ly6G+Ly6C+ neutrophilic MDSCs (N-MDSCs) within tumor tissues. In
contrast, both the percentage of N-MDSCs and M-MDSC were expanded in
peripheral blood of sunitinib-treated mice. Multiplex immunoassay showed
significant increase of CCL2, CCL3, CCL5, CXCL5, IL-17a, GM-CSF, G-CSF
and VEGF-A in tumor tissues, but only CXCL5, IL-, IL-6 and G-CSF in the
peripheral blood of sunitinib-treated mice were affected. In conclusion,
this study shows that sunitinib has anti-vascular effect and could
disrupt the recruitment of CD11b+Ly6G-Ly6C- TAMs into tumors. We also
propose that sunitinib might exert different effects on tumor
microenvironment and peripheral blood.

