Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat sensitizes cyclin
E-amplified ovarian cancer cells to poly ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitor
olaparib


Objective: Ovarian cancer is the second most common gynecological cancer
and the number one cause of cancer death in gynecological cancers. In the
United States alone, there are about 21,290 expected new cases in 2015
and about 14,180 expected deaths. Approximately 95% of ovarian
malignancies are epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Most (50%) of these EOC
tumors have BRCAness features - contain molecular defect in homologous
recombination (HR) DNA repair pathways. About 20% of the non-BRACness
subtypes of EOC exhibit increased expression of cyclin E (CCNE1) which is
associated with resistance to DNA damaging drugs and increased mortality.
A first-in-class drug, a poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor (PARPi)
olaparib was approved by the FDA for the treatment of advanced ovarian
cancer patients with BRCA mutations who have had three or more lines
chemotherapy. PARPi efficacy is lower in non-BRCAness tumors but may be
enhanced by other drug combinations. Our group has shown that epigenetic
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) therapy sensitizes ovarian cancer
cells to various chemotherapeutic drugs. Our goal is to expand olaparib
therapy to patients with chemoresistant tumors by sensitizing CCNE1
amplified EOC with the potent HDACi, panobinostat. Method: Ovarian cancer
cell lines used were OVCAR-3 (CCNE1-amplified) and SKOV3
(CCNE1-non-amplified). They were co-treated with 0.01% DMSO vehicle,
olaparib, panobinostat or olaparib/panobinostat combination.
Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assays assessed cytotoxicity and
immunofluorescence (IF) assessed markers of apoptosis (cleaved
caspase-3). Images were analyzed using the Adobe Photoshop counting tool.
Data analysis was performed via the Microsoft Excel average and
percentage functions. Figures and p-value analysis were created using
GraphPad Prism. Results: Our previous studies have demonstrated through
western blot analysis of cleaved PARP expression that panobinostat
enhances the pro-apoptotic effect of olaparib in CCNE1 amplified OVCAR-3
ovarian cancer cells. In this current study, IF was used to assess the
established marker of apoptosis, cleaved caspase-3, in OVCAR3 and SKOV3
cells. Compared to vehicle-treated cells, olaparib alone induced no
difference in the number of cleaved caspase-3 expression in both SKOV3
and OVCAR3 cells. However, there was significant upregulation in the
percentage of cells positive for cleaved caspase-3 expression in
combination treatments compared to single drug treatments in both cell
lines. Conclusion: The response of ovarian cancer cells to the PARPi
olaparib is enhanced by co-treatment with HDACi panobinostat in vitro.
This indicates that, responses to olaparib in HR-proficient EOC can be
improved by combination therapy with panobinostat. Thus we have
identified a novel way to expand the use of olaparib for the treatment of
advanced ovarian cancer to patients with non-BRCA tumors.

