Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low-dose cabazitaxel inhibits the growth of prostate cancer cells
and enhances the anti-tumor properties of PEDF with greater efficacy than
docetaxel


Despite recently approved novel agents, taxane-based chemotherapy remains
the major therapeutic strategy for metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC). Still mCRPC continues to be incurable.
Furthermore, patients often experience severe side effects, prompting a
re-evaluation of conventional regimen. Past studies have demonstrated
promise for Low-Dose Metronomic (LDM) chemotherapy; schedule defined as
the frequent administration of low doses of chemotherapeutic drugs with
no prolonged drug-free breaks. Yet relative activities of LDM taxanes and
combinations with known anti-neoplasic agents have to be investigated.
Using CRPC cell lines (PC3, Du145 and the LNCaP-derivative CL1), we have
shown that cabazitaxel-treated cells have a significantly lower EC50
compared to docetaxel, with Du145 cells presenting the greatest
differences. In cell cycle analysis, both low-dose taxanes increased the
sub-G1 cells population. However, the sub-G1 increase was significantly
greater in cabazitaxel- than in docetaxel-treated Du145 cells, but not in
PC3 and CL1. Accordingly, plasma membrane Annexin V elevation occurred in
Du145 cells at lower doses of cabazitaxel than docetaxel validating a
higher efficacy due to increased apoptosis. As other possible cell death
mechanisms, autophagy and necrosis were investigated. Beclin1 expression
levels remain unchanged in all three cell lines. In contrast, necrosis
was stimulated in all the taxanes-treated cell lines in a dose dependent
manner. In vivo, LDM cabazitaxel was significantly more efficient in
delaying tumor growth than docetaxel. This effect was markedly increased
when cabazitaxel was combined with the angio-inhibitor and anti-tumor
Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor (PEDF). Other results showed that PEDF
and LDM chemotherapy combination induces more phagocytosis of CRPC cells
when compared to single treatments. In conclusion, our data demonstrate a
higher efficacy of cabazitaxel on CRPC both in vitro and in vivo, and
suggest that LDM taxane chemotherapy/PEDF combination could be used as a
novel therapeutic strategy for CRPC.

