Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determinants of response to temozolomide in an exceptionally
sensitive patient derived model


Application of precision medicine to cancer treatment utilizes
cutting-edge genomic sequencing techniques to identify specific mutations
in tumors that can be matched to targeted therapies designed to treat
those abnormalities. To complement NCI-MPACT, an ongoing molecular
profiling-based clinical trial (NCT01827384), we used cell lines
developed from several patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models to examine
response to, and potential biomarkers for, the regimens of the 4-arm
MPACT trial: veliparib (VLP)/temozolomide (TMZ), AZD1775/carboplatin,
everolimus and trametinib. In vitro sensitivity of the PDX-derived cell
lines to clinically achievable concentrations of these MPACT drugs
(combinations and single agents) was examined in classic 2D cultures
(monolayer on plastic) and 3D cultures (spheroids generated in ultra-low
attachment culture plates). Responses in 2D and 3D cultures were similar
after 7 days of drug exposure. Moreover, adding VLP (1.7M or 5M) in
combination with TMZ did not enhance TMZ cytotoxicity. A bladder cancer
cell line developed from a PDX model (BLX) showed exceptional sensitivity
to TMZ (IC50 3-5M) compared to a lung cancer cell line (also produced
from a PDX; LUX) which was insensitive (IC50 >40 M). Loss of MGMT
expression in glioma and possibly in colorectal carcinoma is considered a
predictive biomarker for response to alkylating agents, such as
dacarbazine and TMZ. Indeed, we could not detect MGMT protein expression
in BLX, while MGMT was present at high levels in LUX. To elucidate unique
determinants of BLX hypersensitivity to TMZ beyond MGMT expression, we
examined DNA damage responses elicited in this model. Under both 2D and
3D conditions, exposure to TMZ (13 and 40M) for various times (4, 8, 12,
24, 48, 72 and 96 hrs) induced H2AX after 24 hr, while PARP1 cleavage was
induced as early as 48 hrs after drug addition indicating the onset of
apoptosis. TMZ activated ATR and ATM signaling pathways especially at the
later time points, paralleling the pharmacodynamics of PARP cleavage.
Moreover, concordant with the sensitivity profiles, signaling activation
in 2D and 3D conditions was similar. In contrast, none of these pathways
were activated in the TMZ non-responsive LUX model. Cell line models
developed from PDXs with intermediate MGMT expression are being
evaluated.A key to success of personalized medicine in oncology will be
the identification of genomic determinants that predict which individual
cases will show exceptional responses to particular treatments, and our
data suggest that PDX cell line models may be valuable for elucidating
molecular and genetic characteristics of response to specific drugs and
for the identification of predictive biomarkers.Funded by NCI Contract
No. HHSN261200800001E. This research was supported, in part, by the
Developmental Therapeutics Program in the Division of Cancer Treatment
and Diagnosis of the National Cancer Institute.

