Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAF15 as an important mediator of RNA polymerase II-dependent drug
tolerance


Background: Cancer relapse after chemotherapy is thought to originate
from drug-tolerant cancer cell subpopulations. We studied drug-tolerant
colonies (DTCs), which are subpopulations of cancer cells that survive in
the presence of drugs. Previous DTC formation-based compound screening
identified an RNA polymerase (RNAP) II inhibitor, -amanitin (-AMA),
suggesting the existence of an RNAPII-dependent drug tolerance in cancer
cells. However, the mechanism underlying this regulation is
unclear.Materials and Methods: DTCs derived from the gastric cancer cell
line MKN45 were used as an in vitro model for gastrointestinal tumor
recurrence. For the generation of the DTCs and those of untreated
colonies (i.e., control colonies), cells were sparsely disseminated (100
cells/cm2) into the presence or absence of cisplatin at 50% colony
inhibitory concentration. To identify the DTC formation responsible
genes, a DNA microarray analysis was performed followed by gene ontology
analysis and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) validation. For gene knockdown
experiments with those that have been identified as DTC-formation
responsible genes, cells were treated with small interference RNAs
(siRNAs) for 48 hrs and then sparsely disseminated into the microplates
in the presence of cisplatin for the DTC formation.Results: In terms of
the RNAPII-dependence of the DTC formation, we focused on RNAPII-binding
protein-coding genes in the list of the top 2.5% of specifically induced
genes in DTCs. The transcriptional screening identified only one gene,
TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15). The level of TAF15
mRNA was 2.1-fold higher in DTCs than in the control colonies. A protein
family consisting of fusion in sarcoma (FUS), Ewing's sarcoma (EWS), and
TAF15 is called the FET (FUS/EWS/TAF15) family, and they play various
roles in transcription as well as RNA processing. Among the FET family
proteins, the TAF15 protein level was specifically increased in DTCs,
suggesting that TAF15-specific function may contribute to DTC formation.
Next, we examined whether TAF15 protein depletion by siRNA affects DTC
formation. The TAF15 depletion preferentially inhibited DTC formation
despite the fact that the degree of inhibition to the control colony
formation was limited. With an anti-TAF15 siRNA treatment, the original
small, round-shaped MKN45 cells exhibited spindle-like morphological
changes within 48 hrs. Interestingly, -AMA treatment also induced similar
morphological changes, suggesting that RNAPII inhibition caused TAF15
depletion. Consistent with the morphological changes, both TAF15 mRNA and
protein levels decreased in response to -AMA treatment.Conclusion: These
results suggest that TAF15 is an important mediator of RNAPII-dependent
drug tolerance and one of the potential molecular therapeutic targets of
-AMA in the context of cancer relapse after chemotherapy.

