Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the TGF pathway with galunisertib, a small molecule
inhibitor of TGFRI, promotes anti-tumor immunity leading to durable,
complete responses, as monotherapy and in combination with checkpoint
inhibition


TGF signaling is known to play a central role in tumor biology, via
inducing and/or enhancing tumor cell growth and differentiation,
modulating the extracellular matrix in the stroma, inducing epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, modulating angiogenesis, and inhibiting immune
surveillance and anti-tumor immunity. Galunisertib is a pharmacological
inhibitor of the TGF pathway which acts by inhibiting signaling though
TGFRI. Galunisertib is currently being evaluated clinically in several
Phase I and II studies; as a monotherapy, galunisertib has shown
antitumor activity against a variety of tumors, including durable and
long-term responses in patients with glioma.To explore the impact of
Galunisertib monotherapy on anti-tumor T cell immunity, we utilized
murine tumor models. Treatment of mice with 4T1-LP (poorly immunogenic
4T1 breast tumor engineered to express luciferase) implanted in the
mammary fat pad resulted in strong dose-dependent anti-tumor activity
with nearly 100% inhibition of tumor growth across doses during the
dosing period, with complete tumor rejection upon cessation of treatment
in 50% of animals at the highest dose tested; depletion studies
demonstrated that rejection of 4T1-LP was dependent on the presence of
CD8+ T cells. Rechallenge of treated, tumor free mice resulted in
complete rejection of 4T1-LP tumor cells but no rejection of EMT6-LM2
tumor cells, demonstrating the establishment of a durable response and
immunological memory. Treatment of mice bearing parental 4T1 tumors in
the mammary fat pad resulted in no significant inhibition of tumor
growth, indicating that the presence of a foreign antigen (i.e. LP),
potentially enhanced the ability to reject the 4T1-LP derivative. Animals
that rejected the immunogenic 4T1-LP cells were able to also reject 4T1
parental cells upon rechallenge, suggesting the development of a
secondary immune response via antigen spreading as a consequence of
effective tumor targeting. In the CT26 murine colon carcinoma model,
treatment with galunisertib or anti-PD-L1 as monotherapies resulted in
tumor growth inhibition compared to control of 75% and 86%, respectively
(T/C values of 25% and 14%); complete responders were observed in about
20% of treated animals in both monotherapy groups. Combination of
galunisertib with anti-PD-L1 resulted in an enhanced tumor growth
inhibition of 98% (T/C value of 2%), and a complete response rate of 50%,
suggesting at least additive activity with potential for synergy when
targeting the TGF and PD-1 pathways. Taken together, these data
demonstrate the potential for galunisertib treatment to enhance the
development of anti- tumor T cell immunity, which can be enhanced by
combinations with immune check point inhibitors.

