Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Image analysis-based PD-L1 companion and complementary diagnostics


The PD-1 pathway, comprised of the immune cell co-receptor Programmed
Death 1 (PD-1) and its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2, mediates local
immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment. Immune checkpoint
modulators are designed to block the local immunosuppression caused by
this pathway. The FDA approved anti-PD-1 antibody therapies Opdivo
(nivolumab; Bristol-Myers Squibb) and Keytruda (prembrolizumab; Merck &
Co) rely on PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) in vitro diagnostic (IVD)
tests to determine the PD-L1 status in patients in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), in order to predict response to these drugs. The current
complementary diagnostic for Opdivo (Dako 28-8 PharmDx) relies on a
pathologist scoring paradigm which considers any patient with 1% positive
tumor cells an optimal candidate for Opdivo treatment. However, overall
survival (OS) is further increased when patients have 5% or 10% PD-L1
positive tumor cells. This scoring approach is vastly different than the
PD-L1 scoring approach used in the Keytruda companion diagnostic (Dako
22C3 PharmDx), which utilizes a 50% positive tumor cells value to predict
a positive Overall Response Rate (ORR; OS not yet determined). Thus, the
28-8 test for Opdivo utilizes a more precise approach than the 22C3 test
for Keytruda, and requires a more calibrated scoring approach. This
calibrated approach for Opdivo requires the difficult challenge of
pathologists reliably distinguishing membrane staining to define the fine
gradations of 1%, 5% and 10% PD-L1 positive neoplastic cells. To best
meet this challenge, we developed a digital Tissue Image Analysis (TIA)
solution which enabled accurate, unbiased quantification of PD-L1 on a
cell-by-cell basis to classify the percentage positive tumor cells in
patients with high granularity. Using Flagship's proprietary CellMapTM
algorithm, we evaluated 40 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
NS-NSCLC samples which were stained using the Dako 28-8 PharmDx PD-L1 IHC
test. The TIA strategy digitally separated tumor cells from other cell
types, and quantified membrane staining intensity according to a
consistent threshold. The performance of the resulting IHC-TIA assay was
evaluated in the context of a CLIA validation study performed by
Flagship. The results demonstrated equivalency to the manually scored IVD
reference standard; however, the TIA scoring of this assay provided
consistent, unbiased, and more detailed scoring of PD-L1 stained tissues
for determining the patients with 1, 5, and 10% PD-L1 positive tumor
cells with greater confidence than a manual scoring approach. Moving
forward, these TIA tools can be utilized to assess PD-L1 positive cell
frequencies with greater reliability and granularity to identify optimal
treatment cutpoints for these and other PD-L1 IHC tests used to predict
response to PD-L1/PD-1 inhibitors.

