Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The roles of FGF-2-NCAM/FGFR1 interplay in esophageal squamous
cell carcinomas and its microenvironment including tumor-associated
macrophages


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) have important roles in the
angiogenesis, tumor immunosuppression and tumor infiltration of various
cancers. Previously, we reported that a large number of infiltrated tumor
promoting CD204+ TAMs within esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs)
contributed to the significant association of clinicopathological
malignancy and poor disease free survival. However, the relevant
malignant progression mechanisms have not been studied explicitly yet. To
elucidate roles of TAMs in ESCCs, we established an in vitro macrophage
model using human peripheral blood acquired by healthy volunteer donors.
Peripheral blood monocytes were treated with 25 ng/mL recombinant human
M-CSF for 6 days to induce macrophage-like differentiation
(macrophage-like cells), then exposed to the conditioned media of TE
series ESCC cell lines (TECM) for 2 days to induce TAM-like cells. From
the cDNA microarray data between macrophages-like cells treated with and
without TECM, we interested in upregulated genes. Among highly expressed
genes in TAM-like cells, we focused on neural cell adhesion molecule
(NCAM) which was a possibility to act on the regulation between tumor and
its surrounding stroma. Gene knockdown of NCAM by siRNA in TAM-like cells
revealed significant suppression of cell survival and migration via
decrease of PI3K/Akt signaling and downregulation of fibroblast growth
factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) expression. Interestingly, fibroblast growth
factor-2 (FGF-2) derived from ESCCs promotes FGF2/FGFR1 autocrine loop,
and activates FGFR1 signaling in TAM-like cells. Furthermore, we analyzed
70 ESCC tissue samples by immunohistochemistry whether the expression
levels of FGF-2 were associated with clinicopathological background
factors of ESCC patients. Relationships of the expression levels of FGF-2
in human ESCC stromal cells including macrophages had a correlation with
the depth of invasion, blood vessel invasion, TNM classification UICC
cancer staging and high number of infiltrating CD163 positive and CD204
positive macrophages as a marker for the M2 macrophage phenotype. These
findings may indicate novel roles of FGF-2-NCAM/FGFR1 interplay in ESCCs
and its microenvironment including TAMs.

