Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) expression by
apatorsen as a therapeutic strategy in breast cancer


Background: Heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) is over-expressed in a number
of cancers, including breast cancer, and interacts with apoptotic
proteins inhibiting the apoptotic process and promoting tumourgenesis.
Clinically, Hsp27 expression has been associated with a more aggressive
phenotype and resistance to chemotherapy. Apatorsen (OGX-427) is a
therapeutic antisense oligonucleotide designed to specifically target
Hsp27. Apatorsen has shown single agent clinical activity, and randomised
trials in combination with chemotherapy are underway. Here we present
pre-clinical validation of inhibition of Hsp27 expression by apatorsen as
a novel therapeutic strategy in breast cancer.Results: Basal expression
analysis of Hsp27 by qPCR and western blot in a panel of >20 breast
cancer cell lines demonstrated a wide variation with up to 3-log
difference in expression between cell lines and good correlation of RNA
and protein expression levels. Hsp27 expression increased after treatment
with chemotherapy agents. Treatment with apatorsen caused rapid reduction
of cellular Hsp27 levels within 24-48 hours; effects on Hsp27 levels were
sustained for 5 and 7 days. Knockdown of Hsp27 was associated with
significant reduction of cell survival with 38-93% loss of cell viability
across the cell line panel (compared to mismatched oligonucleotide).
There was no association between response to apatorsen and basal Hsp27
expression or molecular breast cancer subtype. Using whole genome mRNA
(Illumina Human HT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip Kit) and methylation
analysis (Illumina Human 450K Methylation BeadChip), we were unable to
define a predictive signature of response to apatorsen. Co-treatment of
breast cancer cell lines with apatorsen and Doxorubicin, Paclitaxel and
Vinorelbine chemotherapy showed an additive cytotoxic effect. In vivo
validation of the effects of apatorsen is ongoing.Conclusions:
Therapeutic silencing of Hsp27 expression in breast cancer cell lines
with apatorsen presents a novel strategy for the treatment of disease.
Here we present data to support the use of apatorsen in combination with
conventional chemotherapy for the treatment of breast cancer.

