Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL7-CXCR2 axis as a novel prognostic factor in myeloid cell
associated glioblastoma


Glioblastoma (GBM), a grade IV glioma, is considered highly vascular and
invasive subtype. GBM is most lethal during first year after initial
diagnosis despite surgical resection, radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy.
Antiangiogenic treatments (AATs) against VEGF-VEGFR pathways resulted
into increased GBM tumor growth with marked hypoxia and increased
recruitment of bone marrow derived cells (BMDCs) to the tumor
microenvironment (TME), without any survival benefits.Preclinical studies
have found that AAT failures were associated with increased bone
marrow-derived tumor-associated myeloid cells (TAMCs) in GBM. Depletion
of CSF1R+ myeloid cells using GW2580 decreased recruitment of TAMCs in
the tumor, and reduced GBM growth. Interestingly, AAT increased the
expression of CXCL7 chemokine, and CSF1R blockade decreased CXCL7 in GBM
microenvironment. In addition, CXCL7 expression was correlated with
number of tumor infiltrating bone marrow derived cells, phospho-ERK MAPK
expression, and proliferation of bone marrow cells in GBM.Here, we looked
at the prognostic significance of CXCL7 and its receptor CXCR2 in human
GBM. We performed systematic human data analysis (www.oncomine.com),
which revealed that CXCL7 is highly expressed (43 to 150 fold) in normal
BM compared to other normal organs. This suggests that CXCL7 is required
for BM cell survival and migration both in normal and tumor conditions.
In GBM datasets, CXCL7 mRNA expression in tumor was increased (> 4.5
fold) in GBM patients (n = 27) compared to normal brain (n = 4). CXCL7
mRNA expression was seen more in stroma (n = 4) than tumor cells (n = 5).
Overall survival status analysis showed that patients with GBM who died
early (n = 28) had significantly higher CXCL7 mRNA expression compared to
living patients (n = 10). In addition, increased CXCL7 mRNA expression
was associated with the GBM tumor recurrence (n = 8) compared to primary
occurrence (n = 8). Interestingly, CXCL7 mRNA expression was correlated
with the CXCR2 mRNA expression (CXCL7 receptor) both in normal (0.7, n =
71) and brain tumor tissues (0.6, n = 68). Similarly, CXCR2 mRNA
expression was increased in GBM (n = 78) compared to other brain tumors.
CXCR2 mRNA expression was seen more in stroma (n = 4) than tumor cells (n
= 5). Patients with GBM, who died early (n = 19) had significantly higher
CXCR2 mRNA expression compared to living patients (n = 10). In addition,
increased CXCR2 mRNA expression was associated with the GBM tumor
recurrence (n = 8) compared to primary occurrence (n = 8). However, data
regarding the CXCL7 and CXCR2 expression in response to AATs is lacking
in human cancer datasets.In summary, we identified CXCL7-CXCR2 axis as a
novel prognostic factor in GBM. However, studies are required to
investigate CXCL7-CXCR2 regulation in myeloid cell survival/ polarization
in TME.

