Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel drivers of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition across multiple cancer types: from bioinformatics to the bench


To emigrate from a primary tumor to a distant site, a proliferating
cancer cell must acquire the phenotypic traits necessary for migration
and invasion. This shift from growing to going, termed
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), may be a genetic or
epigenetic phenomenon, ultimately characterized by altered cellular
function that promotes metastasis. In addition to its role in malignant
progression, EMT is integral in development and for healthy wound
healing. EMT has been described in all carcinomas, and, because it of its
established physiologic role, we hypothesize that there are a set of
central EMT regulators that are universal to all carcinoma types. To
identify global regulators of EMT, we integrated data from 15 published
gene expression microarray studies that include a total of 49 epithelial
and 46 mesenchymal cell line samples across 6 malignant tissue types
(breast, prostate, colon, esophageal, liver, retinal pigment) and with
various in vitro EMT induction strategies. While accounting for batch
effects and other technical variability inherent in gene expression data,
we performed differential expression analysis to identify genes that vary
significantly between epithelial and mesenchymal states. Importantly, we
found differential expression of established EMT markers (e.g. CDH1,
ZEB1) validating our approach. We also identified genes that had not
previously been implicated in cancer progression, representing novel
candidate drivers of EMT, for example SARG (C1orf116). We found that SARG
expression is decreased in high-grade cancer and metastatic disease, and
is negatively associated with chemotherapy resistance across multiple
cancer types (Oncomine). In an in vitro model of prostate cancer EMT, we
found that SARG had >5-fold increased RNA and protein expression in
PC3-epithelial cells. Knockdown of SARG expression in PC3-epithelial
cells resulted in decreased gene expression of the epithelial-marker CDH1
and elevated expression of the mesenchymal marker CDH2, suggesting a role
as a driver of the epithelial phenotype. In parallel with functional in
vitro experiments, we have applied a Bayesian network learning approach
to identify differentially expressed genes that are likely to play
regulatory roles in EMT with causal influence on other genes.
Importantly, this analysis provides valuable information regarding novel
downstream effectors of known key regulators of EMT such as CDH1 and
ELF3. Moreover, we also identified new EMT regulators such as CEP170 that
have not been previously described. Experiments are underway to further
explore the functional implications of these gene networks. This
integrative approach of global gene expression analysis, network
learning, and functional validation may identify causal genes and
regulatory interactions in EMT, both expanding upon current knowledge and
identifying novel drivers of this key metastatic process.

