Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptide-mediated miniprep isolation of extracellular vesicles for
high-throughput proteomics; method evaluation and application in colon
cancer


Background: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-secreted membrane
vesicles enclosed by a lipid bilayer derived from endosomes or from the
plasma membrane. Since they are released into body fluids, and their
cargo includes tissue-specific and disease-related molecules, EVs
represent a rich source for disease biomarkers. However, standard
ultracentrifugation methods for EV isolation (UC-EV) are laborious,
time-consuming, and require high inputs. Recently a novel isolation
method was described, which can be performed at small miniprep scale,
utilizes specific Heat Shock Protein (HSP)-binding peptides to aggregate
HSP-decorated EVs (Ghosh et al. (2014), PLoS ONE 9:e110443). Using cancer
secretome and biofluid samples, the authors showed enrichment of exosome
markers for their method (abbreviated HSP-EV here) but a detailed
description of the captured EV proteomes in comparison to the
gold-standard ultracentrifugation (UC) method and application to small
tumor proximal fluid samples is lacking.Approach: Here we used label-free
proteomics of replicate EV isolations from HT-29 cancer cell-conditioned
medium to compare EV fractions captured using the new HSP peptide method
and UC. Subsequently we applied this novel method to profile EVs released
from fresh human colorectal tumors (CRC) (n = 17) and colon adenoma (n =
4) tissue as well as patient-matched normal colon tissue.Results: Despite
a 30-fold different input scale (UC-EV: 60 ml versus HSP-EV: 2 ml), both
methods yielded comparable numbers of identified proteins (3115 versus
3085), with reproducible identifications (72.5% versus 75.5%) and
spectral count-based quantification (average CV 31% versus 27%). EVs
obtained by either method contained established EV markers and proteins
linked to vesicle-related gene ontologies. In the EV fraction of the
tissue secretomes 6390 proteins were identified, of which 471 proteins
were significantly 5-fold more present in CRC samples than in normal
tissue EVs. Gene ontology analysis revealed enrichment of nuclear
proteins involved in DNA damage response, chromosome organization and RNA
processing in the CRC EVs.Conclusion: The HSP-EV method provides an
advantageous, simple and rapid approach for EV isolation from small
amounts of biological samples, enabling high-throughput analysis in a
biomarker discovery setting.

