Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of the cocaine and amphetamine regulated
transcript (CART) in cancer


The cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript (CART) is well
documented in the central nervous system for its role in appetite
regulation and reward pathways. In recent studies CART has been proven to
be a poor prognostic marker in lymph node-negative, estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer patients, and has also been shown to be
associated with worse survival in small bowel carcinoid tumours. The
regulation of CART in these different cancer types however remains
largely unknown. The presence of a large CpG island in the putative
promoter region and the lack of expression of CART in many cancer cell
lines suggest a possible epigenetic mechanism of suppression.A panel of
various cancer cell lines (breast, colorectal, endometrial and ovarian)
were assessed for endogenous CART expression via western blot and RT-PCR.
Cells were then treated with forskolin and leptin; agents which have been
previously shown to induce CART expression in the CNS. Cells were also
treated with CART conditioned media, which has been previously shown to
be the only factor capable of inducing CART expression. Treatment was
carried out with varying doses of two DNA methyltransferase inhibitors,
5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine and RG108, followed by examination of CART
expression post treatment. Bisulfite sequencing of the promoter region of
CART was performed in all cell lines and a small selection of formalin
fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. Whole methylome sequencing
was carried out to confirm this promoter region of CART and study the
global effects of treatment with epigenetic modifiers and CART
peptide.Assessment of a collection of cell lines via western blot has
shown CART expression to be negative across the panel. Moreover,
treatment with forskolin and leptin did not result in re-expression of
CART. Treatment with 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine has however resulted in
increased CART mRNA levels, and subsequent bisulfite sequencing of the
promoter region of CART has revealed dense methylation at the CpG island.
Treatment with CART conditioned media may also induce promoter
demethylation and subsequent re-expression of CART. Collectively, this
data suggests the potential involvement of DNA methylation in the
regulation of CART.

