Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of breast tumor T-cell infiltration in
exome datasets


Tumors are heterogeneous, containing tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) which presence has been associated with favorable prognosis in
multiple tumor types. Importantly, most of the T-cell specificity for
tumor neo-antigen lies in a unique sequence of DNA (CDR3) resulting from
the recombination of the V, D, and J segments of the T-cell receptor beta
(TCRB clonotype). The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) is the most
comprehensive molecular dataset of tumors but does not include detailed
information about TILs or tumor immunity in general. In order to
characterize the T-cell infiltration in public cancer genomic datasets,
we hypothesize that such a unique CDR3 DNA fragment can be recovered from
bulk tumor genome-wide DNA or RNA sequencing and that the information can
be used for clinical association studies.We first establish the
feasibility of the approach by comparing the deep CDR3 sequencing
(ImmunoSeq) and CDR3 reads recovered in tumor exome data. The clonotypes
were detected using three CDR3 read detection tools and results were
compared to the ImmunoSeq results. Each tool identifies between 10 and 38
reads. As expected, most of the CDR3 reads are misaligned to the nave
reference genome (60% clipped). Across all three tools, we identify 26
unique clonotypes, 15 of which are detected in the ImmunoSeq experiment.
IMSEQ shows the strongest overlap with the other tools (13/14 clonotypes)
and with ImmunoSeq (9/14 clonotypes) showing that our strategy identifies
bona fide CDR3 reads from exome datasets. We applied the approach to a
cohort of 1,078 TCGA samples. We identified CDR3 reads in 473 samples
which are more likely to have a higher fraction of TILs as detected by
histological review (p = 1.1410-8). Using the RNA-seq datasets, 906
samples had CDR3 reads and also associated with higher TIL content (p =
4.4110-6). Tumors with CDR3 reads in both DNA and RNA datasets tend have
a higher TIL fraction. A set of 66 tumors shares a unique TCR clonotype
with however no association with tumor subtypes or HLA haplotype. When
restricted to Her2+ tumors, high CDR3 read counts, but not high fraction
of TILs, was associated with better overall survival (p = 0.016),
suggesting that CDR3 reads are predictive of anti-Her2 response. In
contrast, the presence of CDR3 reads in Her2- tumors is not prognostic. A
detailed analysis of 22 immune meta-gene expression signatures in these
samples complements CDR3 reads information and suggests mechanisms of
immune-tolerance.Our results demonstrate the feasibility of identifying
genetic evidence of T-cells in bulk tumor samples using deep sequencing,
providing information about the T-cell abundance and clonal identity.
This novel type of tumor immune biomarker enriches the comprehensive
dataset collected through TCGA, and reveals correlations with other
molecular features and clinical outcomes.

