Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation of primary human tumor cells significantly reduces bias
in molecular analysis and improves culture of target cells


Solid tumors are infiltrated by cells of non-tumor origin, including
heterogeneous lymphocyte subpopulations, fibroblasts, and endothelial
cells. The amount and composition of infiltrating cells is highly
variable and patient dependent, which makes analyses of primary tumor
samples difficult. The contaminating cells lead to hybridization of
non-tumor cell derived mRNA molecules to probes on microarrays and a
significant reduction of sensitivity caused by measurement of irrelevant
signals during next-generation sequencing or proteome analysis can be
expected. In addition, the culture of human tumor cells is frequently
hampered by fibroblasts overgrowing the target cells, which bias assays
such as drug sensitivity tests. To overcome these limitations, we have
developed a fast and easy method to isolate untouched human tumor cells
from primary tissue. This procedure is based on the comprehensive
depletion of cells of non-tumor origin by combining automated tissue
dissociation and magnetic cell sorting (MACS). A negative selection
strategy enables the isolation of the tumor cell population without
knowledge of surface protein expression on these cells. Even tissues that
initially contain low numbers of tumor cells (Solid tumors are
infiltrated by cells of non-tumor origin, including heterogeneous
lymphocyte subpopulations, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. The amount
and composition of infiltrating cells is highly variable and patient
dependent, which makes analyses of primary tumor samples difficult. The
contaminating cells lead to hybridization of non-tumor cell derived mRNA
molecules to probes on microarrays and a significant reduction of
sensitivity caused by measurement of irrelevant signals during
next-generation sequencing or proteome analysis can be expected. In
addition, the culture of human tumor cells is frequently hampered by
fibroblasts overgrowing the target cells, which bias assays such as drug
sensitivity tests. To overcome these limitations, we have developed a
fast and easy method to isolate untouched human tumor cells from primary
tissue. This procedure is based on the comprehensive depletion of cells
of non-tumor origin by combining automated tissue dissociation and
magnetic cell sorting (MACS). A negative selection strategy enables the
isolation of the tumor cell population without knowledge of surface
protein expression on these cells. Even tissues that initially contain
low numbers of tumor cells (< 20%) reach purities of higher than 95% in
less than 20 minutes. Here, we have applied this method to isolate human
tumor cells from primary and metastatic ovarian carcinoma and thymoma
specimens. The purified human ovarian carcinoma tumor cell fraction was
further used for the isolation of CD133+ cancer stem cells. Cultivation
of human tumor cells was more consistent with prior removal of
contaminating stromal cells than without. Whole genome expression
profiling of bulk human tumor tissue and matched purified tumor cells
showed a significant reduction in stroma specific gene expression
signatures while tumor specific signatures were enriched. Moreover, the
comparison of expression profiles of isolated cancer stem cells to their
parent population of purified tumor cells indicate that different tumor
cell subpopulations could be characterized more precisely than if the
unpurified fraction was used as reference. This suggests a reduced risk
of misinterpretation when only purified tumor cells are evaluated or used
as a control for smaller subpopulations. Whole exome sequencing of the
same samples further verified the benefit of tumor cell purification from
stromal contamination. The sequence read heterogeneity was dramatically
reduced in the purifiedsamples. The reduction of non-tumor cell derived
DNA, therefore, led to the detection of a higher number of tumor specific
SNPs and INDELS, and consequently in a higher confidence in the results,
in particular for mutations only present in a subset of tumor cells.
Taken together, removal of non-tumor cells strongly improves their
subsequent culture and molecular analysis of primary human tumor tissue.

