Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET bromodomain degradation as a therapeutic strategy in
drug-resistant multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable malignancy with an unmet need for
novel therapeutic modalities. Moreover, acquired or de novo resistance to
established or novel therapeutics remains a major challenge in this, and
other, neoplasias. BET Bromodomain inhibitors (BBIs), including JQ1, have
potent anti-MM activity in vitro and in in vivo, but do not provide
curative outcome and do not induce apoptosis in most cell types. We
sought to investigate dBET, a class of BBIs that induce degradation of
BET Bromodomains (BRDs) through CRBN-mediated ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation, in drug-resistant MM. Additionally, we posited
that resistance to dBET treatment would emerge through genetic
perturbations and wished to uncover potential mechanisms prior to its
clinical utilization. To address this, we compared effects of optimized
lead compound, dBET6, with JQ1 on a panel of MM cell lines, including
clones resistant to JQ1 or bortezomib and assessed viability using
CS-BLI/CTG assay and BRD/c-MYC expression by western blot. Using an
open-ended unbiased genome-wide CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats)-associated Cas9 approach, we examined whether
we could uncover genes associated with resistance to dBET6. MM1.S cells
were transduced with Cas9 and pooled lentiviral particles of the GeCKO
library, consisting of 2 pooled sgRNA sub-libraries (120,000 sgRNAs;
targeting 19,000 genes and 1800 miRNAs). Using this CRISPR/Cas9-based
approach we sought to expedite the isolation of MM cells resistant to
dBET6. We treated the pool of cells thrice with dBET (IC80), allowing
regrowth between treatments and maintaining a coverage of 1000
cells/sgRNA. dBET6-resistant cells were processed to quantify sgRNA
enrichment or depletion, using deep sequencing. We observed dBET6 to have
significantly greater potency against MM cells than JQ1, or its
combination with lenalidomide, and that MM1S.CRBN-/- cells were resistant
to dBET6. Resistance to neither JQ1 nor Bortezomib conferred resistance
to dBET6. We observed dBET6 to induce rapid (Multiple myeloma (MM) is an
incurable malignancy with an unmet need for novel therapeutic modalities.
Moreover, acquired or de novo resistance to established or novel
therapeutics remains a major challenge in this, and other, neoplasias.
BET Bromodomain inhibitors (BBIs), including JQ1, have potent anti-MM
activity in vitro and in in vivo, but do not provide curative outcome and
do not induce apoptosis in most cell types. We sought to investigate
dBET, a class of BBIs that induce degradation of BET Bromodomains (BRDs)
through CRBN-mediated ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, in
drug-resistant MM. Additionally, we posited that resistance to dBET
treatment would emerge through genetic perturbations and wished to
uncover potential mechanisms prior to its clinical utilization. To
address this, we compared effects of optimized lead compound, dBET6, with
JQ1 on a panel of MM cell lines, including clones resistant to JQ1 or
bortezomib and assessed viability using CS-BLI/CTG assay and BRD/c-MYC
expression by western blot. Using an open-ended unbiased genome-wide
CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats)-associated Cas9 approach, we examined whether we could uncover
genes associated with resistance to dBET6. MM1.S cells were transduced
with Cas9 and pooled lentiviral particles of the GeCKO library,
consisting of 2 pooled sgRNA sub-libraries (120,000 sgRNAs; targeting
19,000 genes and 1800 miRNAs). Using this CRISPR/Cas9-based approach we
sought to expedite the isolation of MM cells resistant to dBET6. We
treated the pool of cells thrice with dBET (IC80), allowing regrowth
between treatments and maintaining a coverage of 1000 cells/sgRNA.
dBET6-resistant cells were processed to quantify sgRNA enrichment or
depletion, using deep sequencing. We observed dBET6 to have significantly
greater potency against MM cells than JQ1, or its combination with
lenalidomide, and that MM1S.CRBN-/- cells were resistant to dBET6.
Resistance to neither JQ1 nor Bortezomib conferred resistance to dBET6.
We observed dBET6 to induce rapid (<4hrs) degradation of BRD2, BRD3 and
BRD4 and complete absence of c-MYC protein, in contrast to JQ1 which
caused dose-dependent down-regulation of c-MYC, and apparent upregulation
of BRD4. As predicted, our CRISPR/Cas9 screen identified significant
enrichment of sgRNAs targeting CRBN, as well as the Cullin-RING ligase
(CRL) complex, known to play a critical role in E3 ubiquitin ligase
activity. In summary, our data support the development of dBET for the
treatment of drug-resistant MM. Additionally, our results demonstrate
that loss of function of CRBN or the CRL complex induces dBET resistance
by perturbing dBET-mediated BRD4 degradation. However, it is plausible
that additional CRBN/CRL-independent mechanisms of dBET resistance exist
that allow cells to survive despite complete degradation of BRDs and this
will be a key question to be answered in future studies.

