Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated analysis of gene mutations and gene sets for
predicting paclitaxel response in lung adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. A prevalent
histological subtype of lung cancer is adenocarcinoma. Chemotherapies and
targeted therapies have been developed to treat such malignancy. However,
due to the heterogeneity of cancer genomes, drug responses vary
considerably among patients and the average survival rate remains quite
unsatisfactory. Therefore, integrated biomarkers for predicting drug
responses are greatly needed. Addressing this, in the present study we
aimed to develop a prediction model based on an integrated analysis of
gene mutations and gene sets. Briefly, the two-tailed Student's t-test
was performed to identify the gene mutations and gene sets of which
activities were associated with drug sensitivity, and classification
trees were derived from these genomic features. We applied the analysis
to genomic datasets and drug sensitivity data from the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) and gene sets defined in the Molecular Signatures
Database (MSigDB), and constructed a prediction model for response to
paclitaxel, a widely used drug for cancers, in lung adenocarcinoma.
Taking KRAS mutation as an example, we identified 20 and 15 drug
response-associated gene sets in KRAS-mutant and KRAS-wild type cell
lines, respectively. The two lists of gene sets were mutually exclusive,
suggesting the need of building individual prediction models for groups
of cancer subtypes. We then built a classification tree for each of the
two groups and tested their prediction performance by leave one out
cross-validation tests; 64% and 81% accuracy was achieved for KRAS-mutant
and KRAS-wild type cell lines, respectively. Gene sets of SIG_CHEMOTAXIS
and PID_ERB_GENOMIC_PATHWAY served as crucial nodes for the trees of
KRAS-mutant and KRAS-wild type cells, respectively. In conclusion, we
developed a novel method that integrates gene mutations and gene sets for
predicting drug responses and demonstrated its high performance in lung
adenocarcinoma. Our model is widely applicable to identify potent
biomarkers for anticancer drugs in cancers and accelerate the realization
of precision medicine.

