Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy with anti-PSMA x anti-CD3 bispecific antibody
stimulates potent killing of a human prostate cancer cell line and
target-mediated T cell activation in monkeys: A potential therapy for
prostate cancer


PSMA (Prostate-Specific Membrane Antigen) is a promising therapeutic
target in prostate cancer. Exploiting the high and selective expression
of PSMA in the prostate, capromab and J591 antibodies are used as imaging
or therapeutic agents, and antibody-toxin conjugates such as MLN2704 are
being developed. Such antibodies do not stimulate T cell-mediated killing
of prostate cancer cells; however, promising clinical data with T
cell-recruiting bispecific agents and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T
cells have created new immunotherapy paradigms that may also have
potential in prostate cancer.We designed long-acting humanized bispecific
antibodies that coengage PSMA+ cells and CD3+ T cells to stimulate
redirected T cell-mediated cytotoxicity (RTCC) of prostate cancer cells.
Unlike other bispecific formats, our antibodies possess an Fc domain and
form stable heterodimers that are easily manufactured. Binding to Fc
receptors was also abolished (reducing the potential for nonselective T
cell activation), yet binding to human FcRn was preserved to maintain
long serum half-life.We screened several anti-PSMA x anti-CD3 bispecific
antibodies in vitro, and selected XmAb14484 based on its potent (PSMA
(Prostate-Specific Membrane Antigen) is a promising therapeutic target in
prostate cancer. Exploiting the high and selective expression of PSMA in
the prostate, capromab and J591 antibodies are used as imaging or
therapeutic agents, and antibody-toxin conjugates such as MLN2704 are
being developed. Such antibodies do not stimulate T cell-mediated killing
of prostate cancer cells; however, promising clinical data with T
cell-recruiting bispecific agents and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T
cells have created new immunotherapy paradigms that may also have
potential in prostate cancer.We designed long-acting humanized bispecific
antibodies that coengage PSMA+ cells and CD3+ T cells to stimulate
redirected T cell-mediated cytotoxicity (RTCC) of prostate cancer cells.
Unlike other bispecific formats, our antibodies possess an Fc domain and
form stable heterodimers that are easily manufactured. Binding to Fc
receptors was also abolished (reducing the potential for nonselective T
cell activation), yet binding to human FcRn was preserved to maintain
long serum half-life.We screened several anti-PSMA x anti-CD3 bispecific
antibodies in vitro, and selected XmAb14484 based on its potent (<
1ng/ml) stimulation of human T cell killing of the LNCaP prostate tumor
cell line. RTCC activity required PSMA binding, because a non-specific
control (XENP13245, anti-RSV x anti-CD3) was inactive. XmAb14484
crossreacts with monkey but not mouse targets; therefore, we evaluated
its effects in cynomolgus monkeys. Peripheral blood cells do not express
PSMA, so we were unable to monitor target cell depletion. However, T cell
engagement of target cells induces distinct effects on peripheral T
cells, which can be used as surrogate markers for activity in the
prostate. After treatment with 0.03 mg/kg XmAb14484, CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells were rapidly activated (quantified by CD69 upregulation) and
redistributed from the periphery. Serum cytokines including IL-6 and TNF
were also strongly induced. T cell and cytokine responses returned to
baseline within 2-3 days. In marked contrast, a 100-fold higher dose (3
mg/kg) of the anti-RSV x anti-CD3 control antibody induced minimal
effects, demonstrating that PSMA+ target cells are required for T cell
activation by XmAb14484.In summary, the pharmacologic activities of
XmAb14484 on human cells and in monkeys support its clinical assessment
in prostate cancer. We also demonstrate that T cell effects readily
measured in peripheral blood (T cell redistribution, activation and
cytokine induction) are useful surrogate markers of target-specific
engagement.

