Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination use of natural Hsp90 inhibitors to reverse
BRCA1-mediated platinum resistance in triple negative breast cancer


Background: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are highly associated
with an aggressive clinical course and poor prognosis, largely due to
resistance to chemotherapy. Platinum-based therapies act by causing DNA
damage, which in the absence of a functional DNA repair system, leads to
cancer cell death. BRCA1, a well-studied tumor suppressor, is critical
for repairing DNA damage by homologous recombination. This ability makes
BRCA1 an attractive therapeutic target for the re-sensitization of cancer
cells to platinum chemotherapies. Recently, we have demonstrated that the
chaperone protein heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is required for BRCA1
stability. While targeted elimination of HSP90s results in a loss of
BRCA1, current pharmacological inhibitors also exhibit toxicity unrelated
to HSP90. We have found that the natural compounds gedunin, triptolide,
and celastrol can modulate HSP90 expression without negative side
effects. We believe that combinatory use of these non-toxic compounds can
further reduce BRCA1 expression beyond their individual effect to
overcome BRCA1-mediated resistance to platinum-based chemotherapies.Study
Design: The goal of these experiments is to identify a combination of
gedunin, celastrol, and triptolide to maximize BRCA1 degradation (via
inhibition of HSP90), impairing the DNA repair system, and allowing
carboplatin to effectively eradicate TNBC cells. Using in vitro
techniques we will identify the most potent combination of gedunin,
celastrol and triptolide to maximize BRCA1 degradation. We will then
confirm that this is a HSP90 mediate event that results in the impairment
of DNA repair. Using in vivo models of breast cancer we will demonstrate
that natural compounds will sensitize BRCA-expressing TNBC cells to
carboplatin, inhibiting breast cancer progression and tumor
growth.Results: Using Western analysis, we have found that gedunin,
celastrol and triptolide each can attenuate HSP90 activity, leading to
BRCA1 degradation in BT-20 and MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells. Additionally, we
have observed that gedunin, celastrol, and triptolide can each prevent
formation of radiation-induced DNA repair complex, as evident by -H2AX
staining, in HCC1937BRCA1 TNBC cells. Once we identify the most potent
combination of our natural compounds, TNBC xenografts with be created and
treated with the combination and carboplatin to demonstrate sensitivity
to platinum treatment and inhibition of breast cancer
progression.Significance: In order to increase survival rates in TNBC
patients, it is essential that resistance to chemotherapy be overcome.
Successful completion of these studies demonstrating that natural
compounds can act as HSP90 inhibitors to reverse platinum resistance
without added toxicity would facilitate their rapid incorporation into
clinical trials and provide a critically needed therapy for women with
TNBC.

