Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel small molecule inhibitor of the Notch transcription
activation complex


NOTCH signaling is a developmental pathway known to play critical roles
during embryonic development as well as for the regulation of
self-renewing tissues. Aberrant activation of NOTCH signaling leads to
deregulation of the self-renewal process resulting in sustained
proliferation, evasion of cell death, loss of differentiation capacity,
invasion and metastasis, all of which are hallmarks of cancer. Over
activation of NOTCH in human cancers can be a consequence of over
expression of NOTCH ligands/receptors, GOF mutations in NOTCH receptors
as well as chromosomal translocations leading to constitutive activation
of the pathway. Given the importance of Notch signaling in human cancers,
several therapeutic approaches have been utilized to block NOTCH
signaling. Two of these strategies are; a) the use of monoclonal blocking
antibodies (Mabs) against NOTCH ligands and receptors and b) the use of
small molecule -secretase inhibitors (GSIs). However, these approaches
can only be effective if tumor cells express full-length ligand or
receptor molecules. On the contrary, in human cancers harbouring NOTCH
gene fusion due to chromosomal translocations, the use of Mabs and GSIs
will have very limited clinical benefits. A third, yet not fully explored
approach could be the blockage of NOTCH signalling by targeting the most
downstream event in the NOTCH cascade i,e NOTCH transcriptional
activation complex using small molecule inhibitors.Here we report
discovery and identification of a novel, orally-active small molecule
inhibitor, named CB-103, of the NOTCH pathway that blocks NOTCH signaling
by targeting the NOTCH transcriptional activation complex in the nucleus.
CB-103 has shown the ability to block NOTCH signalling in human cancer
cell lines, induce neurogenic phenotype in drosophila, induce muscle cell
differentiation and inhibit NOTCH dependent cellular processes in mice.
In addition, CB-103 exhibit anti-tumor efficacy in a xenograft model of
human triple negative breast cancer resistant to GSIs and Mabs against
NOTCH ligands/receptors. Furthermore, CB-103 has shown a remarkable
activity in PDX models of human T-ALL harbouring activation of the NOTCH
pathway. Additional studies are underway on several analogs of CB-103 to
determine ADME/PK/PD profile and nominate a development candidate for
further clinical development of this novel inhibitor of the NOTCH pathway.

