Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIT melanomas are developmentally racially biased


KIT is a critical pathway for melanocytic homeostasis and it is often
down-regulated in cutaneous melanoma. However, KIT activation plays a
critical role in a subpopulation of melanomas especially those in acral
locations and melanomas on chronically sun damaged skin. We analyzed
exome and RNAseq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Network (321
cutaneous melanomas in the data set) to identify patterns unique to KIT
activation. The melanomas were divided based on known mutually exclusive
mutations (BRAF, NRAS and KIT) vs those without (WT). We compared RNA
data between each group. KIT group had significantly higher expression of
KIT than BRAF, NRAS and WT (pKIT is a critical pathway for melanocytic
homeostasis and it is often down-regulated in cutaneous melanoma.
However, KIT activation plays a critical role in a subpopulation of
melanomas especially those in acral locations and melanomas on
chronically sun damaged skin. We analyzed exome and RNAseq data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Network (321 cutaneous melanomas in the data
set) to identify patterns unique to KIT activation. The melanomas were
divided based on known mutually exclusive mutations (BRAF, NRAS and KIT)
vs those without (WT). We compared RNA data between each group. KIT group
had significantly higher expression of KIT than BRAF, NRAS and WT
(p<0.01, FDRTT for UV, (G/A)C(G)>(G/A)T(G) for deamination, and G>T for
oxidative damage. UV and deamination appeared inversely proportional,
while oxidative damage appeared to be independent of those other two
features. KIT and WT had a greater% of non UV high deamination tumoral
environments. A fraction of these tumors also had very high oxidative
signatures. We then compared 2 KIT subgroups UV vs non UV (absence of
CC>TT mutations) for germline ethnicity differences. Asian SNPs were
highly increased in non UV subgroup whereas Caucasian SNPs were in UV
subgroup. Further, we divided KIT non UV subgroup into deamination and
oxidative damage subgroups and compared ethnicity differences.
Deamination was significantly higher in Asians whereas oxidative damage
was higher in Caucasians. A similar analysis was done to the WT group,
where African SNPs were significantly increased in the non UV subgroup
and were primarily associated with oxidative damage. This data implies
that KIT mutant melanomas develop in a unique genetic and mutational
environments and makes this an ideal system to in which study racial
disparities at the molecular level.

