Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Type II interleukin 1 receptor-modulated SETBP-1/SET/PP2A/p-ERK
signaling reduces the therapeutic activity of regorafenib against human
colorectal cancer cells


Regorafenib, a newly approved multi-kinase inhibitor by US FDA, has
recently demonstrated overall survival benefits in late-stage colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients. We have preliminarily observed that the expression
type II interleukin 1 receptor (IL1R2), an IL-1 decoy receptor, was
closely associated with regorafenib resistance in human CRC cells. We
also found that IL1R2 expression was associated with poor prognosis and
5-year survival of CRC patients. In this study, we conducted experiments
to elucidate the mechanisms underlying which IL1R2 is involved in
regorafenib resistance. We first demonstrated that silencing of IL1R2 in
HT29 cells overcame its resistance to regorafenib, whereas ectopic
expression of IL1R2 in HCT116 cells reduced its sensitivity to
regorafenib in either in vitro or in vivo assay systems. In addition, we
established regorafenib-resistant DLD-1 cells (DLD-1-R) by long-term
culturing DLD-1 cells in the presence of regorafenib, and we observed
that protein expression of IL1R2 was increased in DLD-1-R cells compared
to the parental DLD-1 cells. Furthermore, our results showed that IL1R2
expression was positively associated with p-ERK levels, which are crucial
for survival of cancer cells. Pretreatment of HT29, IL1R2-overexpressing
HCT116, and DLD-1-R cells with MEK/ERK inhibitor U0126 significantly
reversed their regorafenib resistance in in vitro and in vivo systems.
Mechanistically, we revealed that increased p-ERK levels in
IL1R2-overexpressing cells were due to the decrease of PP2A activity
instead of its expression levels. Since PP2A is a phosphatase of ERK, we
further demonstrated that IL1R2 mediated through transcriptionally
enhancing the expression of SETBP-1. The formation of SETBP-1/SET/PP2A
complex decreased the activity of PP2A. Taken together, our present study
identified IL1R2 was a potential prognostic and staging biomarker of CRC
patients. Significantly, we also demonstrated a new molecular mechanism
involved in regorafenib resistance and the combination of regorafenib and
MEK/ERK inhibitor is a rationale regime to overcome regorafenib
resistance in CRC patients.

