Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular modeling of novel peptide-receptor interaction for
targeted drug delivery of prostate cancer


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths among men in the United States. Due to the harsh side effects of
conventional chemo- and radiotherapies, targeted drug delivery is now
gaining the focus of cancer researchers. The key for success of any newly
developed targeted drug delivery systems is the novel design of targeting
peptides which have high binding affinities to differentially
over-expressed receptors on the surface of PCa cells. Two over-expressed
such receptors, which can be targeted to the cell surface of PCa cells
are: Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone Receptor (GnRH-R), and Prostate
Specific Membrane Antigen (PSMA). The analysis done from molecular
dynamics simulation data gave an important information about each
interaction; such as RMSD, The number of contacts between receptor and
peptide within a cutoff distance of 5 and the binding free energies,
GGBSA of the interactions. In all systems, the back bone RMSD deviation
of the receptor was calculated using the last 10 ns of the sampling
process and averaged over all trajectories. The RMSD data deviated
between 1.22 - 2.51 . The free binding energies or GGBSA was calculated
from the last 10 ns of the sampling process. The QH1 system has the more
negative GGBSA -36.15 kcal mol-1 and the QH4 system has the least
negative GGBSA of -18.4 kcal mol-1 among the eight systems of GnRH-R. QH2
system exhibits a highly interactive hydrogen bond (bond distance is 2.65
) between 134th position of the receptor amino acid sequence GLU and 5th
position of the qh2 peptide's TYR. The GGBSA is for the qh2 system is
34.92 kcal mol-1. In the PSMA and its targeting peptide interactions,
T2IA has the least negative GGBSA of -47.37 kcal mol-1. A salt bridge was
observed between the 10th position of the T2IA peptide sequence ARG and
the 328 position of the 3RBU receptor's GLU. Based on our molecular
modeling studies, we have determined the best targeting peptides among
all the newly designed peptides. The binding efficiency of the targeting
peptides with the lowest binding energies will be further investigated
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in near future.

