Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variant peptide identification system for bottom-up proteomics:
Finding hidden sequence alterations in MS data


In database search, acquired spectra are matched with theoretical spectra
of database peptides. Peptides from large databases are likely to match
to more than one spectrum, but only a small proportion of peptide
interpretations are correct. Incorrect interpretations are likely to
arise for two reasons: random matches and non-random matches to
homologous peptides. The former is often eliminated by selection of an
appropriate similarity threshold or by utilization of the statistical
significance of a spectral match. The match to homologous peptide poses a
challenge as there is often large similarity in their fragmentation
spectra as well. Non-random, but incorrect matches occur surprisingly
often in the identification of peptide sequence variants. For this
reason, a high identification score does not imply correctness of
interpretation. Increasing spectral score threshold enhances specificity
in general, but results in significant loss of sensitivity. Therefore, a
single spectral criterion is inadequate for distinguishing between
homologous peptides.In this study, we reconceive the system for
elimination of incorrect interpretations. We propose a system that uses
multidimensional LC/MS information in combination with a priori knowledge
of sample content to filter out unlikely interpretations. The system
calculates retention time of candidate peptides, performs isotopic
analysis of precursors and constructs preliminary protein assembly to
increase separation between correct and incorrect matches. The approach
is used for reevaluation of database search results and is generally
applicable to the analysis of standard bottom-up proteomic data.The
system was used for identification of alterations in MS2 proteomics data
and validated against RNA-Seq data from the same sample. The results
demonstrate that non-spectral data can be used to efficiently eliminate
peptide interpretations that have no correspondence in the RNA and as
such are likely false positives. The approach is sensitive and yields a
large proportion of altered peptides that have RNA-Seq support. The
method can potentially help overcome the problem of the large database
search present, e.g., in proteogenomic studies, particularly important in
cancer research and diagnostics. In summary, general prior knowledge of
sample content and the use of LC and MS1 data improve on the MS2-based
identification of peptides.

