Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted TET oxidase activity through methyl-CpG binding domain
extensively suppresses cancer cell proliferation


DNA demethylating agents are useful therapeutic drugs for human cancer;
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine and 5-azacytidine for myelodysplastic syndrome are
good examples. They not only induce DNA demethylation but also have
significant cytostatic and cytotoxic effects. However, precise mechanisms
for anticancer activity of these demethylating reagents have yet to be
established, mainly due to the lack of method to induce only DNA
demethylation. Here we show that a fusion protein comprising the
methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) and the catalytic domain of Ten-eleven
translocation protein 1 (TET1-CD) globally demethylates and upregulates a
number of methylated genes. Gene expression microarray analyses using
human embryonic kidney cell line 293T indicate that cells expressing
wild-type (wt) TET1 catalytic domain with MBD (MBD-TET1-CDwt) upregulates
more genes than ones expressing TET1-CDwt without MBD (TET1-CDwt) or
catalytically inactive TET1-CD mutant (mut) with MBD (MBD-TET1-CDmut) and
their upregulated genes frequently contained CpG islands (CGIs) within
1,000-bp of the transcription start site (TSS). Interestingly, 65% of
genes upregulated 5-fold or more by MBD-TET1-CDwt were also reactivated
after treatment with 5-azacytidine, DNA demethylating agent. These
results suggested a fact that gene reactivation by both methods was
primarily based on DNA demethylation. In order to examine growth
inhibitory effects of DNA demethylation to cancer cells, we utilized a
tetracycline inducible system to regulate the expression of MBD-TET1-CDwt
using a prostate cancer cell line. Induction of MBD-TET1-CDwt
demethylated and upregulated the glutathione S-transferase pi 1 (GSTP1),
one of the hypermethylated genes in prostate cancer. In accordance with
reactivation of methylated genes, induction of MBD-TET1-CDwt extensively
suppressed the growth of LNCaP cells. Flow cytometry analysis showed
decreased cells in S phase and increased cells in G1 phase by
MBD-TET1-CDwt expression. Our present results clearly indicate that TET
oxidase activity recruited at methyl-CpG sites through MBD induces
reactivation of hypermethylated genes by DNA demethylation, and that our
methods allow us to analyze the effects of global DNA demethylation in a
wide variety of cancer cells.

