Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive value of wild-type EGFR determined by
immunohistochemistry for response to treatment with cetuximab in patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer


The aberrant expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
has been reported in patients with colorectal cancer, and EGFR is an
important therapeutic target in such patients. To date, of the anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), only cetuximab and panitumumab have been
approved for the treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC). While treatment with a combination of antibodies and cytotoxic
drugs improves response rate and median time to progression in some
colorectal cancer patients, the duration of response is often limited. In
addition, no clear association has been found between the expression
level of the EGFR protein in the tumours, determined by the FDA-approved
EGFR PharmDx kit, or other standard anti-EGFR antibodies, and the
response to the EGFR inhibitors. We have previously shown that kits such
as the EGFR PharmDx kit, used to determine the expression of EGFR, does
not discriminate between the wild-type EGFR (wtEGFR) and the type III
deletion mutant EGFR (EGFRvIII), and as such could have contributed to
the lack of association between the expression of EGFR and response to
anti-EGFR antibodies. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine
the predictive value of wtEGFR for response to therapy with cetuximab.
The expression levels of wtEGFR, mutated EGFRvIII, and phosphorylated
EGFR (pEGFR Tyr1068 & Tyr1173) were determined using immunohistochemistry
and specific antibodies in 61 FFPE tumour specimens from patients with
mCRC treated with cetuximab. Sections were scored by the percentage of
positive tumour cells, location and intensity of staining. Their
associations with response and progression free survival were evaluated
using Chi-squared and Kaplan-Meier survival curves and log-rank test
respectively. Overall 11% and 46% of the cases were found to express
membranous and cytoplasmic EGFR, using mAb specific for wtEGFR
(DAK-H1-WT). On the other hand using anti EGFR.113 clone antibody, which
does not discriminate between the wtEGFR and EGFRvIII, 11.5% and 18% of
the cases were found to express the cytoplasmic and membranous EGFR
respectively. While all cases were negative for the pEGFR, the expression
of EGFRvIII was mainly cytoplasmic, occurring in 41% of the cases
examined. Of these, only the cytoplasmic expression of wtEGFR was found
to be significantly associated with poor response to treatment (P =
0.002) and progression free survival (95% CI, 0-3 months vs 4.5-17
months, P = 0.001). Taken together, our results suggest that cytoplasmic
expression of wtEGFR is associated with a significantly shorter
progression free survival, and is a predictive marker for poor response
to treatment with the anti-EGFR mAb cetuximab. These findings underlie
the need for further investigations, in a larger population of patients,
to validate the predictive value of wtEGFR for response to therapy with
anti-EGFR antibodies in patients with mCRC.

