Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular heterogeneity in diverse prostate cancer circulating
tumor cell subsets


Purpose:Circulating tumor cell (CTC) enumeration or Androgen Receptor
(AR) splice variant 7 expression from Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule
(EpCAM) positive CTCs are predictive biomarkers for patients with
prostate cancer. Recent reports suggest subpopulations of CTCs with
decreased EpCAM expression may have greater invasive capacity or
drug-resistant potential. These include cells with mesenchymal phenotypes
that express N-cadherin, or MUC1, or stem cell populations that express
CD133. Integrated molecular analysis across different CTC subpopulations
has not been performed. We sought to compare the molecular profile of
different populations of CTCs from the blood of patients with prostate
cancer.Methods:A multiparametric flow cytometry assay was used to
identify different populations of CTCs from patients with prostate
cancer. We then employed an integrated CTC capture and analysis
technology known as the VERSA (Versatile Exclusion-based Rare Sample
Analysis) platform to in parallel or sequentially capture CTC subsets
based on differential cell surface marker expression. Target populations
of CTCs include those expressing EpCAM, N-Cadherin, MUC1 or CD133. mRNA
was extracted on chip for comparison of gene expression profiles for the
AR, multiple AR splice variants, downstream targets in the canonical AR
signaling pathwayResultsFlow cytometry results showed both intra- and
inter-patient heterogeneity in populations of CTCs from patients with
prostate cancer. Using flow cytometry we are able to identify CTCs at
numbers comparable.to those isolated in the VERSA. We identified putative
tumor cells (AR+Cytokeratin+CD45-) that co-expressed Epcam with
mesenchymal or stem cells markers. Patients differed in cell surface
marker compositon with ranges of 0-40% Epcam+/N-Cad+, 10-27% Epcam-/Ncad+
and 5-10% Epcam +/Ncad-. Based on this data, we captured CTCs using both
parallel and serial capture from the same blood sample iwth different
capture antibodies including EpCAM, N-Cadherin and CD133. We identified
full length androgen receptor gene expression from CTCs captured with
EpCAM and N-Cadherin from the same patient sample. The gene expression
patterns of the Epcam-/N-cadherin+ CTCs varies across patients with
differential expression of PSMA, PAP and PSA.ConclusionsPrior reports
have identified different populations of CTCs in patients with advanced
prostate cancer. Using flow cytometry and a CTC capture methodology, we
identified significant heterogeneity in CTC sub-populations. We confirmed
expression of the full length Androgen Receptor with gene expression
analysis across subtypes. This heterogeneity in CTCs may represent
populations of cells from different metastatic sites or with different
invasive potential.

