Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Very-small-nuclear circulating tumor cell (vsnCTC) as a putative
biomarker for visceral metastasis in metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC)


Introduction and Objective: Patients with metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC) who develop visceral metastases (VM) have poorer
clinical outcomes in comparison to those without VM. Currently, VM are
discovered late in the clinical course of mCRPC-VM and this aggressive
natural history typically culminates in organ failure. There are no
existing tests that identify men at risk for VM other than radiography.
Our team performed circulating tumor cell (CTC) enumeration using
NanoVelcro CTC Assay on prostate cancer patients across the spectrum of
metastatic states: no metastasis, non-visceral metastasis, and VM. We
identified an association between the presence of very-small-nuclear CTCs
(vsnCTCs, DAPI+/Cytokeratin+/CD45- with nuclear size Introduction and
Objective: Patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC) who develop visceral metastases (VM) have poorer clinical
outcomes in comparison to those without VM. Currently, VM are discovered
late in the clinical course of mCRPC-VM and this aggressive natural
history typically culminates in organ failure. There are no existing
tests that identify men at risk for VM other than radiography. Our team
performed circulating tumor cell (CTC) enumeration using NanoVelcro CTC
Assay on prostate cancer patients across the spectrum of metastatic
states: no metastasis, non-visceral metastasis, and VM. We identified an
association between the presence of very-small-nuclear CTCs (vsnCTCs,
DAPI+/Cytokeratin+/CD45- with nuclear size < 8.5m) and VM. Serial
enumeration studies suggested the emergence of vsnCTCs occurred before
the radiographic detection of VM, and the change of vsnCTC counts
reflected the patients disease progression. We then hypothesized that
presence of vsnCTC signals the presence of VM and has predictive and
prognostic value with respect to VM.Methods: We identified mCRPC patients
who had progressed through next generation hormonal maneuvers such as
abiraterone, enzalutamide, or an equivalent drug. Serial blood specimens
were used for vsnCTC enumeration using NanoVelcro CTC Assay as previously
published. The vsnCTC counts were related to the presence and development
of VM (evaluated by radiography) as well as the response to anti-cancer
treatment.Results: Blood specimens were identified from 28 patients who
met the eligibility criteria; 15/28 patients presented with VM and 13/28
had bone-only disease at their first CTC enumeration. Five out of 13
non-VM patients developed VM during follow-up, and vsnCTCs were detected
86-196 days prior to radiographic detection of VM (true positive); 4/13
had vsnCTCs detected but no VM was found by the time of analysis (false
positive). None of the vsnCTC(-) patients developed VM. vsnCTCs were
detected in 20/20 VM patients compared to 4/8 non-VM patients. Reduction
of vsnCTC count occurred at initiation of anti-cancer treatment;
transition from vsnCTC(-) to vsnCTC(+) was seen prior to progression
under the treatment. Of the patients who have VM, 14 passed away at the
time of this abstract submission including all the patients converting
from non-VM to VM during the time of follow-up. Two out of 8 non-VM
patients passed away including one patient who had vsnCTCs detected
around 6 months prior to death.Conclusions: vsnCTCs are associated with
the presence of VM. The vsnCTC is a potential biomarker for predicting
the development of VM and monitoring the treatment response in mCRPC.
Transition from vsnCTC(-) to vsnCTC(+) was associated with the
development of VM and progression under the treatment.

