Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurately identifying expressed somatic variants for neoantigen
detection and immuno-oncology


Accurate detection of somatic variants is a staple of both research and
clinical cancer analysis, with applications ranging from detecting new
common driver mutations in large patient cohorts to selecting therapeutic
small molecule treatment courses for an individual patient. Recent
research into neoantigens and immunotherapy has shown great promise as a
precision therapeutic, and somatic variant detection by next-generation
sequencing represents an ideal method of identifying candidate
neoantigens. Somatic variant detection typically involves assaying the
DNA for changes in gene sequences without assessing whether those
variants are actually expressed in RNA. However, the expression of small
variants is key because only expressed peptides will be displayed as
neoantigens on the cell surface.From a technical standpoint, detection of
somatic variants in the RNA represents additional challenges above and
beyond those of somatic detection in DNA. The widely varying expression
levels of cancer genes, alternative splicing, and RNA editing are all
features that make somatic variant calling in RNA uniquely challenging.
However, accurately detecting variants directly from expressed
transcripts is beneficial to neoantigen prediction, and therefore we
sought to create and validate a method for somatic variant calling in
RNA.We have designed a highly accurate expression-based somatic variant
detection pipeline utilizing extensive discovery and filtering methods to
overcome the challenges inherent in RNA somatic variant calling. We
validated our pipeline using a combination of well-characterized cell
lines, commercially available reference standards, and real world FFPE
patient samples. To our knowledge, this is the most extensive validation
of its kind to date, representing over 29,158 small variants across 39
samples. In testing, we measured our detection method at >99% sensitivity
and >99% PPV using a combination of gold set small variants and
orthogonal validation. This method, in combination with our validated DNA
somatic variant calling pipeline (>99% sensitivity and >99% PPV), enables
precise detection of variant expression levels in a given sample, even at
low allele frequency (5%).After validating our RNA somatic variant
calling method, we applied it to detect candidate neoantigens in patient
tumor samples. We performed HLA typing for each sample using HLAssign
software and predicted MHC presentation of the expressed somatic
variants. In ongoing studies, we are validating our most promising
putative neoantigens using orthogonal technologies and demonstrating our
ability to detect the most promising clinically effective peptides for
therapy.

