Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Axl delays metastatic outgrowth of prostate
cancer bone marrow disseminated tumor cells


The presence of detectable metastases in the bone marrow of prostate
cancer patients represents lethal, incurable disease. These metastases
that may emerge years or decades after prostatectomy are derived from
small colonies of dormant tumor cells that disseminated from the primary
tumor. Our group has previously shown that Gas6/Axl signaling is
associated with disseminated tumor cell (DTC) dormancy in mouse models of
prostate cancer metastasis. In this study we explored the functional
significance of this association and tested the hypothesis that
overexpression of Axl in prostate cancer cells would prolong their
dormant phase in the bone marrow. Axl overexpression in the AR-positive
Axl-negative human prostate cancer cell line C42B slowed proliferation in
vitro. Select cells were completely dormant as detected by the lack of
EdU incorporation over 40 hours, and this fraction was increased when
co-cultured with bone-forming osteoblasts. To assess the functional
effects of Axl on prostate cancer progression in vivo, we utilized a
mouse model of prostate cancer metastasis in which subcutaneous tumors
are established and surgically removed upon reaching 200mm3. At 10 weeks
post-tumor removal, mice bearing C42B-Axl tumors did not have overt
osteoblastic or osteolytic lesions in their femurs or tibiae, whereas
mice bearing C42B-WT tumors had visible lesions by x-ray.
Immunohistochemistry staining of mouse femurs and tibiae corroborated
these findings. To confirm that the absence of metastases in mice with
C42B-Axl tumors was not due to the inability of the cells to disseminate,
we used immunofluorescence to detect human cells in the bone marrow of
flushed femurs and tibiae. At 12 weeks post-tumor removal, fewer prostate
cancer cells were detected in the bone marrow of mice with C42B-Axl
tumors compared to those with C42B-WT tumors. Notably however, both
groups had detectable prostate cancer cells in the bone marrow,
indicating that the absence of C42B-Axl metastasis was not due to failure
of primary tumor cells to disseminate. The presence of disseminated
C42B-Axl cells in the bone marrow coupled with their failure to develop
into clinical metastases at the time of C42B-WT metastatic outgrowth
establishes a functional role for the association of Axl expression with
DTC dormancy. Axl may be sufficient to induce and maintain dormancy, and
ongoing experiments will address the requirement of Axl in this setting.

