Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of tumor microenvironment and molecular
subclassification of colorectal cancer identifies patient subsets with
poor prognosis


The patho-molecular diversity of colorectal cancer (CRC) complicates the
prediction of patient postoperative prognosis and response to treatment.
This calls for methods for CRC stratification beyond clinical features
and the few molecular biomarkers currently implemented. Recent studies
have highlighted the importance of the tumor microenvironment in CRC.
Here we show by integrative transcriptome/methylome analysis of >300
patient samples that CRC generates five arche-typic microenviroments
encompassing three molecularly distinct types of cancer cells. The
existence of the microenviroments, which we denote Secretory, Stroma,
Immune, ARE, and CIN, could be independently identified in large external
CRC datasets and are in concordance with the CRC subtypes recently
defined by the CRC Subtyping Consortium (1). Detailed analysis of the
five microenvironments reveals striking differences in cell composition
and pathway activity. We observe that the microenvironment, particularly
immune and stromal cell activity, is closely associated with patient
prognosis. In particular, tumors associated with low anti-tumoral immune
activity due to poor recruitment of immune cells or immune inhibition by
activated stromal cells have poor prognosis. Importantly, we find that
microenviroment subtyping is in fact pivotal for molecular prediction of
patient prognosis as no single molecular marker carries robust prognostic
information in all CRC subtypes and environments. Instead, potent
prognostic biomarkers are environment-specific: As an example interferon
signaling is deregulated in several microenviroment types, yet the
specific interferon response genes deregulated (i.e. biomarker
candidates) differ between microenvironments in accordance with their
cellular composition. Our approach has allowed us to identify superior,
single prognostic biomarkers for each CRC type and, importantly, their
prognostic value in external datasets is only observed after environment
subtyping. Collectively, these observations may well explain the poor
validation rate of prognostic biomarker candidates in the past. In
conclusion: we provide a CRC microenvironment framework that has the
potential to guide future clinical decision-making primarily in relation
to prognosis, but likely also in relation to therapy choice. This work is
performed within framework the SYSCOL consortium funded by EU FP7(1)
Guinney, J. et al. The consensus molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer,
Nature Medicine (2015) doi:10.1038/nm.3967

