Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Casein kinase 2 alpha phosphorylation of cortactin governs actin
cytoskeletal regulation of invadopodia function


Malregulation of signal transduction events controlling cortical actin
cytoskeleton dynamics is responsible for to enhancing tumor cell motility
and invasion. The actinbinding protein cortactin facilitates branched
actin network formation through activation of the actin related protein
(Arp) 2/3 complex. Increased cortactin expression due to gene
amplification is observed in many cancers, corresponding with increased
tumor progression and poor patient outcome. In many cancer types,
elevated Arp2/3 complex activation is responsible for driving increased
migration and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation by governing
invadopodia formation and activity. While cortactinmediated activation of
Arp2/3 complex has been well established, the objective of this study is
to identify upstream signaling pathways responsible for modulating the
interaction between cortactin and Arp2/3 complex in invasive carcinoma
cells. We have determined that casein kinase (CK) 2 is responsible for
disrupting the ability of cortactin to bind and/or activate Arp2/3
complex. CK2 directly phosphorylates cortactin at a conserved threonine
24 (T24) adjacent to the canonical Arp2/3 binding motif in the cortactin
aminoterminal acidic (NTA) domain. CK2 phosphorylation of cortactin T24
impairs the ability of cortactin to activate Arp2/3 actin nucleation as
determined by spectrofluorometric analysis. Decreased invadopodia
formation and ECM degradation activity is observed in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells with shRNAmediated CK2 knockdown,
expression of a CK2 phosphorylationnull cortactin mutant (T24A), and with
treatment of the Phase I CK2 inhibitor CX4945 (Silmitasertib).
Collectively, these data suggest that CK2mediated cortactin
phosphorylation at T24 is a critical event in regulating the interaction
with Arp2/3 complex, identifying a key anti-invasive mechanism impacted
by targeted anti-CK2 therapeutics.

