Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer analysis of clonal evolution reveals the costs and
adaptive benefits of genomic instability


Cancers are a mosaic of clones of varying population sizes. Any single
cancer sample encodes a tumor-metagenome, since it represents the
aggregate genomes of diverse clones that coexist within the sample. We
quantified genomic instability as the fraction of the tumor-metagenome
affected by copy number variations (CNVs) and leveraged two tumor mixture
separation algorithms, EXPANDS and PyClone, to quantify genetic
intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) from single cancer samples. We tested the
potential of measures of genomic instability and ITH as prognostic
biomarkers across 1,165 exome sequenced primary tumors from 12 cancer
types at TCGA. Our results suggest that a tradeoff between the costs and
adaptive benefits of genomic instability governs differential
radiotherapy sensitivity.Between 1 and 18 clones were estimated to
coexist per tumor sample at >10% cell frequency (median = 4). Clone
number varied considerably within and between cancer types, with
melanomas representing the most heterogeneous group. 86% all analyzed
tumor samples contained at least 2 clones. Across cancer types, the
presence of >2 clones was associated with worse overall survival as
compared to tumors in which 75% genomic instability was shared among 75%
genomic instability was shared among < = 2 clones. The highest risk was
observed among individuals with an intermediate number of 4 clones -
additional diversification beyond 4 clones did not impart further risk.
The highest risk was also observed among individuals with 50-75% genomic
instability, in both the original exome sequencing dataset and an
independent SNP array dataset. Genomic instability 75% predicted reduced
risk (HR = 0.15, 95% CI: 0.08-0.29).We analyzed the relation between
radiotherapy intensity and overall survival among 242 individuals (21%)
treated with radiotherapy and found that not all individuals did benefit
equally from therapy. In order to achieve the same benefit from therapy,
individuals with 25-50% genomic instability required higher therapy
intensity (regression slope = 1.83; P = 0.009) than individuals with
50-75% genomic instability (slope = 2.09; P = 0.005). In contrast,
individuals with 75% of a tumor's metagenome is affected by CNVs. This
upper limit of tolerable genomic instability may be responsible for the
non-linear association we observed between genetic ITH and survival.
Leveraging a clone's distance to the upper limit of tolerable genomic
instability may represent a new strategy to optimize therapy intensity.

