Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAK-243, a small molecule inhibitor of the ubiquitin activating
enzyme (UAE), disrupts DNA damage repair and sensitizes tumor cells and
xenografts to ionizing radiation


Radiation therapy, as a primary therapy or as a combination partner, is
used in half of all worldwide cancer treatments. Research is ongoing to
identify agents which potentiate the effects of ionizing radiation (IR)
in tumor cells. Because IR causes DNA double strand breaks (DSBs),
inhibition of DNA damage repair mechanisms could enhance the effects of
radiation. DNA repair at DSBs is mediated by the non-homologous
end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR) pathways, both of
which rely on the post-translational modification of proteins by
ubiquitin (Ub). A phosphorylation and ubiqutination cascasde at DSBs
results in Ub-dependent recruitment of 53BP1 and BRCA1 complexes.We have
identified a first in class investigational drug, TAK-243 (MLN7243),
which targets the ubiquitin activating enzyme, UAE (UBA1), the enzyme
responsible for activating > 99% of all cellular Ub. Previously, TAK-243
was shown to inhibit mono-Ub of PCNA and FANCD2, key proteins within the
translesion synthesis (TLS) and Fanconi Anemia (FA) DNA repair pathways,
and also to inhibit Ub transfer to UBC13, an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme utilized in DSB repair. We hypothesized that TAK-243 would prevent
repair of DSBs and thereby potentiate IR-induced cell death.Here we show
that TAK-243 pre-treatment potentiates the effect of IR on HCT-116 cells
in a colony formation assay in vitro. To link this combination benefit to
the disruption of DNA damage repair, we demonstrate that TAK-243
pre-treatment blocks the IR-induced recruitment of 53BP1 to sites of DNA
damage both in vitro and in vivo. In a patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
model of non-small cell lung cancer, formation of IR-induced 53BP1 foci
is inhibited when TAK-243 is dosed 1 hour before beam-focused radiation
exposure. In contrast, levels of IR-induced pH2Ax are not significantly
changed by TAK-243 treatment, suggesting that TAK-243 does not prevent
formation or detection of DSBs, but rather acts downstream to prevent DNA
damage repair. Additive-to-synergistic effects on tumor growth inhibition
were observed in several xenograft models treated with the combination of
TAK-243 and beam-focused IR, with persistent tumor regressions noted in
some NSCLC and breast cancer models. The results of our experiments
provide a mechanistic rationale for combining radiation with TAK-243 in
the clinical setting. Currently, TAK-243 is being evaluated in a solid
tumor phase I clinical trial evaluating safety, tolerability,
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and anti-tumor activity (NCT02045095).

