Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Twist1 modifies the metabolic state of breast cancer cells through
transcriptional activation of a key regulator of glycolysis


The shift from a normal to high glycolytic state (Warburg effect) is a
central hallmark of almost every cancer and a strong driving force for
cancer cell survival and disease progression. Importantly, studies -
including our own - have shown that normalization of metabolic state in
cancer cells can halt or reverse malignancy. To date, the intrinsic and
extrinsic factors that drive metabolic shifts in cancer cells are not
entirely clear. A better understanding of how the metabolic state of
cancer cells is regulated will give us important tools to inhibit disease
progression. We have established a novel model of breast cancer
progression consisting of three cancer cell lines established from the
primary tumor (TES1) and two sites of metastasis (TES2b and TESPE) of the
same patient. We compared gene expression profiles between primary and
recurrent tumor cells to identify factors that regulate disease
progression and dissemination. Key differences between cells derived from
primary and recurrent disease were an activation of genes involved in
glycolysis and genes involved in activation and maintenance of the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) program, a powerful driver of
cancer metastasis. Our analyses on a functional relationship between EMT
and activation of glycolysis uncovered a direct link between the
malignancy-driving EMT mechanism in breast cancer progression and
metabolic reprogramming of the tumor cells. Specifically, we identified
Twist1, a pro-metastatic master regulator of EMT as a direct modulator of
a key glycolytic enzyme known to modulate the rate of glycolysis,
6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase/Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 3 (PFKFB3). We found
that Twist1 binds directly to the promoter region of PFKFB3 and induces
expression of the enzyme. Additionally, inhibition of Twist1 expression
in TES2b (TES2b-shTwist1) cells decreased glycolytic flux, while Twist1
overexpression in HMLE immortalized human breast epithelial cells
(HMLE-Twist1) increased glycolytic activity and simultaneously decreased
cellular respiration. Metabolomics analyses of HMLE vs. HMLE-Twist1 cells
using Gas Chromatography Mass Spectroscopy (GCMS) indicated that Twist1
expression is sufficient to induce drastic changes in the overall
metabolic state of the cells, including glutamine metabolism and
availability of TCA cycle intermediates and amino acids. Together, our
findings are significant as they underscore the importance and potency of
EMT activation in cancer and uncover a novel mechanism by which EMT
activation through Twist1 drives metabolic alterations that fuel cancer
progression and metastasis. Results from this study will ultimately aid
in the discovery and development of new paradigms to fight cancer
mortality rates around the world.

