Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of MYC by miR-3189-3p in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma is a devastating malignancy with a median survival of
approximately 15 months. This aggressive tumor originates from the glial
cells and accounts for nearly 50% of adult brain tumors. Glioblastomas
are characterized by rapid proliferation and resistance to standard
treatment of surgery, temazolamide and radiation therapy. MicroRNAs are
short single-stranded non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression in
both normal and pathological conditions. We have previously found
downregulation of miR-3189-3p in glioblastomas and astrocytomas. Using in
vitro models, we demonstrated that ectopic expression of this miRNA
inhibited glioblastoma cell growth and migration through downregulation
of the splicing factor SF3B2 and the guanine nucleotide exchange factor
p63RhoGEF, respectively. The miR-3189-3p-mediated inhibition of
glioblastoma growth in vivo further confirmed the anti-cancer activity of
this microRNA.Given the strong biological effect of this miRNA on
glioblastoma cells, we sought to investigate the implication of other
gene targets in miR-3189-3p-mediated effects. The elevated expression of
MYC oncogene is found in a variety of cancer types, including
glioblastoma. Here, we demonstrated that overexpression of miR-3189-3p
results in downregulation of MYC. Since this gene is not a predicted
target for miR-3189-3p, we hypothesized that this modulation of MYC
expression is mediated through the translational repressor, TIA1
cytotoxic granule-associated RNA binding protein-like 1 (TIAL1, also
called TIAR). We tested the levels of TIAR in cells treated with
miR-3189-3p and found no changes in TIAR expression. However, the
downregulation of MYC was dependent on TIAR expression, as determined
through siRNA-mediated downregulation of TIAR. Further studies are needed
to elucidate molecular mechanisms of TIAR-dependent downregulation of MYC
by miR-3189-3p. In addition, a putative binding site for miR-3189-3p is
located within the open reading frame of MYC; therefore, studies will be
performed to determine whether miR-3189-3p downregulates MYC by directly
binding outside the 3-UTR of this transcript.

