Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic genomic indexing enables accurate somatic variant
detection from cancer genome sequencing without sequence alignment
limitations


Cancer genome sequencing is a widely adopted approach for identifying
critical genetic variants and increasingly, for diagnostic application in
precision medicine. Accurate analysis of cancer genome sequencing is
essential, yet remains challenging - the reliable and accurate
identification of somatic variants continues to be a significant issue.
One source of issues involves the mapping/alignment of sequences. It
relies entirely on the human reference genome, a static data consisting
of character strings of chromosome. However, the current reference is
derived from few individuals and thus, does not account for the full
diversity or complex structure of human genomes. Critical features of
cancer genomes are missed or called with errors. As a solution, we
developed dynamic genomic indexing (DGI), which identifies somatic
variants by using the frequency of short sequences that are 20200 bases
in length (20200mer) from paired tumor/normal sequencing data.Any somatic
variants will affect the frequency of short sequences. In this study, DIG
relies on the presence of neo-20mers, derived by point mutations and
insertions/deletions (indels), that are different in frequency between
normal and tumor sequence reads. These 20mer are unique sequences that
arise from cancer genetic variants. First, the DGI identifies the four
groups of differential 20mers that their frequencies are significantly
different between tumor and normal; tumor specific (TS), normal specific
(NS), tumor dominant (TD), and normal dominant (ND). Second, DIG clusters
differential 20mers with neighbor 20mers sharing 19 bp in the middle
within each group. Third, clustered tumor specific 20mers are matched to
clustered NS or ND 20mers. The number of clustered 20mers represents the
number of mutational events and ratio between frequency of TS 20mers and
matched ND 20mers implies allelic depth. All calculations are conducted
in comparison to matched normal samples. Thus, the reference genome is
never required throughout the analysis process. Furthermore, these 20mers
can be searched easily in RNA-Seq to see if mutations are expressed.We
evaluated the performance of DGI using simulated whole exome sequencing
(WES) data and 24 WES from the Cancer Genome Atlas project. We identified
many of reported somatic mutations (>90%) from WES as well as novel
mutations. We observed DGI performs as good as other variant callers for
substitutions while outperforms for indels. Our results support the
principle of non-alignment sequencing analysis. DGI provides simple, but
accurate matrices of somatic variants for cancer sequencing data for any
population and can be easily scaled to handle population-based studies.
This study provides small variant detection (Cancer genome sequencing is
a widely adopted approach for identifying critical genetic variants and
increasingly, for diagnostic application in precision medicine. Accurate
analysis of cancer genome sequencing is essential, yet remains
challenging - the reliable and accurate identification of somatic
variants continues to be a significant issue. One source of issues
involves the mapping/alignment of sequences. It relies entirely on the
human reference genome, a static data consisting of character strings of
chromosome. However, the current reference is derived from few
individuals and thus, does not account for the full diversity or complex
structure of human genomes. Critical features of cancer genomes are
missed or called with errors. As a solution, we developed dynamic genomic
indexing (DGI), which identifies somatic variants by using the frequency
of short sequences that are 20200 bases in length (20200mer) from paired
tumor/normal sequencing data.Any somatic variants will affect the
frequency of short sequences. In this study, DIG relies on the presence
of neo-20mers, derived by point mutations and insertions/deletions
(indels), that are different in frequency between normal and tumor
sequence reads. These 20mer are unique sequences that arise from cancer
genetic variants. First, the DGI identifies the four groups of
differential 20mers that their frequencies are significantly different
between tumor and normal; tumor specific (TS), normal specific (NS),
tumor dominant (TD), and normal dominant (ND). Second, DIG clusters
differential 20mers with neighbor 20mers sharing 19 bp in the middle
within each group. Third, clustered tumor specific 20mers are matched to
clustered NS or ND 20mers. The number of clustered 20mers represents the
number of mutational events and ratio between frequency of TS 20mers and
matched ND 20mers implies allelic depth. All calculations are conducted
in comparison to matched normal samples. Thus, the reference genome is
never required throughout the analysis process. Furthermore, these 20mers
can be searched easily in RNA-Seq to see if mutations are expressed.We
evaluated the performance of DGI using simulated whole exome sequencing
(WES) data and 24 WES from the Cancer Genome Atlas project. We identified
many of reported somatic mutations (>90%) from WES as well as novel
mutations. We observed DGI performs as good as other variant callers for
substitutions while outperforms for indels. Our results support the
principle of non-alignment sequencing analysis. DGI provides simple, but
accurate matrices of somatic variants for cancer sequencing data for any
population and can be easily scaled to handle population-based studies.
This study provides small variant detection (<50bp) as a first step
toward in a broader effort to develop non-alignment sequencing analysis
for structural variation such as copy number and chromosomal
rearrangement.

