Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a quantitative targeted RNA-Seq methodology for use
in differential gene expression analysis


RNA Sequencing (RNA-Seq) uses the capabilities of Next Generation
high-throughput sequencing (NGS) methods to provide insight into the
transcriptome of a cell as it generates millions of reads. Whole
transcriptome sequencing can be used to quantify gene expression on a
transcriptome-wide scale, identify splice variants, quantify allele
specific expression, and characterize fusion transcripts. Development of
a highly reproducible and sensitive targeted quantitative sequencing
method would aid in facilitating a deeper understanding and
characterization of the roles of a specific set of genes, while enabling
much higher sample throughput and significant cost savings relative to
whole-transcriptome sequencing. In this study, we report a targeted
RNA-Seq technology, QIAseq RNA, which makes use of several methodologies
to deliver an extremely flexible, highly precise tool for characterizing
gene expression. QIASeq RNA incorporates 12-base random molecular
barcodes into each unique target strand which benefits quantifying gene
expression in a given multiplexed sample. Counting the number of
molecular tags allows one to determine the sequence coverage per target
and adjust experimental conditions to use the read budget of any
sequencing platform most efficiently. Using either the Illumina or Ion
Torrent platforms, users can choose to multiplex up to 96 RNA samples
from 12 to 1000-plex expression panels. No mRNA selection or rRNA removal
or blocking is required. The entire protocol, from cDNA synthesis to
finished library, which is ready for sequencing, can be accomplished in
under one day. Custom assays for a specific target site can add the
ability to distinguish between isoforms or identify allele specific
expression. We explore the capabilities of this system by profiling large
numbers of genes in a cell model system's response to small molecule
treatment. Changes in gene expression by these treatments were measured
by targeted RNA NGS, and fold-changes in gene expression due to chemical
perturbation were characterized. Complex gene relationships in perturbed
pathways were mapped using QIAGEN's Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
tool. The IPA tool also facilitated the elucidation of the impact of gene
expression changes in the context of biological processes, molecular
interactions, cellular phenotypes and disease. This article will provide
application data for GRRC including a discussion of technical challenges
faced when profiling large numbers of genes in a large cohort.

