Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptosis-mediated AXL activation: Contribution to metastatic
cancers


AXL is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is widely expressed in a variety
of cancers and is predictive of poor patient outcome. This receptor is an
essential epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-induced regulator of
cancer metastasis and is related to the occurrence of treatment
resistance. AXL activation requires both the lipid moiety
phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) and the bridging protein ligand Gas6. PtdSer
is only available to mediate AXL activation when it is externalized on
cell membranes, an event that occurs specifically during apoptosis. For
that reason, we aimed to identify if apoptotic cell debris is capable of
activating AXL on cancer cells and how this would affect the metastatic
capacity of these cells.In a non-AXL expressing tumor cell line (HCC827)
apoptosis was induced by means of UV-irradiation. We detected AXL
activation of AXL-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells that were treated with
HCC827 cell debris, suggesting that apoptotic debris of dying tumor cells
is capable of activating AXL in surviving surrounding tumor cells. Next
we determined the contribution of PtdSer-mediated AXL activation to the
migration of MDA-MB-231 cells in a wound scratch assay. The addition of
warfarin, which prevents autocrine Gas6 binding to PtdSer, decreased
migration to a similar extent as the AXL inhibitor R428.This study
revealed that PtdSer-mediated AXL activation contributes to the migration
properties of MDA-MB-231 cells. As we detected AXL activation upon
addition of PtdSer-containing apoptotic cells debris, this suggests that
the induction of apoptosis by cancer therapeutics might enhance the
metastatic capacities of neighboring surviving tumor cells. This finding
may broadly impact the oncology field given AXL's widespread expression
among different types of cancers, and provides a rationale for the design
of novel combination therapies for decreasing tumor metastasis.

