Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-283, a slow-off inhibitor of RAF dimers, differentiates from
vemurafenib in MAPK signaling inhibition


Dysregulations of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
through abnormal expression or activating mutations of key signaling
molecules, including RAS and RAF, have been identified in a wide range of
cancers. Targeting these signaling molecules in the pathway represents a
promising strategy to target dysregulated MAPK signaling. BGB-283 is a
novel pan-RAF inhibitor and currently under clinical development to treat
BRAF and KRAS/NRAS mutated tumors. In this study, we show that BGB-283
inhibits WT B-RAF dimer much more potently than vemurafenib at millimolar
ATP concentration that is representative of the cellular ATP level,
although BGB-283 and vemurafenib display similar inhibitory activity at
the Km ATP concentration. BGB-283 has very slow off-rate and the
dissociation half-life (t1/2) on WT B-RAF enzyme is well above 24 hrs. In
comparison, vemurafenib has much faster off rates with t1/2 in the range
of minutes. The crystal structure of BGB-283/B-RAF protein complex shows
the benzimidazole and trifluoro group of BGB-283 binds significantly
deeper into pocket formed by -C helix and activation loop than
vemurafenib. BGB-283 exhibits time-dependent inhibition both in
biochemical assay and in B-RAF or K-RAS mutated cells. BGB-283 potently
inhibits the p-ERK signaling in splicing isoform p61B-RAF(V600E) cells
which were reported to be resistant to vemurafenib through a dimer
mechanism. In vivo, BGB-283 significantly suppressed the tumor growth in
A375-p61B-RAF(V600E) melanoma xenograft model. In addition, BGB-283
inhibits vemurafenib induced p-ERK activation and selumetinib induced
p-MEK feedback activation in K-RAS mutated cancer cells. In both cases,
activation is reported to be mediated by RAF dimers. Taken together, we
propose that BGB-283 is a novel, slow-off RAF dimer inhibitor that
targets the MAPK signaling differently from the first generation BRAF
inhibitor vemurafenib. This feature of BGB-283 may help to address the
drug resistance issues in BRAF mutated tumors and further expand its
utility as mono- or combination therapy into RAS mutated patient
populations.

