Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of genetic architecture of multiple myeloma by next
generation sequencing


Myeloma is a genetically heterogeneous disease and is sub-classified
based on the presence of structural variants and genetic mutations.
Structural variants/copy number changes are historically identified by
traditional methods such as karyotyping and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). Although microarray based genome wide analyses
greatly improve the resolution of structural variation, they may be
limited by probe density. Consequently, identification of structural
variation may be insensitive to specific disrupted gene(s), neglecting
the sequence complexity that might underlie these rearrangements.
Determination of the specific breakpoints of structural variants at the
nucleotide level is required for a better understanding of the genetic
causes and to enhance the development of therapeutics for patients. The
emergence of Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has led to the
identification of structural variants in the genome at a higher
resolution relative to currently used cytogenetic methods. We analyzed
DNA extracted from a set of patients with multiple myeloma, who had
Affymetrix SNP array (2.7 million probes) data, by whole exome sequencing
(WES) at 100X coverage on the Illumina HiSeq platform to identify the
full spectrum of associated genomic aberrations. Sequence data was mapped
to the hg19 reference sequence and analyzed by various in-house developed
and open source data analytic tools. Additionally, a custom sequence
analysis pipeline was written to interrogate chromosomal deletions and
translocations in these samples. Our analysis showed that 43% (6/14) of
patients have deletions in chr17p and/or chr13q. We further confirmed
structural variants using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV). These
data indicate the efficacy of WES for the precise determination of
translocation and inversion breakpoints. In addition, we were able to
identify single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and insertions/deletions
(indels) in these samples. We then used the Ingenuity Variant Analysis
(IGV) program to identify clinically actionable variants. These datasets
are being further analyzed by various pathway analysis tools to define
possible pathogenic mechanisms in multiple myeloma.

