Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of colorectal cancers and multiple liver metastases
by mutation and copy number profiling


To investigate genetic and genomic heterogeneity in liver metastases of
colorectal cancer, multiple tumor foci in the liver per patient were
identified on the basis of radiological images and samples from these
systematically biobanked. For a total of 67 patients, 258 metastatic
tumor samples were collected (minimum of 2 and maximum of 9 samples per
patient, median of 4 samples per patient). Additionally, for n = 14
patients, tumor samples from the corresponding primary colorectal cancer
were also available. DNA isolated from these samples was subjected to
mutation profiling by Sanger sequencing for the genes BRAF, KRAS, PIK3CA
and TP53, as well as allele-specific copy number profiling by CytoscanHD
SNP array. For the four genes investigated for mutations, 39/67 (58%) of
the patients were homogeneous in their mutation profile, while 21/67
(32%) were heterogeneous (one or more samples had mutations not detected
in all samples). For 7/67 patients (10%), no mutations were detected in
any of these four genes. For 9/14 patients with matching primary tumors,
there was complete concordance between the primary tumor and all liver
metastases profiled for mutations, while the remaining 5/14 patients
showed discordance in mutation profile between the primary tumor and at
least one of the liver metastases profiled. High resolution copy number
profiles of this cohort detected many of the aberrations previously
described in primary colorectal cancer, specifically gain of chromosomes
7, 8q, 13q and 20q, and loss of chromosomes 5q, 8p, 15q, 17p and 18q. The
extent of heterogeneity observed in patient-wise mutation profiles was
largely mirrored in the copy number profiles of the same tumors. 16/27
(60%) of the patients for which both mutation and copy number profiles
were available showed concordance in the degree of heterogeneity per
patient. In summary, intra-individual heterogeneity varied from patient
to patient, with results from the genetic and genomic data types largely
concurring.

