Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoplasmic sequestration and autophagic degradation of ErbB
receptors in HER2-driven cancer cells by small molecule Sigma1 modulators


Epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR/ErbB) drive cell growth,
survival, metastasis, and resistance in a range of cancers.
Heterodimerization of ErbB1/EGFR, ErbB2/HER2, and ErbB3/HER3 drives
aggressive tumor growth through hyperactivation of cancer cell survival
and growth signaling pathways. The increased protein production required
to sustain these activities renders cancer cells acutely dependent on
support factors, such as chaperones and scaffolds, that maintain protein
homeostasis. ErbB receptors are integral membrane proteins and as such
are synthesized in and transported through the secretory pathway, which
comprises the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi, and associated
compartments and vesicles. Nascent ErbB receptors are stabilized and
chaperoned through this pathway, in part, by heat shock protein 90 family
members, HSP90 and GRP94. Sigma1 (also known as sigma1 receptor) is a
unique integral membrane protein found primarily in the ER. Emerging
lines of evidence suggest that Sigma1 may function as a chaperone or
possibly a scaffolding protein. We find that the levels of Sigma1 protein
are elevated and aberrantly distributed in HER2-amplified breast tumor
biopsies compared to benign breast tissue. These data indicate that the
status and potentially the physiological role of Sigma1 are altered in
malignancy and that Sigma1 may be a valid drug target in the treatment of
HER2-driven breast cancers. Previously, we discovered that certain
selective small molecule modulators of Sigma1 could be used to induce the
unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy in a panel of cancer cell
lines. Here, we demonstrate that these responses to Sigma1 modulators can
be exploited to alter the trafficking, stability, and thus signaling of
ErbB receptors in cancer cells. In vivo, Sigma1 modulators suppress the
growth of xenografted HER2-amplified breast tumors. In the tumors, as
well as in vitro cell culture, ErbB1-3 all are eliminated in response to
treatment with prototypic small molecule Sigma1 modulators. This
corresponds with suppression of downstream PI3K/Akt signaling and with
induction of UPR and autophagy. Using high resolution microscopy and
organelle fractionation techniques, we confirmed that the Sigma1
modulators induce cytoplasmic sequestration and subsequent degradation of
ErbB receptors in ubiquitin-enriched autophagosomes. This process is
blocked by cotreatment with autolysosome inhibitor, bafilomycin A1,
suggesting that autophagy is the primary mechanism of Sigma1 modulator
induced ErbB receptor degradation. Altogether, these data suggest that
Sigma1 is a unique, ligand-operated scaffolding protein that contributes
to the trafficking and stability of ErbB receptors in HER2-driven cancer
cells. Furthermore, these data suggest that Sigma1 is a druggable
component of the protein homeostasis regulatory apparatus of cancer cells.

