Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the ST6Gal-I glycosyltransferase in protecting tumor cells
against hypoxia


A change in surface glycosylation was one of the first identified
hallmarks of a cancer cell, however an understanding of how altered
glycosylation affects cancer cell biology remains unclear. Our group has
shown that ST6Gal-I, a glycosyltransferase that adds negatively charged
sialic acids to surface receptors in a 2-6-linked manner, is upregulated
in many cancer types. Through modulating the activity of various
receptors, ST6Gal-I can act as a pro-survival factor in a variety of
settings, including resistance to some chemotherapeutics. Tumor
microenvironment plays a crucial role in cancer progression. One key
component of the tumor microenvironment is the availability of oxygen,
and in solid tumors there can be areas of hypoxia. Hypoxia leads to the
induction of hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs), which are transcriptional
regulators of the cellular response to low oxygen tension. HIFs such as
HIF-1a, regulate the transcription of many proteins necessary for cells
to survive when challenged by hypoxia. In this study we demonstrated that
forced overexpression of ST6Gal-I in both ovarian and pancreatic cancer
cell lines increased the stabilization of HIF-1a after treatment with the
hypoxia mimetics desferrioxamine and DMOG, and when grown in a hypoxic
environment. Correspondingly, knockdown of ST6Gal-I inhibited the
stabilization of HIF-1a in these same conditions. Additionally, ST6Gal-I
activity stimulates pro-survival signaling through phosphorylated NFB and
AMPK in these same models. These signaling pathways have been shown to be
important for cellular survival in hypoxic environments. Markers of
HIF-1a-induced transcription were investigated through qRT-PCR, and it
was revealed that the ST6Gal-I-mediated stabilization of HIF-1a increased
the levels of PDHK1and GLUT1 mRNA. Both GLUT1 and PDHK1 promote the shift
in glucose metabolism when cells are in a low oxygen environment. Taken
together, these data indicate that ST6Gal-I acts as a pro-survival factor
by eliciting a more robust response by HIF-1a. The finding that a
glycosyltransferase regulates the cellular response to hypoxia represents
a novel paradigm in hypoxia signaling.

