Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploration of alternative pathways mediated by IFNL4 and related
to cell proliferation and death in a hepatoma cell line


The ability to generate interferon lambda 4 (IFNL4), the most recently
discovered member of the type-III interferon family, has been associated
with impaired clearance of hepatitis C virus (HCV). IFNL4 signals through
an IFNL receptor complex that serves all type-III interferons and
consists of receptors IFNLR1 and IL10R2. Signaling through IFNL receptor
complex leads to activation of the JAK-STAT pathway and transcriptional
activation of interferon-stimulated genes (ISG). Intracellular expression
of IFNL4 also causes reduced proliferation and increased cell death in
human hepatic cells but it remains unclear if this is a result of
JAK-STAT signaling through IFNL receptor complex or through some other
alternative mechanisms. To address this question, we used CRISPR-CAS9
system to knock-out IFNLR1 in a hepatoma HepG2 cells. We designed and
tested six guide RNAs (gRNAs) for IFNLR1 exons. CAS9 protein and gRNAs
that most efficiently induced mutations in IFNLR1 were introduced into
HepG2 cells to generate stable cell lines. No obvious defects were
observed in IFNLR1-KO-HepG2 cells, indicating that loss of IFNLR1 had no
deleterious effects on cell viability. We selected three stable clones
which had sequencing-confirmed inactivating IFNLR1 mutations and Western
blot-confirmed lack of IFNLR1 protein expression. Compared to the
parental HepG2 cells the IFNLR1-KO-HepG2 cells were deficient in the
ability to induce the luciferase-tagged interferon-stimulated response
element (ISRE-Luc) reporter after treatment with recombinant IFNL4 and
IFNL3 proteins, which signal through the same receptor complex. At the
same time, response to IFNa treatment was not affected because IFNa
signals through its own receptor complex. These results indicate that, as
other type-III interferons, IFNL4 induces ISRE signaling through IFNL
receptor complex. INFLR1-KO-HepG2 cells provide a highly efficient model
for studies of factors involved in signaling of type-III interferons,
including IFNL4. Next, we will investigate alternative pathways involved
in anti-proliferative and cell death-related phenotypes induced by IFNL4
in HepG2 cell. We will perform RNA-seq on parental and IFNLR1-KO-HepG2
cells treated with or without IFNL4, IFNL3 and IFNa. These results will
contribute to a better understanding of IFNL4 function, which can be
relevant for viral infections and cancer.

