Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymocyte selection-associated HMG box protein (TOX) induces
genomic instability in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia


MYC and NOTCH are major oncogenic drivers in T-cell Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia (T-ALL), yet additional collaborating genetic lesions
collaborate to induce frank malignancy. To identify these factors, a
large-scale transgenic screen was completed where 28 amplified and
over-expressed genes found in human T-ALL were assessed for accelerating
leukemia onset in the zebrafish transgenic model. From this analysis,
Thymocyte selection-associated HMG protein (TOX) synergized with both MYC
and NOTCH to induce T-ALL. Here, we show that TOX is highly expressed in
95% of human primary and relapse T-ALL when compared with both normal T
cells and B-ALL. TOX is highly and specifically expressed in human T-ALL
due to both genomic amplification and transcriptional regulation by the
master transcription factors MYB/LMO2. Characterization of zebrafish
T-ALLs revealed that TOX promoted genomic instability as assessed by
changes in DNA content and Whole Genome Sequencing. Effects on genomic
instability were confirmed by metaphase spread following TOX expression
in MEF cells, confirming roles for TOX in regulating genomic instability
and elevated DNA translocation potential in a wider range of cell types.
To identify TOX binding partners, Tandem Mass Spectrometry was performed
in human T-ALL cells. TOX was found to interact with KU70/KU80 but not
other DNA repair enzymes, a result verified by co-immunoprecipitation
studies. Given that TOX elevated genomic instability in the zebrafish
model, that Ku70 or Ku80 loss lead to genomic instability and T cell
lymphoma in mice, and that TOX bound specifically to KU70/KU80 - the
initiating factors required for Non-Homologous End Joining (NHEJ) repair
- we hypothesized that TOX is a negative regulator of double-strand break
repair. Fluorescent repair assays were completed in 3T3 fibroblasts and
confirmed that TOX inhibits NHEJ. Dynamic real-time imaging studies
showed that TOX suppresses recruitment of fluorescent-tagged KU80 to DNA
breaks. Importantly, TOX loss of function increased NHEJ in human T-ALL
cells and reduced time to DNA repair as assessed by fluorescent Traffic
Light Reporter assays and quantitative assessment of 53BP1 and H2A.X foci
resolution following irradiation. Our results show that TOX is aberrantly
re-activated in 95% of human T-ALL, thereby suppressing KU70/KU80
function to promote genomic instability and ultimately elevating rates at
which acquired mutations and rearrangements are amassed in developing
pre-malignant T cells. Our work shows that TOX is the major oncogenic
driver of genomic instability human T-ALL and locks cells in a constant
state of dampened repair.

