Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fix the fixation: effect of formalin fixation on targeted
sequencing, variant calling and gene expression


Tumor biopsies are often Formalin-Fixed and Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) for
histological staining, genetic testing and archival purposes. Formalin
treatment preserves tissue by crosslinking proteins, but can lead to
mutation of the nucleic acid bases that can be detected by
next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods despite being unrelated to the
cancer. Studies have shown that certain fixation protocols are compatible
with high quality nucleic acid isolation and variant calling by NGS.
These studies used tissue fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24
hours, a standard protocol in the pathology field. In practice, however,
FFPE sample handling varies from site-to-site. As we processed FFPE
samples from various sites, we found that the quality of the isolated
nucleic acids and subsequent sequencing results varied substantially. We
hypothesized that this is due to deviations from the standard protocol
such as improperly buffered reagents, variation in the fixation time and
temperature, microwaving, and varied storage conditions of the samples.To
understand the role of formalin fixation on the quality of the isolated
nucleic acids and subsequent NGS analyses, we subjected the widely
studied cell line NA12878 to various formalin fixation conditions. We
then performed an augmented target enrichment and sequencing assay on
both the DNA and RNA isolated from fresh frozen (FF) and formalin fixed
(FFPE) NA12878 samples. We assessed raw nucleic acid quality, library
quality, alignment rate, duplication rate, on-target efficiency and
variant concordance between FF and FFPE.We noted substantial negative
effects on sequencing library quality associated with sample incubation
in unbuffered formalin, at high temperatures, and long periods of time
(e.g. 3 days rather than 1 day). These harshly treated samples also
showed poor alignment qualities, higher duplication rates, and lower
mapping qualities. At the small variant level, they showed an increase in
global C>T deamination (CG->TA, 50% FFPE vs 35% in FF) and oxidation
(CG->AT, 15% FFPE vs 10% FF) rates. Variants caused by formalin fixation
were most commonly detected at low (Tumor biopsies are often
Formalin-Fixed and Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) for histological staining,
genetic testing and archival purposes. Formalin treatment preserves
tissue by crosslinking proteins, but can lead to mutation of the nucleic
acid bases that can be detected by next-generation sequencing (NGS)
methods despite being unrelated to the cancer. Studies have shown that
certain fixation protocols are compatible with high quality nucleic acid
isolation and variant calling by NGS. These studies used tissue fixed
with 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 hours, a standard protocol in
the pathology field. In practice, however, FFPE sample handling varies
from site-to-site. As we processed FFPE samples from various sites, we
found that the quality of the isolated nucleic acids and subsequent
sequencing results varied substantially. We hypothesized that this is due
to deviations from the standard protocol such as improperly buffered
reagents, variation in the fixation time and temperature, microwaving,
and varied storage conditions of the samples.To understand the role of
formalin fixation on the quality of the isolated nucleic acids and
subsequent NGS analyses, we subjected the widely studied cell line
NA12878 to various formalin fixation conditions. We then performed an
augmented target enrichment and sequencing assay on both the DNA and RNA
isolated from fresh frozen (FF) and formalin fixed (FFPE) NA12878
samples. We assessed raw nucleic acid quality, library quality, alignment
rate, duplication rate, on-target efficiency and variant concordance
between FF and FFPE.We noted substantial negative effects on sequencing
library quality associated with sample incubation in unbuffered formalin,
at high temperatures, and long periods of time (e.g. 3 days rather than 1
day). These harshly treated samples also showed poor alignment qualities,
higher duplication rates, and lower mapping qualities. At the small
variant level, they showed an increase in global C>T deamination (CG->TA,
50% FFPE vs 35% in FF) and oxidation (CG->AT, 15% FFPE vs 10% FF) rates.
Variants caused by formalin fixation were most commonly detected at low
(<5%) allele frequencies (AFs). When compared to gold set mutations in
NA12878, we observed 80% false negative and 60% false positive variants
in harshly treated samples. We are performing a similar analysis with RNA
isolated from FF and FFPE NA12878 samples to understand the role of
formalin on RNA variant and gene expression assays.Using the results of
this study, we intend to provide guidance on optimal fixation conditions
for NGS applications. It is crucial to fix tissues in buffered formalin
for less than 24hr at room temperature to preserve nucleic acid integrity
and amenability for downstream NGS assays. We also demonstrate how a
deeper understanding of the effects of formalin can improve variant
calling from FFPE tissues, especially at lower AFs where formalin-related
errors have the greatest impact.

