Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of oncogenic methyltransferase
ESOC1 as a diagnostic and therapeutic target for esophageal cancer


Esophageal cancer is one of the most lethal malignancies of the digestive
tract, and at the time of diagnosis most of the patients are at advanced
stages. In spite of the use of current surgical techniques combined with
various treatment modalities, such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the
prognosis of esophageal cancer still remains poor. Therefore, further
development of new anti-cancer drugs for this disease with minimum risk
of adverse event is urgently awaited. To screen oncoantigens which could
be used for the development of new diagnostic biomarkers as well as
molecular targeted drugs and/or immunotherapy, we have established a
screening system as follows; i) To identify overexpressed genes in
esophageal cancers by genome-wide screening using the microarray
representing 27,648 genes and pure populations of tumor cells taken from
cancer tissues by laser microdissection, ii) To verify the candidate
genes for their very low or absent expression in normal tissues by
northern-blotting, iii) To validate the clinicopathological significance
of their expression with tissue microarray covering hundreds of archived
esophageal cancers, iv) To verify whether the target genes are essential
for the growth or survival of cancer cells by RNAi and cell growth
assays. During this process, we selected dozens of druggable oncoproteins
with various enzymatic activities, and identified overexpression of
metyltransferase ESOC1 (esophageal cancer-associated oncoprotein 1) in
the majority of esophageal cancers and its scarce expression in normal
tissues except testis. Immunohistochemical staining using tumor tissue
microarrays consisting of 251 esophageal cancers demonstrated that ESOC1
expression was associated with poor prognosis (P = 0.0029 by log-rank
test), and multivariate analysis confirmed its independent prognostic
value (P = 0.0082). Suppression of ESOC1 expression with siRNA
effectively suppressed the growth of cancer cells. ESOC1 has a SAM
dependent methyltransferase domain, and we confirmed its
methyltransferase activity for some small non-coding RNAs that were
overexpressed in esophageal cancers. In addition, we confirmed that the
exogenous expression of ESOC1 increased the growth activity of HEK293T
cells, but the mutant ESOC1 did not have methyltransferase activity, and
did not confer the growth promoting activity. Since ESOC1 plays a
significant role in the cell growth and malignant nature of tumors, we
suggest that ESOC1 is likely to be a prognostic biomarker and a potential
therapeutic target for developing new anti-cancer drugs and cancer
vaccines.

