Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel function of NRP2 in therapy resistant metastatic cancer


Neuropilins (NRPs) are cell surface glycoproteins known for their role as
co-receptors for plexins and VEGF family members in neuronal development
and vascular and lymphatic growth. Neuropilin-2 (NRP2), a family member
of NRPs has been reported to enhance the survival of cancer cells
following therapeutic stress. In a recent study, our group has shown that
the expression of NRP2 can be a poor prognostic factor for invasive
bladder cancer patients treated with radiochemotherapy. Its expression
correlated with an increased risk of an early cancer specific death and
significantly decreased cancer specific survival among these patients
supporting its role as a promoter of therapy resistance. This function of
NRP2 is distinctly different from its known function as a co-receptor. In
this study, we have provided the molecular mechanism of how NRP2 imparts
therapy resistance in cancer cells. Our results indicate that depletion
of NRP2 inhibits autophagy, a process which promotes survival of cancer
cells during therapeutic stress. Further, we observed a role of NRP2 in
the maturation of early to late endosomes. Since late endosomes are
required for the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes, the decrease in
the formation of late endosomes following NRP2 depletion can explain the
defect in autophagy observed during inhibition of the NRP2 axis. We have
provided a detailed molecular mechanism of how the recruitment and
functions of several endocytic proteins such as EHD4, Rubicon, Mon1 and
PIKFYVE are affected due to the depletion of NRP2, which resulted in the
defect in endosomal trafficking. Recent evidences indicate that cancer
cells maintain a high endosomal trafficking activity and the defect in
trafficking promotes aberrant cellular signaling cascades either by
interfering with receptor recycling to the cell surface or by inhibiting
their lysosomal degradation. In this respect our data demonstrate that
depletion of the NRP2 axis leads to an increased accumulation of active
EGFR in early endosomes, which induces aberrant signaling cascade to
promote apoptosis in cancer cells. We were also able to identify a novel
downstream target of NRP2 axis known as WD Repeat and FYVE Domain
Containing 1 (WDFY1). Our data indicate that depletion of NRP2
transcriptionally upregulates the expression of WDFY1. This is achieved
due to an inhibition of the nuclear localization of a transcriptional
inhibitor FAC1. Overall, our data suggest that NRP2 axis maintains the
expression of WDFY1 in cancer cells to promote enhanced level of
endocytic acitivity and autophagy. NRP2 is therefore important for the
progression and survival of metastatic cancer cells and targeting this
axis is crucial to enhance therapeutic efficacy of aggressive
malignancies.

