Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel paclitaxel sensitivity genes via
lentiviral CRISPR/Cas9 screening in haploid human cells


Some cancers lack clearly druggable driver mutations and might also have
too few neo-antigen generating mutations to provoke a tumor-specific
immune response, even in the presence of antibodies targeting immune
checkpoint mechanisms. Synthetic lethal/non-oncogene addiction represents
an alternative approach to the therapy of such cancers, as exemplified by
the recent approval of olaparib.RNA interference has identified several
putative synthetic lethal targets, but few, if any, of these have have
withstood vigorous validation. The recent application of RNA-guided gene
editing to mammalian cells offers new prospects for target
identification. The complete ablation of gene expression, which this
technology permits allows the identification of targets that have no
phenotype when partially depleted by RNA interference.Horizon has
recently established a capability for CRISPR-Cas9 KO screening. Screens
are performed by transducing a pool of cells with a complex lentiviral
library. Next generation sequencing is then used to identify which sgRNAs
are accumulating or being depleted from the population. As there are
multiple sgRNAs per gene, we can rank genes for their likelihood of
having a phenotype under the conditions used in the screen. Our
proof-of-principle small molecule resistance and sensitivity screens
using both whole-genome libraries and custom subset libraries have
successfully identified previously published hits and also yielded novel
hits.Horizon has also developed a fully haploid cell line (eHAP), which
has the potential to provide additional clarity in genetic screening. To
evaluate the power of CRISPR-Cas9 KO screening in haploid cells, we have
used our screening platform to identify genes required for survival in
low doses of paclitaxel. Whole-genome screening using the GeCKOv2 library
identified three kinesins amongst the most prominent of the hits whose
depletion sensitised cells to this microtubule stabilising agent.
Intriguingly, two of these kinesins, KIF2A and KIF2C are thought to
destabilise mitotic microtubules, providing an attractive explanation for
the synthetic lethality.We will also present results from a second
genome-wide CRISPR KO screen in haploid cells to identify genes required
for survival under glucose starvation. Prominent hits included components
of the electron transport chain and the tuberous sclerosis complex.

