Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response to 5FU therapy in colorectal cancer is affected by
EZH2-mediated BclX splicing


Background and Aims: The chromatin modifier EZH2 is remarkably
up-regulated in many cancer types including colon cancer. High levels of
EZH2 have been correlated with tumor metastasis and regulation of
tumor-initiating cell subpopulation. Since, DZNep, an EZH2 inhibitor, can
inhibit the growth capability of colon cancer by inducing apoptosis;
down-regulation of EZH2 seems to be a promising therapeutic approach. Our
preliminary data showed that EZH2 levels were remarkably increased in
blood samples from metastatic colorectal cancer patients who did not
respond to the combination therapy with bevacizumab-irinotecan-5FU in
comparison to patients who were responders and developed a stable
disease. Many apoptosis-related proteins possess a dual function (pro-
and anti-apoptotic) due to alternative splicing. Therefore we aimed to
find possible apoptosis-associated EZH2 targets to explain these
interesting findings.Methods: HCT116 colon cancer cells were used for
DZNep and 5FU treatment and its efficiency was verified by Western blot
analysis. In vivo splicing assay was performed using BclX minigene
construct. The mRNA expression of EZH2, caspase 2, Death-associated
protein kinase (DAPK) and BclX isoforms was assessed by quantitative
real-time PCR in cells (BclX also in blood of patients) and normalized to
the GAPDH. Cell viability was examined by Crystal Violet
staining.Results: Western Blot for caspase 3 cleavage indicated increased
apoptotic levels after DZNep treatment. Combined DZNep and 5FU treatment
of cells led to a synergistic effect in reducing cell viability. DZNep
treatment specifically promoted pro-apoptotic BclXs isoform, but did not
affect the shift of pro-apoptotic isoforms of caspase 2 and DAPK. Using a
BclX minigene transfection we confirmed this effect exogenously. The
ratio BclXs/Xl was significantly altered by overexpression of different
splicing factors such as ASF/SF2, Sam68, after DZnep treatment. Moreover,
patients who did not respond to the combination therapy had the highest
EZH2 and BclXl isoform levels.Conclusion: Our data indicate a new
interesting link between epigenetic regulation and the splicing
machinery. Detailed investigation of EZH2-mediated regulation of BclXs/Xl
ratio could have the potential for prediction of 5FU-based therapy
response in colon cancer patients.

