Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered in vitro models of cancer metastasis using
decellularized biomatrix


Background: Metastasis contributes to majority of death in cancer
patients. However, cancer metastasis is difficult to study due to the
lack of experimental models that can fully recapitulate the biological
process, especially the organ specificity of cancer metastasis. Recent
advances in tissue engineering demonstrated that decellularized tissue,
organs that are denuded of cells, are excellent scaffolds for tissue
engineering of complex organs, such as liver and lung. These
decellularized organs preserve the organ microenvironment, which is
critical in cancer metastasis. We hypothesized that we can utilize
decellularized organ and engineer in vitro models of cancer metastasis
that can recapitulate the organ specificity of cancer metastasis. Here we
report the proof-of-principle of this approach by employing colorectal
cancer as a disease model. Since the primary cause of morbidity and
mortality in colorectal patients is liver and lung metastasis, we aimed
to engineer in vitro models of colorectal cancer lung and liver
metastasis.Methods: Decellularized biomatrix was prepared by sodium
deoxycholate based perfusion decellularization of rat liver or lung. We
compared the growth factors on the biomatrix scaffold to that of normal
rat liver and lung using semi-quantitative ELISA. We cultured colorectal
cancer cell lines: HT-29, SW480 and Caco2, on tissue culture dishes
coated with liver and lung decellularized biomatrix scaffolds. Cell
colony morphology and structure was examined by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and hematoxylin
and eosin stain. Therapeutic response (chemotherapy and radiation) for
cells grown on biomatrix was also examined.Results: Decellularized organs
preserved 92% growth factors bound to biomatrix scaffold at near
physiological levels. HT-29, SW480 and Caco2 were able to proliferate on
dishes coated with biomatrix scaffold and spontaneously formed
three-dimensional (3D) colonies when maintained at higher levels. These
tumor colonies are millimeter in size and are spherical in shape, similar
to in vivo metastases. SEM showed cells on the tumor surface appeared to
form tight junctions with each other. TEM images further confirmed that
these 3D tumor colonies contain areas of necrosis, consistent existing
literature 3D colonies and in vivo metastasis. Importantly, we identified
signet ring cell formation in the engineered 3D metastases. We also found
the cells in engineered liver and lung metastasis responded to
chemotherapy treatment differently than the cells cultured under standard
conditions or on collagen or on matrigel. Interestingly, cells in both
engineered liver and lung metastasis are more sensitive to radiotherapy
than standard condition.Conclusions: Our engineered in vitro tumor
metastasis models closely mimic the in vivo metastasis phenotypically,
histologically, and biologically.

