Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thrombus formation inside liver metastasis of breast cancer by
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin


A relationship between cancer and thrombosis has been long recognized. In
the patients with advanced breast cancer, chemotherapy increases risk of
deep thrombosis from 2-10% to around 18%. In 1856, Virchow proposed three
pathophysiological risk factors for cancer patients who will likely
develop deep thrombosis, such as stasis of circulation, blood components
and vessel damages. Virchow's triad explains risk only for deep
thrombosis, but whether the risk for thrombus formation inside tumor can
also be increased is not determined yet. In preclinical studies, it has
been reported that doxorubicin can induce endothelial cell damage and
induce thrombus formation. Based on these evidences, we hypothesized that
thromboembolic events inside tumor can be increased by doxorubicin,
therefore these events may affect transport of therapeutics, oxygen and
nutrients to tumor cells to show anti-tumor effect.In current study, we
evaluated thrombus formation by IF staining of 4T1 murine breast tumors
metastasized to mouse liver using antibody to fibrinogen before or after
therapy with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD). There was a
significant increase in the amount of fibrinogen accumulated inside tumor
after PLD therapy. We also quantified the amount of blood vessels using
antibody to endothelial cells. There was a significant reduction in the
amount of vessels only inside, but not outside metastatic liver tumors
after PLD. Next, we imaged transport of systemically injected
fluorescently labeled albumin inside and outside liver metastases using
intravital microscopy. The amount of circulation inside metastatic tumor
was much limited as compared to those in outside tumors. We also imaged
diffusion of labeled albumin into tumor. After PLD therapy, the amount of
albumin inside tumor was reduced as compared to that in untreated liver
metastases. Then, we evaluated relative level of hypoxia inside tumor
between untreated and PLD treated tumors using antibody to CA9. There was
a significant increase in the level of hypoxia inside liver metastases
after the therapy.Previously we reported accumulation of PLD in 4T1
primary breast tumors by imaging fluorescence of doxorubicin. PLD
accumulated and extravasated predominantly inside tumor, suggesting
direct anti-tumor effect by PLD in the primary tumors. In contrast, we
imaged PLD accumulated in macrophages located in surrounding area of
metastatic tumors in liver. Doxorubicin may be released, diffused close
distance and affect adjacent endothelial cells, therefore inducing
thrombus in vessels surrounding tumor. These changes may reduce
circulation/diffusion, induce hypoxia inside tumor and kill tumor
associated endothelial cells. Thus, PLD may show indirect anti-tumor cell
effect in liver metastases. To determine whether thrombus formation
inside tumors is key mechanism for (indirect) antitumor effect in liver
metastases, combination therapy using PLD with anticoagulant will be
performed.

