Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring in vivo biodistribution of superparamagnetic
nanoparticles using superparamagnetic relaxometry (SPMR)


We report on the use of Superparamagnetic Relaxometry (SPMR) as a
technique for monitoring the distribution of superparamagnetic magnetite
(Fe3O4) nanoparticles in vivo. SPMR uses superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) sensors to measure the remnant magnetization
of nanoparticles bound to cells following a brief magnetizing pulse.
Unbound nanoparticles are not detected, making SPMR uniquely capable of
discriminating between nanoparticles that are circulating freely in the
bloodstream from those that have been immobilized in organs and tissues
throughout the body.The rate of clearance of magnetic nanoparticles from
circulation is largely dependent on their hydrodynamic diameter and
surface chemistry. In this study, biodistribution of PrecisionMRX
nanoparticles with 25 nm cores and two different surface coatings were
followed using the MRX instrument. In independent experiments, negatively
charged carboxylate nanoparticles and methoxy-PEG (mPEG) functionalized
nanoparticles with a near neutral charge were suspended in 100 L of
saline. Nanoparticle suspensions were injected intravenously via tail
vein into Balb/C mice at a dose of 5 mg/kg of body mass, while control
mice were injected with 100 L of saline solution. Mice were measured
individually on the MRX instrument at successive time points over the
course of 24 hours. At selected intervals during the 24 hour period, mice
were euthanized, exsanguinated, and organs harvested for ex vivo
measurements on the MRX. Organs and blood were subsequently assayed for
iron content.MRX measurements of mice injected with carboxylate
nanoparticles showed a strong magnetic signal localized in the region of
liver that reached a maximum several minutes after injection. The
negative surface charge of the carboxylate nanoparticles likely resulted
in their rapid opsonization in the blood and removal from circulation by
phagocytic cells in the liver. Conversely, MRX measurements of mice
injected with mPEG coated nanoparticles indicated an extended circulation
time, with a gradually increasing magnetic signal in the liver that had
not yet reached a maximum after four hours. Together, these experiments
demonstrate the utility in using SPMR to measure the clearance of
nanoparticles from the bloodstream following injection, an important
parameter in the design of optimal coatings for in vivo diagnostic and
therapeutic use.This work was performed, in part, at the Center for
Integrated Nanotechnologies, an Office of Science User Facility operated
for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science. Sandia
National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated
by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin
Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear
Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.

