Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lyn drives cancer metastasis via post-translational regulation of
SNAI proteins


Introduction: Metastasis is the most common cause of death from cancer
and occurs when malignant cells discard epithelial restraints and acquire
invasive abilities, facilitating their dissemination to permissive
micro-environments. This process is enhanced by tumor cell activation of
Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), a (normally embryonic)
developmental program in which epithelial cells assume a mesenchymal
phenotype during gastrulation and organogenesis, allowing single cell
invasive movement away from the ectodermal layer. Recent evidence
strongly implicates EMT induction in malignant progression and treatment
resistance. For example, EMT regulatory transcription factors are
required for breast cancer metastasis. Several oncogenic pathways (growth
factors, Src family, MAPK, AKT) induce EMT. Lyn tyrosine kinase, a member
of Src family tyrosine kinase is up-regulated in advanced prostate cancer
and has been reported to correlate with aggressive breast cancer. Our
objective is to determine the role of Lyn tyrosine kinase in EMT.Methods:
LNCaP (Lymph Node Metastasis of Prostate Cancer), BT-549 (Triple Negative
Breast Cancer) and UM-UC-13 (Bladder Cancer) cells were transfected with
Lyn siRNA; EMT markers were monitored by western blot and qRT-PCR and
immunofluorescence, migration by scratch assay and invasion by Boyden
chamber. Sub cellular localization of proteins was examined by IF and
nuclear/cyto extraction. In vivo experiments were performed in UC13-luc
cells with shRNA of Lyn.Results: Here we report that Lyn expression is
low in epithelial cells and is up-regulated in mesenchymal cells.
Targeting Lyn using siRNA decreases EMT markers (Fibronectin, Vimentin
and Zeb-1) at both mRNA and protein levels while increasing the
epithelial marker (E-cadherin). Moreover, we found that Lyn siRNA
decreases cell migration and invasion. Thisis decrease in mesenchymal
phenotype can be attributed to the decrease in the amount of Slug and
Snail, transcriptional repressors of E-Cadherin and activator of Vimentin
and Fibronectin. Interestingly, we found that Lyn knockout induces a
decrease of SLUG only at protein levels and not at mRNA levels. We
discovered that Lyn triggers a signaling cascade through Vav-Rac-Pak1
pathway to alter sub cellular localization of the SNAI proteins leading
to their proteasomal degradation. This effect results in decreased
invasion and migration in vitro as well as decreased metastasis in
vivo.Conclusion: Expression of Lyn kinase can be correlated to low
prognosis and aggressive/metastatic phenotype. We show that knocking down
Lyn by siRNA initiates a switch to a more epithelial phenotype reducing
cell migration and invasion.

