Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short telomeres are associated with increased risk for
arsenic-related skin lesions in Bangladesh


Chronic exposure to arsenic, a human carcinogen, has been shown in
epidemiologic studies to increase the risk of arsenical skin lesions
(keratosis and melanosis) as well as cancer (including non-melanoma skin
cancer). Recent studies suggest that the mechanism of arsenic's toxicity
may be related to telomere dysfunction, including altered telomere length
(TL), and differential expression of genes involved in telomere
maintenance. However, prior studies of arsenic exposure, TL, and skin
lesion tend to be small and cross-sectional in nature. In this study, we
investigated the association between arsenic exposure and TL (measured by
qPCR as T/S ratio), as well as TL and subsequent risk of skin lesion in
individuals who are exposed to naturally contaminated drinking water with
a wide range of arsenic levels in the Health Effects of Arsenic
Longitudinal Study (HEALS) in Araihazar, Bangladesh (2000-2009). In all
laboratory analyses, we attempted to randomize samples across plate
positions, and in statistical analyses, we controlled for any residual
confounding by plate or plate position. All TL data generated showed a
strong inverse association with age. In a random sample of the baseline
cohort (n = 649), we observed a positive association between water
arsenic levels and TL (Ptrend = 0.035), with beta estimates of 0.001,
0.023, and 0.025 for water arsenic levels of 10.1-50ug/L, 50.1-150ug/L
and 150+ug/L, respectively, compared to Chronic exposure to arsenic, a
human carcinogen, has been shown in epidemiologic studies to increase the
risk of arsenical skin lesions (keratosis and melanosis) as well as
cancer (including non-melanoma skin cancer). Recent studies suggest that
the mechanism of arsenic's toxicity may be related to telomere
dysfunction, including altered telomere length (TL), and differential
expression of genes involved in telomere maintenance. However, prior
studies of arsenic exposure, TL, and skin lesion tend to be small and
cross-sectional in nature. In this study, we investigated the association
between arsenic exposure and TL (measured by qPCR as T/S ratio), as well
as TL and subsequent risk of skin lesion in individuals who are exposed
to naturally contaminated drinking water with a wide range of arsenic
levels in the Health Effects of Arsenic Longitudinal Study (HEALS) in
Araihazar, Bangladesh (2000-2009). In all laboratory analyses, we
attempted to randomize samples across plate positions, and in statistical
analyses, we controlled for any residual confounding by plate or plate
position. All TL data generated showed a strong inverse association with
age. In a random sample of the baseline cohort (n = 649), we observed a
positive association between water arsenic levels and TL (Ptrend =
0.035), with beta estimates of 0.001, 0.023, and 0.025 for water arsenic
levels of 10.1-50ug/L, 50.1-150ug/L and 150+ug/L, respectively, compared
to <10ug/L. However the association was not replicated in an independent
random sample (n = 1181, Ptrend = 0.176) with beta estimates of 0.007,
-0.004, and -0.017. In a nested case-control study comparing skin lesion
incident cases diagnosed across a nine year period with sex- and
age-matched controls (448 cases and 462 controls), we observed higher
incident skin lesion risk with shorter TL (Ptrend = 4.6E-5), with odds
ratios of 3.05, 1.30, and 1.21 for the first (shortest), second, and
third TL quartiles compared to the longest. Our findings show that
arsenic exposure is not strongly associated with TL, indicating that TL
is likely not the main mode of action for arsenic's carcinogenic
toxicity. However, TL is inversely associated with skin lesion risk,
suggesting that short TL may be a biomarker of susceptibility for
arsenical skin lesions independent of arsenic exposure.

