Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-1 expression mediates response to albumin-bound paclitaxel


BACKGROUND:Albumin-bound chemotherapies such as nab-paclitaxel are
approved to treat pancreatic cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
and breast cancer. Predictive biomarkers to select patients who may
benefit most from nab-paclitaxel are lacking. Nab-paclitaxel is thought
to enter cells through a caveolae-gp60 endocytic mechanism. Caveolin-1
(Cav-1) is a principal structural component of caveolae, and Cav-1 has
been shown to be important for albumin uptake in endothelial cells. Cav-1
is known to be up-regulated in multiple tumor types, including pancreatic
cancer, and certain subtypes of non-small cell lung cancer, and breast
cancer. We hypothesize that Cav-1 expression may predict response to
nab-paclitaxel therapy.METHODS: We correlated Cav-1 expression with
nab-paclitaxel sensitivity in a panel of NSCLC and pancreatic cancer cell
lines. We also assessed albumin uptake in tumor and non-tumor cell lines.
We genetically depleted Cav-1 by shRNA in cells and performed
cytotoxicity assays. In addition, we measured how Cav-1 levels affected
albumin and nab-paclitaxel uptake into tumor cells by immunofluorescence,
immunoblotting, and mass spectrometry. Annexin V flow cytometry analysis
and immunoblotting for apoptosis pathway intermediates were also
performed. Nab-paclitaxel resistant cell lines were created by culturing
cells with increasing doses of nab-paclitaxel for extended periods of
time. The role of Cav-1 expression in mediating response to
nab-paclitaxel in vivo was assessed using xenograft models.RESULTS:H23
and MIA-PaCa2 tumor cells uptake more albumin compared to FHs74Int and
HBEC3KT non-tumor cell lines. Higher Cav-1 expression in a panel of
pancreatic cancer and NSCLC cell lines was correlated with lower IC50 for
nab-paclitaxel. Cav-1 depletion resulted in reduced albumin and
nab-paclitaxel uptake by tumor cells as measured by immunofluorescence,
immunoblotting, and mass spectrometry. Loss of Cav-1 resulted in
resistance to nab-paclitaxel but no change in sensitivity to free
paclitaxel in vitro. Cav-1 down-regulation resulted in protection from
nab-paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Conversely, re-expression of Cav-1 in
low-Cav-1 endogenously expressing cell lines AsPC-1 and HPAFII resulted
in increased nab-paclitaxel uptake and sensitization through apoptosis.
Furthermore, nab-paclitaxel resistant cells generated by prolonged
exposure demonstrated downregulation of Cav-1 levels and reduced albumin
uptake. Finally, genetic depletion of Cav-1 rendered tumor cells
resistant to nab-paclitaxel in xenograft models, with concomitant reduced
albumin uptake and activation of apoptosis.CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest
that Cav-1 expression and caveolae are critical determinants of response
to nab-paclitaxel. This data supports further testing of Cav-1 as a
potential predictive biomarker of response to nab-paclitaxel and
potentially other albumin-bound chemotherapies.

