Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P16INK4a over-expression sensitizes HPV(-) HNSCC to radiation
through down-regulation of USP7


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tumorigenesis
induced by human papillomavirus (HPV) shows a greater clinical response
to radiation therapy when compared to HPV negative patients. The
underlying mechanism for this more favorable outcome is unknown, but the
presumption is that DNA repair response must play a large role. P16INK4a
is a known surrogate marker for HPV positivity; however the relationship
between radiation sensitivity and P16INK4a has not been completely
elucidated in this context. Ubiquitin specific protease 7 (USP7), also
known as HAUSP, is a deubiquitylating enzyme that cleaves ubiquitin from
substrates to stabilize target proteins. USP7 overexpression is a
predictor of poor prognosis in lung carcinomas and correlates with
disease progression and lower survival in gliomas. More recent studies
have shown USP7 has a role in the stability of DNA damage response
proteins such as RNF168, BRCA1 and Chk1; and USP7 knockdown has been
shown to radio-sensitize breast cancer cells to radiation. We have
investigated the possible role of USP7 in the radio-response of HNSCC
cells in the context of HPV status.Methods: Four HPV(+) and four HPV(-)
HNSCC were chosen for this study. The radio-response was determined by
clonogenic survival assay. P16INK4a overexpression was generated using
lentivirus. Western blot analysis was used for visualizing protein
expression. The Cancer Genome Atlas was interrogated to examine the
relationship between USP7 and clinical outcome.Results: Our data suggest
P16INK4a negatively regulates USP7 and leads to the more radiosensitive
phenotype associated with HPV(+)HNSCC. Radio-resistant HPV(-) HNSCC cell
lines show higher levels of USP7 than HPV(+) lines and over-expression of
P16INK4a in HPV(-) HN5 cells leads to down-regulation of USP7 and
radio-sensitization. Conversely, P16INK4a siRNA knockdown in HPV(+)
UMSCC-47 shows an increase of USP7 protein expression and
radio-resistance. P22077, an inhibitor of USP7 activity, was also shown
to radiosensitize a HPV(-) cell line. This shows proof of principle that
inhibiting USP7 can be a viable approach to sensitizing HPV(-) HNSCC to
radiation. USP7 overexpression was also associated with poorer overall
survival in HNSCC.Conclusion: These results suggest that USP7 may be a
marker of clinical radioresistance in HNSCC and that its inhibition has
the potential to improve the treatment outcome of patients with HPV(-)
HNSCC when combined with radiotherapy.

