Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting first line tamoxifen response of recurrent ER+ breast
cancer patients based on transcriptional activity of signaling pathways


IntroductionGenerally, estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer
patients are eligible for hormonal treatment, but roughly half of them
respond, and identifying those that do remains a challenge. Predicting
hormonal therapy response with higher specificity (without losing
sensitivity) is of clinical value, to avoid overtreatment and enable
consideration of alternative, more effective (targeted) drugs. We
developed Bayesian computational model-based mRNA tests [1] to analyze
oncogenic signal transduction pathway activity in cancer tissue samples,
for selection of personalized therapy. Here, we show that such a test for
the ER pathway can predict hormonal therapy response independent of
traditional predictive factors.MethodsGene expression levels (Affymetrix
HG-U133+PM microarrays) were used to determine transcriptional activity
of the ER, AR, PI3K, Wnt, Hedgehog (HH), TGF and NFB pathways, as
described earlier [1], in 132 ER+ primary breast tumor samples of
patients who did not receive adjuvant hormonal therapy and subsequently
relapsed and were treated with first line tamoxifen treatment. Univariate
and multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
associate the pathways activities with progression free survival (PFS) on
tamoxifen treatment, together with traditional response prediction
factors.ResultsIn 102 (77%) of the 132 samples, at least one of the seven
pathways was found active. ER pathway activity was observed in 36 samples
(27%). Strikingly, 76 samples (58%) had an active NFB pathway. In 37
samples (28%), two or more pathways were active, predominantly ER with
NFB.The probability of ER pathway activity was associated with a longer
PFS, with a hazard ratio of 0.41 in a univariate analysis (p = 0.0039),
while activity of the TGF pathway was associated with a shorter PFS (HR =
2.2, p = 0.044). In a multivariate analysis using the seven pathways, ER
pathway activity remained significant (HR = 0.44, p = 0.011), while TGF
did not (HR = 1.67, p = 0.24). A Kaplan-Meier analysis as a function of
ER activity gave a log-rank p-value of 0.002.A multivariate analysis for
PFS including ER pathway activity and the traditional predictive factors
disease free interval (2yr), site of relapse, age, menopausal status,
ESR1 and PGR mRNA expression and Her2 status, showed that ER activity was
independently associated with a favorable PFS (HR = 0.43, p =
0.047).ConclusionIn ER+ breast cancer patients who did not receive
adjuvant hormonal therapy, transcriptional ER pathway activity as
measured by our computational ER pathway mRNA test was associated with a
favorable outcome upon first line tamoxifen treatment. The ER pathway
test can hence be used as an independent predictor of hormonal therapy
response in ER+ breast cancer patients with recurrent disease.[1]
Verhaegh W et al. Cancer Res. 2014;74:2936-45.

