Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100A4 is a critical regulator of stemness and the mesenchymal
phenotype in GBMs


Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most incurable human cancers, and the
mesenchymal subtype of GBMs has the worst prognosis. The mesenchymal
phenotype and glioma stem cells (GSCs) are associated with tumor
recurrence and therapy resistance. While growing evidence suggests that
tumor microenvironment modulates stemness and the mesenchymal phenotype,
little is known about how these phenotypes are coordinately regulated.
Here we report that S100A4 is a critical regulator of stemness and the
mesenchymal phenotype in GBMs. First, we show that S100a4 is a novel
marker and a regulator of GBM TICs. Using genetically engineered mice and
patient derived GBM tumorspheres, we show that S100a4 expression is
enriched in TICs and that S100a4 function is critical for self-renewal of
these cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that selective ablation of
S100a4+ cells in vivo is sufficient to block tumor growth. Second, we
show that S100A4 regulates expression of EMT regulators, SNAIL2 and ZEB1,
in addition to master transcriptional regulators of the mesenchymal
signature genes (CEBPB/D, RUNX1, FOSL2, and BHLHE40), suggesting that
S100A4 is an upstream (master) regulator of mesenchymal transition in
GBMs. Third, we show that acidosis, a common environmental stress in
malignant tumors, induces S100A4 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) regulator expression. Importantly, S100A4 is required for
acidosis-induced EMT and mesenchymal transition. Consistently, S100A4
expression is strongly associated with the mesenchymal subtype of GBMs,
and S100A4 is an independent prognostic indicator for the mesenchymal
subtype GBM patient survival. In summary, we show that S100A4 is a
critical node in the molecular network that controls glioma stem cells
and the mesenchymal phenotype, and propose that targeting S100A4 may
simultaneously suppress mesenchymal transition and stemness of glioma
cells, particularly in stressful tumor environments.

