Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved CAR safety by a non-lethal switch to control CAR activity
at the T-cell surface membrane


Adoptive immunotherapy using engineered T-cells has emerged as a powerful
approach to treat cancer. The potential of this approach relies on the
ability to redirect the specificity of T cells through genetic
engineering. Novel specificities in T cells have been typically
implemented through the genetic transfer of the so-called chimeric
antigen receptors (CARs). CARs are synthetic receptors that associated an
extracellular targeting moiety with one or more intracytoplasmic
signaling domain derived from lymphocyte activation receptors. Present
CAR architectures are designed to combine all relevant domains within a
single polypeptide, thereby; they combines advantages of MHC unrestricted
target recognition to the potent native effector mechanisms of the T
cell. Although adoptive transfer of CAR T cells is proven to be an
effective strategy to cancer therapy, potential adverse effects such as
Cytokines Release Syndrome (CRS) and/or the risk of on-target off-tumor
targeting are still a major concern. To date only suicide mechanisms that
can eradicate the engineered T-Cell at will or mRNA CAR transfection
approaches have been proposed to addresses this safety issue.Here, we
describe the development of a small molecule based switch-on technology
to control the surface presentation of a chimeric antigen receptor in
T-cells. By grafting protein domains that can interact upon addition of a
small molecule drug in the hinge domain of the CAR architecture, we are
able to turn a T-cell endowed with an engineered CAR from an off-state to
an on-state, in term surface presentation as well as for its specific
cytolytic properties. This system offers the advantage of a transient CAR
T-cell for safety while letting open the possibility of multiple
cytotoxicity cycles using a small molecule drug. This non-lethal control
system of CAR engineered T-cells represents an important advance for the
safety of this technology.

