Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Minor Variant Finder: New software for detecting somatic mutations
at low level in Sanger sequencing traces


Introduction: With the rapid adoption of next generation sequencing (NGS)
and its use for characterization of mutations in tumor samples, a need
has emerged to establish an orthogonal technology for reliable and
sensitive detection of somatic mutations which may occur at proportions
of 10% or lower compared to the normal allele. Until now, somatic
variants with an allelic proportion of 25% or less are often undetected
(i.e. not called) by automated Sanger sequencing software. We have
developed Minor Variant Finder software that calls 5% minor variants at
96% sensitivity and 99% specificity in a test data set. The improved
variant detection software calls variants de novo, without a priori
knowledge of location or presence, and affords all the advantages of
Sanger sequencing, of robustness, low error rate, ease of use, human
interpretable visual displays of the output data, and low cost per sample
and target.Methods: New algorithms were developed to compare and subtract
the baseline noise signals of a control sample from a test sample. Noise
minimization and peak detection algorithms enable the detection of peaks
representing candidate minor variants which are confirmed in the
complementary strand.To test the new algorithms, synthetic mixtures of
minor alleles in the range of 2.5%, 5%, 10% and 20% were prepared by
combining genomic DNAs containing known mutations. Using an optimized
PCR/sequencing protocol to sequence cell line and FFPE derived DNA, 13
different amplicons and seven different genes, including P53, KRAS, BRAF,
FLT3, RB1, CDH1, and ERBB2, were sequenced on 3500, 3730, and 3130
Applied Biosystems Genetic Analyzers.Results: To test the new software,
898,499 total base positions and 3126 total variant positions, spanning
variants at 2%, 5%, 10%, and 20%, were interrogated. The software
achieved 96% sensitivity and 99.8% specificity for automated detection of
1112 variants present at the 5% level in 274,110 high quality base
positions. Sensitivity was 99% for variants at 10%, and 99.7% for
variants at 20%. The software displays a noise-minimized trace view to
facilitate visual inspection for confirmation or rejection. Further,
reference sequences with hg19 chromosomal locations and NGS vcf files can
be imported and aligned side by side with the Sanger sequencing data for
orthogonal verification. Hyperlinks to dbSNP for known rsSNP variants are
provided in the software.Conclusions: We have developed new Minor Variant
Finder software that detects and reports minor variants by Sanger
sequencing. We have demonstrated that the new software used in
conjunction with standard protocols for fluorescent dye terminator Sanger
sequencing enable the identification of de novo somatic mutations to a
level of 5% with 96% sensitivity and 99.81% specificity. This technology
will also be useful for the confirmation of minor variants identified by
NGS.For Research Use only - Not for use in diagnostic procedures.

