Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the role of PTEN as a predictive biomarker to next
generation isoform-selective PI3K inhibitors in PIK3CA mutant breast
cancer cells


The phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) pathway is one of the most
frequently activated signaling pathways in human cancer and represents a
promising therapeutic target. Taselisib (GDC-0032), a potent and
selective inhibitor of the PI3K alpha, delta and gamma isoforms, but less
potent in the beta isoform, displays increased sensitivity in models that
are driven by mutant PIK3CA (Ndubaku CO et al, J Med Chem, 2013).
Selective pressure caused by, small molecules such as PI3K inhibitors
will ultimately lead to clinical resistance and disease progression.
Recently, a published mechanism of acquired resistance to the PI3K
inhibitor alpelisib (BYL-719, a PI3K alpha-selective inhibitor) reported
that genomic loss of the tumor suppressor PTEN led to clinical
progression in a metastatic breast cancer patient harboring an activating
PIK3CA mutation (Juric D et al, Nature, 2014). As taselisib and alpelisib
are next generation PI3K inhibitors, we sought to determine if there are
any differences to drug sensitivity in PIK3CA mutant cells that have
concomitant loss of PTEN. To investigate this hypothesis, we first
measured viability in breast cancer cells, each with differing genetic
backgrounds treated with two PI3K inhibitors, taselisib and alpelisib. We
found that PIK3CA mutant and PIK3CA mutant/PTEN null cells were sensitive
to treatment when compared to wild-type and PTEN null cells. However,
PIK3CA mutant/PTEN null cells displayed higher IC50 values for both
inhibitors when compared to PIK3CA mutant cells. To control for
differences in genetic backgrounds, we next tested whether knockdown (KD)
of PTEN expression in PIK3CA mutant breast cancer cells would promote
resistance and reactivate the PI3K signaling cascade even in the presence
of a PI3K inhibitor. Transient, siRNA-targeted KD of PTEN in the PIK3CA
mutant breast cancer cell lines EFM19 and T47D conferred resistance to
alpelisib after 6 days of drug treatment, an observation that was less
pronounced in taselisib treated cells. Additionally, PTEN KD in
DMSO-treated cells led to an increase in cell proliferation and enhanced
downstream PI3K signaling as measured by phosphorylated AKT and S6
proteins when compared to non-targeting siRNA controls. The reactivated,
pro-survival signaling with PTEN KD was maintained upon treatment with
both inhibitors when compared to control cells, an observation that was
more pronounced in alpelisib treated cells. These data suggest that
PIK3CB can compensate for PIK3CA inhibition and that PTEN loss could lead
to clinical resistance to alpelisib, but may not constitute a resistance
mechanism to taselisib. As both molecules have entered phase 3 studies in
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer, understanding how
biomarker-defined genotypes respond to next generation PI3K inhibitors is
critical for identifying patients most likely to gain therapeutic benefit.

