Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The presence of COX-2 and tumor-associated macrophages as a
prognostic marker for invasive breast carcinoma patients


Inflammation is an important mediator of tumor progression. The objective
of this study was to assess whether the tissue localization of COX-2 and
tumor-associated macrophages were associated with clinicopathological
features of invasive carcinoma, including collagen deposition and patient
survival outcome. A tumor microarray (TMA) of 371 biopsy specimens from
patients with invasive breast carcinoma was analyzed for expression of
high levels of COX-2, and the macrophage markers CD68 and CD163 in either
the tumor nest (TN) or the tumor-associated stroma (TS). The study
population for this TMA was female patients, 18 to 80 years of age with a
median follow up of 8.4 years. Survival tables were calculated according
to the Kaplan-Meier method. We found that elevated collagen deposition
was associated with high stromal expression of COX-2 (P Inflammation is
an important mediator of tumor progression. The objective of this study
was to assess whether the tissue localization of COX-2 and
tumor-associated macrophages were associated with clinicopathological
features of invasive carcinoma, including collagen deposition and patient
survival outcome. A tumor microarray (TMA) of 371 biopsy specimens from
patients with invasive breast carcinoma was analyzed for expression of
high levels of COX-2, and the macrophage markers CD68 and CD163 in either
the tumor nest (TN) or the tumor-associated stroma (TS). The study
population for this TMA was female patients, 18 to 80 years of age with a
median follow up of 8.4 years. Survival tables were calculated according
to the Kaplan-Meier method. We found that elevated collagen deposition
was associated with high stromal expression of COX-2 (P < 0.0001);
however, the amount of collagen deposition was not a predictor for
survival outcome. In order to better analyze patient data, samples were
divided into quartiles based on their levels of COX-2 expression and/or
macrophage infiltration. Tumor nests with high COX-2 expression had worse
patient outcome (P = 0.011). One possible mechanism for this is COX-2
dependent recruitment of macrophages to the tumor microenvironment,
supported by our finding of high infiltration of CD68+ macrophages in the
TS, and CD163+ macrophages in both TN and TS. This recruitment of
macrophages was associated with worse overall survival (OS). Furthermore,
patient survival was worsened even more if macrophages expressed COX-2,
suggesting positive amplification of COX-2 signaling via macrophage
recruitment. This notion is further established by the finding of high
presence of CD163+ macrophages in the TN as an independent prognostic
factor as revealed by multivariate analysis (P Inflammation is an
important mediator of tumor progression. The objective of this study was
to assess whether the tissue localization of COX-2 and tumor-associated
macrophages were associated with clinicopathological features of invasive
carcinoma, including collagen deposition and patient survival outcome. A
tumor microarray (TMA) of 371 biopsy specimens from patients with
invasive breast carcinoma was analyzed for expression of high levels of
COX-2, and the macrophage markers CD68 and CD163 in either the tumor nest
(TN) or the tumor-associated stroma (TS). The study population for this
TMA was female patients, 18 to 80 years of age with a median follow up of
8.4 years. Survival tables were calculated according to the Kaplan-Meier
method. We found that elevated collagen deposition was associated with
high stromal expression of COX-2 (P < 0.0001); however, the amount of
collagen deposition was not a predictor for survival outcome. In order to
better analyze patient data, samples were divided into quartiles based on
their levels of COX-2 expression and/or macrophage infiltration. Tumor
nests with high COX-2 expression had worse patient outcome (P = 0.011).
One possible mechanism for this is COX-2 dependent recruitment of
macrophages to the tumor microenvironment, supported by our finding of
high infiltration of CD68+ macrophages in the TS, and CD163+ macrophages
in both TN and TS. This recruitment of macrophages was associated with
worse overall survival (OS). Furthermore, patient survival was worsened
even more if macrophages expressed COX-2, suggesting positive
amplification of COX-2 signaling via macrophage recruitment. This notion
is further established by the finding of high presence of CD163+
macrophages in the TN as an independent prognostic factor as revealed by
multivariate analysis (P < 0.0001, HR = 4.67). These results suggest that
in invasive carcinoma the localization of inflammatory markers within the
tumor are biomarkers for patient survival outcome. Therefore, we propose
that these patients may benefit from therapy with a selective COX-2
inhibitor such as celecoxib.

