Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The SMAC-Mimetic LCL161 exhibits strong synergy with radiation in
vivo in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma by promoting tumor cell
apoptosis


Background and purpose: Evasion of apoptosis contributes to
radioresistance of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), calling
for novel strategies to overcome apoptotic resistance. Second
mitochondria-derived activator of caspase (SMAC) - mimetic is a new class
of targeted drugs that specifically induce apoptotic cell death and block
pro-survival signaling by antagonizing selected members of the inhibitor
of apoptosis protein (IAP) family. The present study was designed to
investigate the radiosensitizing effect of a SMAC mimetic, LCL161, in
HNSCC and the underlying mechanisms for radiosensitization.Material and
methods: Extent of radiation enhancement of 6 HNSCC cell lines (3 HPV[+],
3 HPV[-]) was assessed by in vitro clonogenic assay with appropriate
target inhibition verified by immunoblotting. Combination effect of
LCL161 and ionizing radiation was evaluated by cell cycle analysis,
Annexin-V assay, and immunoblotting. Correlation between apoptosis
associated molecules and HPV status was examined by analyzing mRNA
expression in The Cancer Genome Atlas Database (TCGA) in which 279 HNSCC
tumors are included, and screening protein expression in 6 HNSCC cell
lines via immunoblotting. Human tumor xenografts in nude mice were
generated and treated with LCL161, radiation, or the combination. Target
inhibition in vivo was confirmed by xenografts lysate immunoblotting, and
tissue section immunomhistochemistry.Results: LCL161 displayed minimal
single-agent cytotoxicity with IC50 values ranging between 32M - 95M in 6
HNSCC cells. LCL161 is a potent inhibitor of cIAPs, and caused
downregulation of cIAP1 at nanomolar concentrations in less than 1 hour.
Interestingly, we found that LCL161 could induce radiosensitization only
in HPV[-] HNSCC cell lines, but not in HPV[+] HNSCC cells.TCGA database
analysis indicated significantly higher mRNA expression of cIAP1 in
HPV[-] compared with HPV[+] HNSCC tumors. Consistent with this finding,
immunoblotting confirmed that that protein expression of cIAP1 was
elevated in HPV[-] HNSCC cells. LCL161 mediated radiosensitisation was
associated with enhanced activation of caspases-3, -7, -8, -9, and PARP.
Blockage of caspase activation via a pan-caspase inhibitor, z-VAD-fmk,
attenuated LCL161 radiosensitization. Finally, LCL161 monotherapy had
minimal activity in attenuating tumor growth in HNSCCxenografts. However,
the combination of LCL161 and radiation synergistically reduced xenograft
tumor volume, with pharmacodynamic inhibition of cIAP1 and caspase
activation confirmed in vivo.Conclusion:Taken together, these results
suggest that LCL161, a SMAC-mimetic, significantly radiosensitizes a
subset of HNSCC tumors, via a mechanism involving caspase activation and
apoptosis induction both in vitro and in vivo. These data provide support
for the combination of LCL161 and radiation in the treatment of HNSCC.

