Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cholesterol biosynthesis pathway to inhibit growth of
drug resistant ovarian cancer cells


Despite concerted efforts to develop new strategies for preventing and
treating ovarian cancer, almost 25,000 new cases of the disease are
reported each year in the United States. Cancers of the ovary have poor
prognosis due to drug resistance and metastasis, and have the highest
mortality rate of all the known gynecological malignancies. Standard
treatments include systemic high-dose toxic chemotherapeutic drugs but
drug-resistance almost always occurs. Consequently novel and more
effective non-toxic therapies for ovarian cancer are urgently needed. The
biosynthetic pathway leading to cholesterol production is an attractive
therapeutic target since cholesterol is an essential structural and
functional component of cell membranes required for tumor growth. Therapy
with statins, a class of cholesterol biosynthesis inhibitors that target
HMGCoA-reductase, is associated with certain undesirable side effects;
consequently alternative approaches to inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis
are being considered. 2,3-oxidosqualene cyclase (OSC), which converts 2,
3-monoepoxysqualene to lanosterol, has recently emerged as a possible new
target for inhibiting this pathway. Since OSC occurs downstream of
HMG-CoA reductase during cholesterol biosynthesis, its inhibition is not
likely to be associated with the adverse effects caused by statins.
Potent small molecule inhibitors of OSC have been identified. While
testing anti-cancer properties of one such inhibitor, RO0488071
[4-[6-(Allylmethylamino)hexyloxy]-4-bromo-2-fluorobenzophenone fumarate])
(RO), we found in short-term assays (24 h) that pharmacological doses
very effectively reduced the viability of drug-resistant ovarian tumor
cells (SK-OV-3 and OVCAR-3), determined by Sulforhodamine B colorimetric
assay. In long-term assays (7 days), nM concentrations of the drug were
also effective. Importantly, RO (20-40 mg/kg/day; ip) significantly
suppressed tumor xenografts obtained with ovarian cancer cells (SK-OV-3;
336 60 mm3 vs 171 20 mm3) with no toxicity to experimental animals (27
treatments once tumors reached 100 mm3). Interestingly, RO elevated
levels of the anti-proliferative protein estrogen receptor (ER)in tumor
cells in vitro. Initial studies suggest that a combination of RO and an
ER agonist, enhances the antiproliferative effects of RO in ovarian
cancer cells in an additive or synergistic manner. Our study is the first
to demonstrate that disrupting cholesterol biosynthesis by inhibiting OSC
is a novel and potent means by which to suppress growth of human ovarian
cancer cells. Further studies will determine whether combining RO with ER
agonists is an even more effective therapeutic approach to treat
drug-resistant ovarian cancer in vivo.Support: Peer-reviewed COR faculty
grant from the College of Veterinary Medicine, and by generous funds from
the donors to the Ellis Fischel Cancer Center, University of
Missouri-Columbia.

