Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folic acid-metabolizing enzymes regulate 5-fluorouracil anticancer
activity on colorectal cancer cell lines


Background: In colorectal cancer chemotherapy, the current standard of
care includes 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and leucovorin (LV) combination
therapy. To understand the role of folic acid-metabolizing enzymes in the
LV-mediated enhancement of 5-FU's antitumor activity, we suppressed the
expression of genes related to folic acid metabolism and evaluated the
resultant effect on the proliferation inhibitory effect of
5-fluoro-2-deoxyuridine (FdUrd). Method: We downregulated the expression
of thymidylate synthase (TS), folate receptor 1 (FOLR1),
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), methylenetetrahydrofolate
dehydrogenase (MTHFD), dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), and
phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase (GART) by lipofection of
small interfering RNA (siRNA) in DLD-1 and HCT116 cells, and calculated
the relative change in IC50 values on 48 hr exposure to FdUrd in
comparison with the corresponding IC50 values in control siRNA-treated
cells. In cells with TS downregulation, LV-mediated enhancement of
sensitivity to FdUrd was also evaluated. Sensitivity to FdUrd was
determined using the crystal violet staining method. Results: Treatment
with siRNA downregulated the expression of folic acid-metabolizing
enzymes. LV enhanced the sensitivity to FdUrd in control siRNA-treated
cells in a dose-dependent manner. However, in cells with TS
downregulation, LV did not enhance the sensitivity to FdUrd.
Downregulation of folic acid-metabolizing enzymes, except TS, decreased
the efficacy of FdUrd, although there was little decrease in FdUrd
efficacy owing to MTHFR downregulation. Conclusion: The level of TS
expression determined the LV requirement, and downregulation of folic
acid-metabolizing enzymes, which impaired the folic acid cycle, decreased
the efficacy of 5-FU.
Values are means (n = 3). *: Expression (%) is the expression at the
beginning of FdUrd treatment (at 48 hr after siRNA treatment).Comparison
of the IC50 values in target siRNA-treated cells and control
siRNA-treated cells.

