Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LncRNA AK001796 as a therapeutic target in aggressive breast
cancers


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be classified into
several distinct molecular subtypes based on gene expression. Like mRNAs
and miRNAs, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) differ dramatically in
expression across subtypes and can be used for classification. While
there has been considerable emphasis on miRNAs, our knowledge is still
lacking about the role of lncRNAs that comprise the majority of the
mammalian transcriptome. Recently, the importance of lncRNAs in cancer
has been highlighted by several studies. We have examined the expression
profiles of >17,000 lncRNAs in a large set of breast tumors and have
identified a lncRNA, AK001796, that is overexpressed in aggressive breast
cancers. In particular, AK001796 is enriched in the aggressive
claudin-low, HER-enriched, and luminal B subtypes. Furthermore, in four
different models, we find that AK001796 is significantly upregulated in
cell lines induced to undergo EMT and in putative mesenchymal-like cancer
stem cells within cell lines suggesting this lncRNA as an
inducer/facilitator of EMT. Similar results were obtained when a lung
cancer cell line was induced to EMT through TGF beta treatment. Using
cell fractionation, we have discovered that AK001796 is maintained
predominantly in the nucleus. By RACE we have identified two isoforms of
AK001796 in breast cancer cells that differ by the presence or absence of
a 94 nucleotide intron. The short form (with intron spliced out) appears
to be the variant enriched following EMT and may serve as a marker of
aggressiveness. Interestingly, knockdown of AK001796 using antisense
oligonucleotides lead to significantly increased apoptosis in EMT
positive cell lines whereas in EMT negative cells knockdown had little
effect. Preliminary studies for finding out the protein interacting
partners identified some mesenchymal phenotype-associated proteins in
pull-down studies using biotinylated oligos. To further investigate the
molecular mechanisms regulated by AK001796 and its utility as a
therapeutic target, we will determine the pathways induced by AK001796 by
mapping its protein interaction network and downstream signaling
pathways. These results nominate AK001796 as a promising therapeutic
target in aggressive breast cancers.

