Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of small-molecule FASN inhibitors in preclinical models
of colorectal cancer


Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN), a key enzyme of de novo lipid synthesis, is
upregulated in many cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC); increased
FASN activity is associated with decreased survival and increased disease
recurrence. Recently, a first-in-class, oral FASN inhibitor (TVB-2640)
entered a Phase I clinical trial (3V2640-CLIN-002) in solid tumor
patients demonstrating a favorable tolerability profile with no
significant adverse events; however, tumor characteristics that would
indicate responsiveness to FASN inhibition are not fully understood. The
purpose of our study was: (i) to determine the effect of novel, selective
and reversible FASN inhibitors on proliferation of primary CRC cell
cultures, established CRC cell lines, and CRC patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs); and (ii) to identify potential biomarkers associated with CRC
responsiveness to FASN inhibition. METHODS. The effect of TVB-3166,
TVB-3664, and TVB-3693 (all developed by 3-V Biosciences) on the
proliferation of primary cells (established from 1st generation PDX
tumors) and CRC cell lines was assessed by cell count; apoptosis was
assessed by Cell Death ELISA. In addition, tumor growth was assessed in
PDX models established in NOD SCID gamma mice using freshly resected CRC
specimens (either primary CRC or metastasis) from our patient population.
Once the xenografts grew to 100 mm3, mice were randomized into two groups
(n = 5) to receive either vehicle or TVB-3664 (3mg/kg) by gavage daily.
Tumor volume and animal weights were measured weekly. Western blot
analysis, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescent staining were used
to identify FASN-mediated changes in -catenin, Akt and AMPK pathways.
RESULTS. TVB compounds tested showed similar efficacy in primary and
established CRC cells with a wide range of sensitivity to FASN
inhibition. The 5 cell lines that were most responsive to FASN inhibition
demonstrated a low basal level of pAMPK and pAkt as compared to the 5
least responsive cells. Moreover, we noted that increased FASN protein
expression was also associated with increased sensitivity to FASN
inhibition. Inhibition of proliferation by TVB compounds was associated
with decreased expression of active -catenin, c-MYC, pAkt, and survivin,
while an increase in apoptosis was noted by induction of PARP cleavage.
Consistent with our in vitro studies, TVB-3664 treatment significantly
reduced tumor volume in vivo with no weight changes or toxicity observed.
CONCLUSIONS. Our studies show that the novel FASN inhibitors, as a single
agent, significantly inhibit CRC growth both in vitro and in vivo.
Importantly, our results suggest that basal activation of AMPK and Akt
may be predictive of responsiveness to FASN inhibition and may function
as potential biomarkers to allow a more personalized treatment approach.

