Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ODM-207, a novel BET-bromodomain inhibitor as a therapeutic
approach for the treatment of prostate and breast cancer


Introduction: BET (bromodomain and extraterminal) family proteins (BRD2,
BRD3, BRD4, and BRDT) are epigenetic readers that bind to
acetylated-lysine residues in histones and recruit protein complexes to
promote transcription elongation. In many cancers, BET proteins have been
shown to regulate expression of MYC and other oncogenic drivers that are
important for cell proliferation and survival. Pharmacologic inhibition
of the BET-histone interaction has been shown to result in
transcriptional downregulation of a number of oncogenes and inhibition of
tumor growth providing a novel strategy for treatment of cancer.
Therefore, in this study, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo antitumor
activity of ODM-207, a novel, potent and highly selective BET bromodomain
inhibitor using cell lines derived from prostate and breast cancer as
well as patient-derived tumor cell cultures of breast cancer.Methods and
Results: ODM-207 has antiproliferative effects on several hematological
and solid tumor cell lines. In a panel of prostate cancer cell lines,
ODM-207 attenuates cell growth of androgen receptor (AR)-positive cell
lines such as VCaP and 22Rv1. RNA-sequencing and Western blot studies
revealed that the exposure of sensitive prostate cancer cells to ODM-207
is associated with rapid down-regulation c-Myc expression levels while
wtAR was not affected. In 22Rv1 prostate cancer xenograft, which
expresses both the full-length androgen receptor and androgen receptor
splice variant V7, oral administration of ODM-207 was very efficacious in
suppressing tumor growth at well tolerated doses whereas enzalutamide had
only a modest effect. Contrary to our findings in prostate cancer cells,
BET-inhibitor treatment of estrogen-dependent MCF-7 breast cancer cell
line inhibits tumor growth in cell proliferation assays but is associated
with down-regulation of ER while the c-Myc levels are very low,
highlighting the context-dependent functional effects of BET inhibition.
Interestingly, ODM-207 produces potent antiproliferative effects
associated with cell-cycle arrest and cellular senescence in
patient-derived breast cancer cells.Conclusions: In summary, ODM-207 is a
new generation BET inhibitor found to possess excellent pharmacological
properties and antitumor activity both in vitro and in vivo. Our data
suggest the potential utilization of ODM-207 for the treatment of
prostate and breast cancer.

