Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adenovirus-transduced allogeneic dendritic cells for cancer
immunotherapy


Immunotherapy is currently being established as standard treatment for
cancer. Immune checkpoint blockade antibodies can cure a large proportion
of patients with refractory melanoma and lung cancer, and adoptive
transfer of patient-derived CD19 chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells
results in complete remission in a majority of patient with refractory
leukemia. Cancer vaccines based on patient-derived dendritic cells (DC)
modified ex vivo to present tumor antigens are promising for cancer
treatment especially when combined with immune checkpoint blockade
antibodies. Ex vivo-modified DCs are however poor in migrating to
secondary lymphoid organs after re-administration. In reality, it is more
likely endogenous DC that endocytos the injected DC, mature and then
migrate to lymph nodes where they present peptide fragments of tumor
antigen to T cells together with required co-stimulation.Herein, we
present a new strategy utilizing adenovirus (Ad)-transduced allogeneic
DCs (alloDCs) as immunostimulatory adjuvant to induce both innate and
adaptive immune response. Ad/alloDC can be prepared, tested and made
ready for release in advance and quickly be prepared for injection in
cancer patients upon request, thereby minimizing GMP-processing and
handling of cells. Besides encoding tumor antigens, adenovirus also
provides stimulatory danger signals for DC activation. We show that
Ad/alloDCs secret a panel of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines
including IL-12 and CXCL10 at high levels in a sustainable fashion. We
also show that Ad/alloDC recruit and activate neutrophils and NKs to the
site of injection. Ad/alloDC can also recruit and interact with
allo-reactive T cells to create a proinflammatory milieu, which further
recruit and activate endogenous DCs. We verified that endogenous DCs
activated in situ by an Ad/alloDC injection migrate to draining lymph
node, where they present the engulfed tumor antigen to T cells. We show
that these migratory endogenous DCs facilitate T cell activation and
proliferation. Moreover, when injected intratumorally, Ad/alloDCs
modulate the immunosuppressive environment by reducing the ratio of
monocytic to granulocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC). To
evaluate the therapeutic efficacy, we use B16 melanoma tumor-bearing
C57Bl/6 mice injected with adenovirus-transduced DCs from Balb/c origin
to obtain an allogeneic reaction. We show that Ad/alloDC treatment could
significantly delay tumor growth and prolong survival of tumor-bearing
mice.

