Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of p21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) in cancer stemness and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition


The p21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) is a key downstream effector of the Rho
family GTPases. PAK4 is found to be over-expressed in many oncogenic
Ras-driven cancers and cell lines but not in their normal counterparts.
Mesenchymal pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) stem cells (CSCs)
that are triple positive for stemness markers (CD133+, CD44+, and EpCam+)
as well as Ras and snail transduced human mammary epithelial cells
(HMLER-snail) showed enhanced expression of PAK4 along with activation of
Rho, Rac1 and CDC42. PAK4 RNA interference resulted in disruption of PDAC
CSC spheroids, reduction of mesenchymal markers (i.e. vimentin and snail)
and suppression of CSCs potential to form subcutaneous tumors in mice.
These findings point to a novel role of PAK4 in promoting oncogenic
Ras-driven EMT and stemness. Using PDAC CSCs (MiaPaCa-2 and L3.6pl) and
human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) that are transduced with Ras and
the EMT promoter snail (HMLE-Snail and HMLER-Snail), we investigated the
impact of PAK4 allosteric modulators [PAMs (KPT-7189, KPT-7523, KPT-9274
and KPT-9307)] on the reversal of EMT and stemness. The toxicity and
efficacy of PAMs were evaluated in vitro and in multiple sub-cutaneous
xenograft models. PAMs show anti-proliferative activity in vitro against
different PDAC CSCs and HMECs while sparing normal cells. Cell growth
inhibition was concurrent with apoptosis induction, suppression of colony
formation and reversal of mesenchymal morphology to epithelial (MET).
PAMs not only reduced PAK4 RNA and protein steady state levels but also
inhibited proliferative and anti-apoptotic signals downstream of PAK4.
PAMs caused suppression of EMT markers (EpCAM, vimentin and snail) and
re-expression of an epithelial promoter E-cadherin. PAM treatment
inhibited RhoA, Rac1 and CDC42 activation in GLISA assays. KPT-9274
showed remarkable anti-tumor activity in sub-cutaneous xenograft models
of CSCs and residual tumors showed suppression of EMT markers that was
concurrent with inhibition of PAK4 signaling. These studies open a novel
therapeutic opportunity against EMT and cancer stem cells through PAK4
inhibition.

