Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICGC in the cloud


In November 2015 members of this consortium and the International Cancer
Genome Consortium (ICGC) jointly announced the availability of more than
1,300 whole cancer genomes in the Amazon Web Services elastic compute
cloud (EC2). Another 480 whole cancer genomes are available in the Cancer
Genome Collaboratory, an academic cloud being built by this consortium.
By making the data available in cloud compute form, researchers benefit
from the high availability, scalability and economy offered by cloud
services, and to avoid the large investment in compute resources and the
time needed to download the data. Over the next year, we will increase
the number of ICGC genomes available in the cloud, with the goal of
placing the entire ICGC data set of 25,000 donors in academic and
commercial clouds when the project is completed in 2018. For information
and a getting-started guide, see
https://dcc.icgc.org/icgc-in-the-cloud.Cloud computing represents a
fundamental shift in the way that cancer genomics is performed. Because
of the large size of the ICGC data set, it can take many months to
download the data across a typical university broadband connection, and
it requires a substantial investment in hardware in order to analyze it.
In practice, this has meant that only large computational groups could
perform whole-genome analysis at scale. Using the cloud, research groups
of any size can launch large analytic processes, pay only for the compute
that they use, and avoid charges for data transfer and long-term data
storage.A practical demonstration of the power of working in compute
clouds comes from our ongoing collaboration with the PanCancer Analysis
of Whole Genomes Project (PCAWG; https://dcc.icgc.org/pcawg), which seeks
to interpret patterns of variation in both coding and non-coding portions
of cancer genomes. Upwards of 2,800 ICGC whole cancer genomes were
subjected to a uniform data processing pipeline that included whole
genome alignment, uniform quality control, and standardized germline and
somatic variant calling using a large number of software packages that
were adapted to run efficiently in the cloud. Using a series of 14
academic and commercial compute clouds, we were able to process this 800
terabyte data set in just over a year's time. Given the improvements in
the software that occurred over this period, the whole project would take
less than 4 months on just a single commercial cloud if we were to start
over. When the project is completed later in 2016, we will again use
academic and compute clouds to publish the PCAWG data, its major results,
and all the software used during the analysis, thereby allowing the
research community to integrate PCAWG with their own data sets, and apply
the same analytic procedures.

