Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between mammographic breast density and measures of
terminal duct lobular unit involution among women diagnosed with estrogen
receptor positive breast cancer


Introduction: High mammographic breast density (MD) and reduced levels of
terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU) involution (the histologic source of
most breast cancers) have been associated with increased risk of
developing breast cancer. Data relating MD and TDLU involution to breast
cancer characteristics and outcomes are sparse. Therefore, we assessed
these relationships among women with invasive ER-positive breast
cancer.Methods: The analysis focused on women with ER-positive breast
cancers who were diagnosed at Kaiser Permanente Northwest (1990-2008) and
followed through the end of 2010. Cases comprised of those who died of
breast cancer (n = 54) and controls those that did not die of breast
cancer (n = 180) over similar follow-up. Three reproducible measures that
are inversely related to TDLU involution were evaluated in digitized
hematoxilin and eosin stained sections in benign breast tissues
surrounding the tumors: TDLU counts per unit area, TDLU span and median
number of acini per TDLU. Percentage MD was estimated from digitized
mammograms using computer-assisted thresholding software (Cumulus).
Univariate associations between TDLU measurements and patient
characteristics, tumor size, and disease stage at diagnosis, were
calculated using Mann Whitney Wilcoxon rank test. TDLU measurements were
related to baseline MD using analysis of covariance models and adjusted
for age, body mass index (BMI), tumor size, stage, year of diagnosis and
smoking.Results: TDLUs were observed in 95% of cases and 89% of controls.
All TDLU measurements declined with age (p2cm) (p = 0.07 and p = 0.06,
respectfully). All TDLU measures were associated with MD among controls
(TDLU count: p = 0.04; TDLU span: p = 0.06; median acini count per TDLU:
p = 0.01), whereas among cases only, TDLU span showed a significant
association MD (p = 0.003).Conclusion: Preliminarily, our data suggest
that among women with non-fatal ER-positive breast cancers, TDLU
involution was associated with localized tumor stage, size and MD,
whereas these relationships were less evident among women who died of
their disease. Ongoing analyses will determine whether measures of MD and
TDLU involution are independent predictors of breast cancer outcomes in
this patient population.

