Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of NIH funding for metabolomics research in
epidemiologic studies: opportunities and challenges


Metabolomics, an emerging area of interest in the field of epidemiology,
has significant potential to evaluate the effects of nutritional,
environmental, and pharmaceutical exposures; conduct risk assessments;
predict disease development; and diagnose diseases. To understand current
funding and potential gaps for population-based metabolomics research, we
cross-sectionally evaluated the National Institutes of Health
(NIH)-supported research grant awards related to metabolomics and
epidemiology that were active on February 9, 2015. The grant portfolio
was analyzed using NIH's Query View Report (QVR) software, using relevant
search terms, which included metabolome, metabonome, metabolomic(s),
metabonomic(s), metabolic profile, metabolite profile, metabolic
signature, glycomic(s), and lipidomic(s). Basic descriptive statistics on
technology platform, approach, disease phenotype, biospecimen type,
exposure, study design, and population were examined. The search terms
initially identified 473 grants. After exclusion of grants with
Metabolomics, an emerging area of interest in the field of epidemiology,
has significant potential to evaluate the effects of nutritional,
environmental, and pharmaceutical exposures; conduct risk assessments;
predict disease development; and diagnose diseases. To understand current
funding and potential gaps for population-based metabolomics research, we
cross-sectionally evaluated the National Institutes of Health
(NIH)-supported research grant awards related to metabolomics and
epidemiology that were active on February 9, 2015. The grant portfolio
was analyzed using NIH's Query View Report (QVR) software, using relevant
search terms, which included metabolome, metabonome, metabolomic(s),
metabonomic(s), metabolic profile, metabolite profile, metabolic
signature, glycomic(s), and lipidomic(s). Basic descriptive statistics on
technology platform, approach, disease phenotype, biospecimen type,
exposure, study design, and population were examined. The search terms
initially identified 473 grants. After exclusion of grants with <100
cases and non-human subjects research, 102 grants remained. At the point
in which the grants were coded, additional exclusions were made based on
the same criteria (Metabolomics, an emerging area of interest in the
field of epidemiology, has significant potential to evaluate the effects
of nutritional, environmental, and pharmaceutical exposures; conduct risk
assessments; predict disease development; and diagnose diseases. To
understand current funding and potential gaps for population-based
metabolomics research, we cross-sectionally evaluated the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)-supported research grant awards related to
metabolomics and epidemiology that were active on February 9, 2015. The
grant portfolio was analyzed using NIH's Query View Report (QVR)
software, using relevant search terms, which included metabolome,
metabonome, metabolomic(s), metabonomic(s), metabolic profile, metabolite
profile, metabolic signature, glycomic(s), and lipidomic(s). Basic
descriptive statistics on technology platform, approach, disease
phenotype, biospecimen type, exposure, study design, and population were
examined. The search terms initially identified 473 grants. After
exclusion of grants with <100 cases and non-human subjects research, 102
grants remained. At the point in which the grants were coded, additional
exclusions were made based on the same criteria (<100 cases and non-human
subject research), and on more detailed review, 68 grants remained in the
final analysis. We observed that the majority of currently funded NIH
grants focus on cancer (22%), followed by diabetes (21%) and
cardiovascular disease (13%), and primarily examine nutritional (24%) and
drug/treatment (18%) exposures. Of the 15 funded cancer metabolomics
studies, the most common organ sites investigated were breast (27%) and
prostate (20%), followed by lung, colorectal, esophageal, oral cancer and
lymphoma. Additionally, the primary epidemiologic study designs used in
the funded grants were case-control (25%), cohort (21%), and nested
case-control studies (19%), and intervention trials (19%); and they
mainly use plasma (54%), serum (21%) and urine (19%) biospecimens. With
regard to metabolite profiling, the majority of grants use both targeted
(44%) and untargeted (44%) approaches, with the primary analytical
technique being liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (74%).
The least used analytical technique for these studies was NMR (9%). This
descriptive analysis provides important insights into the current NIH
funding patterns for metabolomics research with an epidemiologic study
design component, which allowed us to identify several challenges and
research opportunities pertaining to the field.

