Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation response genome-wide analysis using paired pre and
post-radiation FFPE human breast tumor samples


Background: Breast cancer is the most common female malignancy in the US,
and radiotherapy is a routine part of multi-disciplinary breast cancer
care. Radiation treatment (RT) tailored to target radiation response
pathways could maximize treatment benefit in radiation resistant tumors,
while minimizing unnecessary toxicity and cost in more radiation
responsive breast tumor subtypes. Here we report on genome-wide analysis,
gene expression profiles and biological pathways associated with RT
response in breast cancer patients. Methods: Between 2010-2013, a total
of 32 breast cancer patients were enrolled at Duke University Medical
Center on an IRB approved Phase I clinical trial testing preoperative
radiotherapy. Paired pre and post-RT FFPE biopsy samples were available
for N = 26. Genome wide-analysis was performed using two distinct
techniques: i) Microarray analysis using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human
Transcriptome Array 2.0 (HTA 2.0); ii) RNA-Seq using TruSeq RNA Access
Library kit (Illumina). All libraries were sequenced on the Illumina
HiSeq 2000 generating 50 bp single reads at a sequencing depth of 40
million reads. The RNA-Seq data was processed using the TrimGalore
toolkit. For the paired pre and post-RT differential gene expression
analysis we used the linear model. Genes that had an FDR 5% in the
RNA-Seq experiment were compared with all microarray probesets that had
an FDR 5%. If at least one probeset that belonged to a gene in the
RNA-Seq list was significant and showed the same direction of change
between pre and post-RT samples, they were identified as consistent. Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Database for Annotation, Visualization
and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) were used to identify significant
pathways and gene ontologies that were differentially regulated between
the conditions. Results: 2648 genes showed the same significant results
in response to RT in microarray and RNA-Seq including: i) a total of 1401
genes that had significantly higher expression levels, and ii) a total of
1247 genes that had significantly lower expression levels following RT.
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) demonstrated distinct separation of
pre and post-RT gene expression signatures. Differentially expressed
genes were involved in major biological pathways such as cell cycle
checkpoint, DNA replication and DNA repair pathways. A subset of these
genes also demonstrated differential expression in radiation responsive
vs. non-responsive breast cancer cell lines. Conclusion: New laboratory
techniques have become available which provide the opportunity to use
FFPE samples for microarray and RNA-seq analysis. Using these new
techniques and our rare pre and post-RT FFPE breast tumor samples, we
have been able to demonstrate distinct differences in gene expression
profiles and modulation of biological pathways in response to RT in human
breast tumors.

