Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rhamnetin enhances anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects on
prostate cancer cells


Dysregulation of oxidative stress plays important role in both tumor
development and response to anticancer drug treatment. Increased
oxidative stress induces reactive oxygen species (ROS) which stimulate
genes viz. FoxO3a and Klotho. Klotho modulates stress-induced senescence,
whereas forkhead transcription factor; FoxO3a is known to involve in
antioxidant, anti-proliferative and tumor suppressor functions. We have
previously demonstrated that FoxO3a is deregulated in human prostate
adenocarcinoma and in transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate
(TRAMP) model that mimics progressive forms of human disease. Here we
demonstrate the potential involvement of Klotho protein in prostate
cancer progression and using a natural agent; rhamnetin as anticancer in
TRAMP mice modulated Klotho and FoxO3a signaling by altering ROS to
inhibit prostate cancer. Per-oral feeding of rhamnetin at 10- and
20-g/mouse/day (gavaged in 0.2 ml vehicle containing 0.5% methyl
cellulose and 0.025% Tween 20) to TRAMP mice for six days per week for 16
weeks, starting at 8 weeks of age, exhibited marked reduction in tumor
growth. Rhamnetin intake led to increased antioxidant potentials, which
was evident from increased levels of klotho, Nrf2 and with significantly
increased expression of Shc66 in the dorso-lateral prostate. Reports
suggested that secretory klotho binds to multiple FGFRs (fibroblast
growth factor receptors) with different affinity. However, TRAMP mice
exhibited significantly increased FGFR1 expression in dorso-lateral
prostates, which were reduced significantly after rhamnetin feeding to
TRAMP mice. Furthermore, inhibited FGFR1 expression resulted in reduced
phospho-Akt (Ser-473) and ERK1/2 phosphorylation in rhamnetin fed mice
than control. This modulated signaling cascade decreased nuclear presence
of p-Akt (Ser-473), which restricted FoxO3a phosphorylation and led to
nuclear retention in dorso-lateral prostate. Increased nuclear presence
of FoxO3a elevated transcriptional activity and expression of
FoxO-dependent apoptotic protein, Bim. Moreover, rhamnetin feeding to
TRAMP mice reduced Alix expression, which further helped in accelerating
apoptotic machinery. Similarly rhamnetin treatment to human prostate
cancer LNCaP and PC-3 cells also resulted in the restoration of Klotho
and FoxO3a in the nucleus. Increase nuclear presence of Klotho and FoxO3a
protein may be a decisive factor for increase resistance to oxidative
stress and inhibited prostate cancer progression. Our finding suggests
that rhamnetin may be developed as a preventive agent in prostate cancer.

