Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imprime PGG triggers PD-L1 expression on tumor and myeloid cells
and prevents tumor establishment in combination with PD-L1 treatment in
vivo


Immune checkpoint inhibitors, including -PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies, have
revolutionized cancer therapy, yielding compelling long-term clinical
responses in cancers resistant to traditional treatment. Translational
studies have reported that expression of PD-L1 on the surface of tumor or
infiltrating immune cells correlates to greater objective response.
However, a large number of cancer patients are still refractory to
treatment with checkpoint inhibitors, suggesting that the efficacy of
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 immunotherapies may be improved by combination with
agents that can both activate immune responses within the tumor
microenvironment and induce PD-L1 expression. Imprime PGG (Imprime), a
glucan PAMP (Pathogen Associated Molecular Pattern) is currently in
clinical development in combination with tumor-targeting antibodies,
anti-angiogenic antibodies and immune checkpoint inhibitors. As a PAMP,
Imprime is readily recognized by, and binds to, innate immune cells,
triggering a coordinated immune response that includes neutrophil
activation, repolarization of M2 macrophages and dendritic cell (DC)
maturation. Co-culture of M2s or DCs with T cells elicits increased PD-L1
expression on the surface of these myeloid cells, drives T cell expansion
and induces interferon gamma (IFN) production. When exposed to the
IFN-rich media from these co-cultures, tumor cell lines from numerous
cancers (lung, breast, and pancreas) routinely upregulate surface
expression of PD-L1. In vivo treatment of Imprime in tumor free mice also
repolarized splenic macrophages to M1 functionality, and furthermore,
enhanced the ability of antigen presenting cells to prime
antigen-specific CD8 T cells. These results suggest that Imprime has the
potential to enhance the efficacy of checkpoint inhibitors. We therefore
evaluated anti-tumor efficacy in two distinct syngeneic murine tumor
models. In the CT-26 model, treatment began when tumors reached 40-100
mm3. Though neither Imprime nor PD-1 (clone RMP1-14) was alone effective,
the combination substantially repressed tumor growth. In the MC-38 model,
tumors were injected subcutaneously. Three days later, mice were
randomized to treatment groups. Tumors were evident at day 29 in 17/18
vehicle-treated mice, 16/18 Imprime-treated mice and 12/18 PD-L1
(10F.9G2)- treated mice. Remarkably, though tumors grew initially, only
3/17 mice treated with PD-L1 + Imprime showed palpable tumors at day 29.
To assess the durability of this response, these mice were re-challenged
by injection of MC-38 tumor cells on the opposite flank. These mice
remained tumor-free even while MC-38 tumors readily grew in age-matched,
tumor-nave, control mice. Collectively, these data show that Imprime
treatment can dramatically enhance the efficacy of immune checkpoint
inhibitors in syngeneic tumor models.

