Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 1A (PPP1R1A) promotes
tumor growth and metastasis via inhibition of protein phosphatase 1 in
Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcoma is a malignant pediatric bone and soft tissue tumor.
Children with metastatic Ewing sarcoma have a cure rate of less than 30%
(De loris MA et al, 2013). The major hurdle of curing Ewing sarcoma is
the lack of specific and druggable targets. EWS/FLI is the master
regulator of Ewing sarcoma and functions as an aberrant transcription
factor to deregulate downstream targets which eventually leads to cancer
phenotypes. By comparing genes deregulated by EWS/FLI in RNA-sequencing
analyses across multiple model systems, we identified protein phosphatase
1 regulatory subunit 1A (PPP1R1A), a potent protein phosphatase 1 (PP1)
inhibitor, as one of the core targets of EWS/FLI (Niedan S et al, 2014;
Sankar S et al, 2013; Tirode F et al, 2007). Public data mining and
western blotting analysis has demonstrated that PPP1R1A is highly
expressed at both RNA and protein levels in Ewing sarcoma, but not the
putative cell of origin, mesenchymal stem cells, or other sarcomas.
Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
analysis showed that PPP1R1A is up-regulated by EWS/FLI. Further data
mining with published chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-Seq,
Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE), and formaldehyde-assisted
isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE) data suggested, and subsequent
luciferase reporter assay validated, that PPP1R1A is directly targeted by
EWS/FLI via a GGAA microsatellite enhancer element. We next studied the
role of PPP1R1A in Ewing sarcoma by functional assays in vitro and in
vivo. Intriguingly, depletion of PPP1R1A caused a loss of oncogenic
transformation of patient-derived Ewing sarcoma cells in soft agar, and
limited xenograft tumor growth in NOD-SCID mice (p = 0.0001).
Furthermore, reduction of PPP1R1A resulted in decreased cell migration in
wound healing and Boyden chamber assays, and limited lung metastasis in
an orthotopic mouse model. Further studies demonstrated that activation
and phosphorylation at Thr35 of PPP1R1A by protein kinase A (PKA), is
required for PPP1R1A to promote tumorigenesis and metastasis, as
evidenced by rescuing of PPP1R1A-knockdown induced phenotypes by
constitutively active (T35D) but not wild-type PPP1R1A. Consistently, we
found that Ewing sarcoma but not HEK293 cells were sensitive to the
treatment of PKA inhibitors (H89 and PKI 5-24). Finally, we found that
further mutating of the PP1 binding site (R8A/K9A) in T35D PPP1R1A
rendered this constitutively active mutant unable to rescue the knockdown
phenotype, indicating that PP1 binding and inhibition by activated
PPP1R1A is indispensable for PPP1R1A function. Collectively, our data
suggest that PPP1R1A and related pathway plays a positive role in
tumorigenesis and metastasis in Ewing sarcoma. Therefore, targeting
PKA/PPP1R1A/PP1 pathway has potential therapeutic value in the treatment
of both primary and metastatic Ewing sarcoma.

