Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RT-PCR and NGS comparison: detection of known EGFR mutations in
non-small-cell lung cancer clinical samples with routine laboratory
testing


Next-generation sequencing (NGS) promises to deliver clinical mutation
analysis for multiple actionable biomarkers at once. However, most
targeted therapies are developed with companion diagnostic assays after
rigorous analytical and clinical validation. In order to compare the
consistency of biomarker results under standard laboratory workflow, we
measured the detection of known EGFR mutations in 17 clinical and 2
reference samples using the cobas EGFR Mutation Test version 1(cobas
test), the TruSeq and TruSight panels using the Illumina MiSeq and
AmpliSeq panel using the Thermo Fisher PGM instruments. Samples were
tested in triplicate at 2 sites for each platform with 2 sites performing
cobas testing and sequencing. Archived clinical samples were NSCLC
adenocarcinoma with average tumor cell content at 60.3% 21.0% and mutant
allele frequency of 36.0% 17.0% based on pyrosequencing during initial
clinical testing. Three samples had scar tissue present and the remainder
had little to no necrosis. The average age was 67.6 7.0 years and samples
came from 10 women, 6 men and 1 gender not specified. Data were analyzed
to assess the inter- and intra- platform discordant rates, the mean error
rates relative to the known mutation status, platform invalid rates,
average turnaround time and repeat testing rates. All platforms had low
discordant and mean error rates when using the 2.5% mutation frequency
cutoff and a read depth (RD) limit = 100. One PGM site had a sample
invalid rate between 20%-51% for different EGFR amplicons at RD = 100;
the upper limit of the invalid rate for PGM sites was >70% with RD = 500.
The cobas z 480 platform had a 0-0.32% intra-platform discordant rate and
a 0.65-0.93% mean error rate. The MiSeq platform had a 0-0.69%
intra-platform discordant rate and a 0-0.69% mean error rate. The PGM
platform had a 0.99-3.15% intra-platform discordant rate and a 1.5-4.02%
mean error rate. The mean numbers of all non-silent COSMIC mutations
detected by PGM and MiSeq at the 2.5% cutoff were 4.36 and 2.32,
respectively. However, the mean number of EGFR mutations detected
relative to the expected number was 100% for MiSeq and 92.4% and 100% for
PGM at 2.5% and 10% frequency cutoffs, respectively. The 3 platforms were
assessed for samples that required repeat testing, re-extraction of DNA
and the turnaround time (TAT) from DNA isolation to result. In all three
cases, the cobas test required the least TAT, fewer repeats and
re-extractions relative to PGM and MiSeq. One MiSeq site required the
longest turnaround time (14 days) but did not require repeat testing for
invalid runs. Re-extraction from backup sections was common for both PGM
and MiSeq but not cobas.The cobas test provides accurate, precise, and
fast actionable results for NSCLC patients. NGS approaches can result in
accurate and precise results when adequate RD is achieved but TAT remains
a challenge relative to the cobas test.

