Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and cellular distribution of Profilin1/VASPp157 and
cofilin1/VASPp239 is altered by docosahexaenoic acid and suppresses
cancer cell migration and survival


The major risk factor for cancer associated death is uncontrolled
metastasis and longer cancer cell survival. Mechanisms associated with
actin binding protein-mediated actin dynamics and subcellular
distributions are not well defined. Secondary messengers (cAMP and
cGMP)differentially phosphorylate actin binding proteins like VASP and
are associated with actin remodeling in cancer cells. We tested the
hypothesis that differential phosphorylation of VASP precipitates
association with two additional actin binding proteins, profilin1 and
cofilin1. Furthermore, we speculate that the associations of VASP with
profilin1 or cofilin1 are causing changes in subcellular location of the
protein complexes. Briefly, non-invasive lung epithelial (MLE12) and
cancer (A549) cells were treated with 8-Br-cAMP and/or DHA for 6h and
24h. Actin binding proteins (profilin1, cofilin1, VASP, VASPp157and
VASPp239) expressions were analyzed by western blot in cell lysate. Wound
assay and transwell apparatus were used to study cell migration. Confocal
analysis was performed to analyze F-actin content and actin binding
proteins at the wound leading edges and in human lung cancer biopsy
samples. Flow cytometry, using ki-67, and cleaved-caspase-3 antibodies
were performed to study proliferation and cell viability. Our data
indicate an association between profilin1/VASPp157 and cofilin1/VASPp239
and changes in the relative cytoplasmic/nuclear distribution of these
protein complexes that coincide with the invasive potential of the cell
line or tissue. Additional studies showed that docosahexaenoic acid,
inhibited cancer cell migration and viability and altered the expression
and cellular distribution of profilin1/VASPp157 and cofilin1/VASPp239. In
summary, profilin1/VASPp157 and cofilin1/VASPp239 protein complex
expression and subcellular distribution could serve as novel, new areas
of research, as biomarkers of disease progression, and/or as innovative
therapeutic targets against metastasis.

