Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cells expose thymidine kinase 1 as a new
immunotherapy target


This project investigates the role of Thymidine Kinase 1 (TK1) as a
possible target for cancer therapeutics in breast cancer. Currently,
therapeutic cancer treatments frequently damage bystander cells and have
a devastating impact on the immune system. Many attempts have been made
to engineer therapeutic techniques that are specific to cancer cells,
unfortunately, resulting in few breakthroughs. TK1 is a
phosphotransferase enzyme that is consistently present at abnormally high
levels in cancer patient serum. TK1 assists in DNA repair and is
characteristically expressed in the cytosol. We have discovered that TK1
is overexpressed on the surface of breast cancer cells lines MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231, and Sk-Br-3. Interestingly, TK1 is not found on the surface
of normal cells. We developed a unique monoclonal anti-TK1 antibody
specific to human TK1 (A72). A72 was used in conjunction with flow
cytometry, confocal microscopy, electron microscopy, and
immunohistochemistry to test for TK1 on the cell surface. We stained each
breast cancer cell line with A72-FITC conjugate and prepared appropriate
controls. The samples were then analyzed using an Attune Flow Cytometer
showing a 6% binding of A72 on the normal lymphocytes, while A72 binding
was elevated to 20% of the breast cancer cells. Further testing using
confocal microscopy was performed. The cells were treated with A72-FITC
conjugate and Cell Mask Deep Red (a red membrane dye), and consecutively
imaged. Results showed that A72-FITC associate with the cells in the same
region of the red membrane stain, demonstrating that A72 binds to the
cell membrane. This was further confirmed using electron microscopy by
probing the cells with anti-TK1 conjugated to biotin that complexed with
gold-streptavidin. The normal cells expectedly showed no significant
binding, while gold staining was clearly seen on the surface of the each
breast cancer cell line. Immunohistochemistry was completed to confirm
the presence of TK1 in actual breast tumors from patients. Normal breast
tissues along with breast tumor tissues were obtained from the Utah
Valley Regional Medical Center. After treating the slides with anti-TK1
antibodies in conjunction with MACH 4 HRP secondary, DAP peroxidase was
used to develop the slides. The tissues were examined using a light
microscope. Cancer tissues appeared brown, indicating an overexpression
of TK1. As expected, healthy breast tissues showed no significant
staining, suggesting little to no presence of TK1. These data strongly
suggest that TK1 is located on the surface of breast cancer cells, but is
not found on the surface of normal cells. Further testing may open the
possibilities of using TK1 as a new breast cancer biomarker. Ultimately,
this also indicates the possible use of TK1 monoclonal antibodies in a
therapeutic approach.

