Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-inflammatory role of ASC-dependent inflammasomes in promoting
gastric tumourigenesis via IL-18


IntroductionGastric cancer is the third most lethal cancer worldwide and
represents a growing number of cancers linked with inflammation. However,
the identity of innate immune regulators with oncogenic potential in the
host gastric mucosal epithelium remains obscure. We aim to identify the
molecular basis by which specific pattern recognition receptors belonging
to the inflammasome family promotes gastric tumorigenesis.Experimental
proceduresWe have employed the gp130F/F gastric cancer mouse model
coupled with mice lacking specific inflammasome-related genes. In
addition, human gastric cancer tumor (and matched non-tumor) biopsies and
cell lines were used. Immunohistochemistry on gastric tissue sections was
used to assess the extent of cellular proliferation, apoptosis,
inflammation and angiogenesis, and quantitative real-time PCR was used to
measure the expression of genes of interest. Immunoblotting and ELISA
were used to measure the activation and expression levels of
inflammasome-related proteins.ResultsA causal role for ASC-dependent
inflammasomes in gastric tumorigenesis was confirmed upon the genetic
ablation of ASC in gp130F/F:Asc-/- mice, which resulted in a 50%
reduction in tumor burden compared to parental gp130F/F mice. The
suppressed gastric tumorigenesis in gp130F/F:Asc-/- mice was associated
with increased gastric epithelial (tumor) cell apoptosis, as determined
by elevated numbers of TUNEL and caspase-8 positive cells. Surprisingly
however, no changes in the number and activation status of inflammatory
cells were observed. The suppressed gastric tumorigenesis in
gp130F/F:Asc-/- mice was also characterized by a gene signature
comprising apoptotic-related genes. In gastric tumor tissue, IL-18, but
not IL-1, protein levels were augmented compared to matched non-tumour
tissue, and genetic ablation of IL-18 in gp130F/F:IL-18-/- mice
suppressed gastric tumorigenesis comparable to that observed upon ASC
deficiency. The treatment of human gastric cancer cells with IL-18 also
potentiated their growth compared to IL-1.ConclusionsCollectively, these
data reveal that ASC-dependent inflammasomes and their downstream
mediator IL-18 represent a novel oncogenic mechanism in gastric cancer.

