Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsp90-Tom70 interaction facilitates ATM localization to
mitochondria and induces mitochondrial autophagy


The serine/threonine protein kinase Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM),
plays a critical role in DNA damage response specifically to agents that
induce DNA double strand breaks. Recently, mitochondrial autophagy
(mitophagy)-associated non-nuclear functions have been attributed to ATM
in AT fibroblast (Valentin-Vega YA et al., Blood 119: 1490; 2012). Our
investigations suggested similar role of ATM in mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL) cell lines (Sarkar, A et al., Proc. AACR, 74: Abstract # 313;
2014). This is clinically important, since ATM is lost in >50% of primary
malignant B-cells in MCL patients. To identify the role of ATM in
mitophagy, using MCL cell lines, we established that a fraction of ATM
protein is located within mitochondria. The proportion of mitochondrial
ATM increases following mitophagy induced by mitochondrial uncoupler CCCP
or FCCP in ATM proficient cell lines. This process is compromised in MCL
cells lacking ATM. However how ATM enters mitochondria is not known.
Using quantitative liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis
(LC/MS), we identified new ATM interacting proteins in HEK293 cells that
facilitate mitochondrial transport of ATM. These new ATM interacting
proteins (Hsp90, Hsp70 and the outer mitochondrial translocation (TOM)
complex, including Tom70) are unrelated to DNA damage response. The
physical association of ATM with Hsp90 and Tom70 was confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation experiments while ATM-Hsp70 interaction was mostly
nonspecific. Additionally, using kinase dead FLAG-ATM construct in HEK293
cells or pharmacologic (KU55933) inhibition of ATM kinase activity in ATM
proficient Jeko-1 and Mino MCL cell lines, we demonstrate that ATM
phosphorylation is dispensable to enforce mitophagic exclusion of
nonfunctional mitochondria since non-phosphorylated ATM can still bound
to Hsp90 and induce mitophagy. These MCL cell lines when treated with an
Hsp90 inhibitor; 17-AAG either alone or in combination with CCCP;
abolished mitochondrial ATM localization and are defective in
CCCP-induced mitochondrial clearance suggesting extra-mitochondrial ATM
enters mitochondria via Hsp90 interaction. Further analysis revealed
ATM-Hsp90 loosely associate with outer mitochondrial import receptor
Tom70 via Hsp90 interaction and this targeting preference between
Hsp90-Tom70 is abolished following deletion of the cytosolic tricopeptide
repeat (TPR) clamp domain of Tom70 entailing that ATM-Hsp90-Tom70 complex
may be required for ATM entry inside mitochondria. Moreover, trypsin
digested purified mitochondrial fraction from HeLa cells revealed the
entry of C terminal ATM protein within mitochondria while N terminal part
remained in the cytosolic fraction. The molecular model of ATM's role in
mitophagy and its biological consequence in ATM deficient MCL will be
discussed.

