Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new, therapeutically actionable target for the VHL E3 ubiquitin
ligase in renal cell carcinoma


Background: Loss of function of the von Hippel Lindau (VHL) tumor
suppressor is a nearly ubiquitous feature of clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC). The current therapeutic strategies in RCC were
developed around knowledge that the VHL E3 ubiquitin ligase targets
hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) for degradation. AURKA is a
well-established mitotic kinase and an emerging target in numerous
cancers arising from its critical roles in tumor growth and survival.
More recently AURKA was discovered to also have important non-mitotic
functions in G1/G0 cells, where it activates HDAC6 to regulate
microtubule stability. Here we report that AURKA is a novel target for
the VHL E3 ligase, which plays an important role in modulating the
non-mitotic activity of AURKA.Methods: In vitro and in vivo
ubiquitination assays were performed to establish AURKA as a direct
target of VHL. Immunoblot analyses were used to determine AURKA levels in
human RCC patient material and VHL deficient cell lines.
Immunofluorescence was utilized to assess the impact of VHL-mediated
AURKA ubiquitination on microtubule targets using primary cilia.Results:
In this study, we show that AURKA is a novel target for VHL's E3-ligase
activity. VHL directly regulates AURKA expression in non-mitotic,
quiescent cells by promoting AURKA degradation via the 26S proteasome.
The ubiquitination assays showed enhanced AURKA ubiquitination in the
presence of VHL. We found that VHL mediates AURKA degradation via a
multi-monoubiquitin chain linkage, in contrast to the more traditional
and abundant K48-linkage of proteins targeted for proteasome-mediated
degradation. Biochemical studies revealed that unlike HIF recognition by
VHL, which requires proline hydroxylation, VHL interacted with, and
degraded AURKA independent of its hydroxylation status, suggesting an
alternate mechanism for recognition of AURKA. Importantly, using primary
cilia as a biomarker for stabile microtubules and activity of
AURKA/HDAC6, we showed that the loss of primary cilia observed in
VHL-null cells was rescued by alisertib (AURKA inhibitor) and
rocilinostat (HDAC6 inhibitor).Conclusion: In conclusion, the biochemical
evidence presented here identifies AURKA as a novel target of VHL's E3
ubiquitin ligase activity. We demonstrate a previously unknown mechanism
for VHL mediated multi-mono ubiquitination of AURKA in regulating its
non-mitotic functions, important in enabling the G0/G1 transition of
cells and maintaining the cilia-centrosome cycle. Importantly, as an
alternative to the current HIF related anti-angiogenic therapies,
identifying AURKA as a novel VHL target lays the foundation for new
therapeutic avenues in RCC, targeted specifically at the epithelial
defects associated with VHL-null renal cell carcinoma.

