Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular structure of the major G-quadruplex formed in the PDGFR-
promoter nuclease hypersensitivity element and its binding with small
molecules


Overexpression of platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR-) is
associated with multiple cancers, making PDGFR- an attractive target for
anticancer drugs. Few strategies other than molecular targeting of the
PDGFR- protein or its cognate ligand have been reported for developing
inhibitors for the PDGFR- signaling pathway. DNA G-quadruplexes (G4s)
formed in the GC-rich nuclease hypersensitivity element of the human
PDGFR- gene promoter have been found to inhibit PDGFR- transcriptional
activity, and stabilization of these G4s by small-molecule compounds
could serve as a mechanism for cancer therapeutics. We have shown that
the major G4 formed in the PDGFR- promoter is from the central four
G-runs, adopting an intramolecular parallel-stranded structure with a
broken G-strand and contains three 1-nucleotide (nt) chain-reversal loops
and one lateral loop. The novel folding of the PDGFR- G4 highlights the
inherent stability of the 1-nt loops in parallel-stranded G4 structures.
Elucidating the structure of the major PDGFR- promoter G4 is important
for designing small-molecule drugs to specifically target this structure
to inhibit gene transcription. Using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, we have determined the potassium solution structure of this
major G4 formed in the PDGFR- promoter. Our structure showed a unique 3
capping structure involving three guanine nucleotides in the lateral
loop. This novel capping structure is determined by the specific loop
sequence as well as the broken-stranded PDGFR- G4 folding pattern. The
unique 3 capping structure could be specifically recognized by proteins
and small molecule ligands. Unrestrained molecular dynamic calculations
showed that this major PDGFR- G4 and its 3 capping structure are stable
in aqueous environment on the ns time-scale. We also investigated the
binding of small-molecules to the PDGFR- G4 using a combination of NMR,
circular dichroism (CD), and fluorescence based methods to identify
compounds that can selectively bind the PDGFR- G4 over other classic
parallel-stranded G-quadruplexes, such as the c-MYC promoter G4. Our
study demonstrates the structural diversity in promoter G4s which may
enable specific recognition and the modulation of gene expression by
small-molecule drugs.

