Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diabetic metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer patients
administered metformin during docetaxel chemotherapy have improved
prostate cancer-specific and overall survival


Introduction and Objective: Docetaxel (DTX) chemotherapy is currently one
of the only treatment options for patients with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). Although DTX treatment has
been shown to provide survival benefits, it is not curative. Thus, there
is a continued need to improve the therapeutic options available for
mCRPC patients. One approach is combining DTX with other agents that
enhance its effectiveness (i.e. chemosensitizers).Metformin, a commonly
prescribed and well-tolerated oral biguanide used to treat type II
diabetes, has been shown to exert anti-neoplastic effects in several
types of solid tumors, including prostate cancer. More specifically,
metformin has been shown to improve the efficacy of chemotherapy in
breast cancer and colon cancer models. Niraula et al (2013) evaluated the
effect of metformin combined with DTX in prostate cancer patients who
participated in the TAX 327 trial. Metformin did not have a statistically
significant additive or synergistic effect with docetaxel, but only 38
patients were included in the analysis.There is very limited data
examining the combined effect of metformin and DTX in prostate cancer
patients. Therefore, the objective of this study is to determine if
diabetic mCRPC patients administered metformin during DTX treatment have
improved prostate cancer-specific (PCa-specific) and overall survival
(OS) when compared to nondiabetic mCRPC patients receiving DTX
therapy.Methods: The primary objective of this retrospective study is to
analyze patient data from the Ontario Cancer Registry (OCR), Ontario
Diabetes Database (ODD), Canadian Institute for Health Information
Discharge Abstract Database (CIHI DAD), National Ambulatory Care
Reporting System (NACRS), Ontario Health Insurance Plan (OHIP), and the
Registered Persons Database (RPDB) evaluate whether there is a difference
in PCa-specific and OS between diabetic mCRPC patients administered
metformin during DTX treatment and non-diabetic mCRPC patients receiving
DTX treatment. The databases described previously are all accessible
through the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences (ICES) in Ontario,
Canada.Data has been collected and linked at ICES and a research-ready,
anonymized dataset has been provided to our research group. Since
receiving access to the dataset from ICES, statistical analysis
(including multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression, logrank
test, and Kaplan Meier survival curves) is in progress using SAS
software.Results and Conclusions: Data analysis is currently in progress.
If metformin is shown to have a chemosensitizing effect in diabetic mCRPC
patients, this would indicate a novel therapeutic approach that is needed
for this patient population.

