Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Scalable, rapid and affordable low-pass whole genome sequencing
method for single-cell copy-number profiling on LM-PCR based WGA products


Introduction: Genome-wide profiling of copy-number alterations (CNA) in
single cells enables the characterization and investigation of genomic
heterogeneity and evolution in tumor cell populations such as individual
circulating tumor cells (CTCs), or disaggregated solid tumors. Ampli1 WGA
is a commercially available kit for whole-genome amplification from
single cells suitable for array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH),
which is currently the gold standard for genetic diagnosis of CNA.
However, labor and reagent costs limit aCGH applicability. Here we
introduce for the first time a rapid, high-throughput low-pass Whole
Genome Sequencing (WGS)-based method for CNA analysis (LPCNA) on single
cells, enabling simultaneous profiling of multiple cells at lower cost
and effort.Methods: Six single cells from NCI-H23, NCI-H661 and NCI-H1650
cell lines and 19 white blood cells (WBCs) were amplified using Ampli1
WGA Kit. Only 5l (1/10th of total WGA product) were used as sample input
for LPCNA. Purified WGA products were processed for each sample in a
single-tube, one-step reaction resulting in IonTorrent-compatible indexed
libraries. Samples were pooled and size-selected to recover fragments
with a length ranging from 300 to 400 bp. Following purification and
template preparation, pools were sequenced on Ion 318v2 Chips. Array CGH
was performed for comparison, using Agilent SurePrint 4180k arrays as
previously reported. CNA analysis was performed using Control-FREEC for
low-pass WGS data, or Agilent Genome Workbench for aCGH.Results: By
exploiting the deterministic nature of Ampli1 whole genome amplification,
we devised a method to generate IonTorrent compatible libraries in a
single reaction, drastically reducing time of bench work and cost.Method
accuracy has been assessed by comparing the copy number profiles
generated by our approach with about 870,000 reads/sample (average genome
coverage of 0.064x, range 0.051-0.073) with those obtained by a validated
aCGH method. Very good agreement in gain and loss profiles was achieved
for all single tumor cells analyzed. As expected WBC analysis resulted in
normal copy-number profiles with autosomes copy number = 2, with minimal
false-positive rate (Introduction: Genome-wide profiling of copy-number
alterations (CNA) in single cells enables the characterization and
investigation of genomic heterogeneity and evolution in tumor cell
populations such as individual circulating tumor cells (CTCs), or
disaggregated solid tumors. Ampli1 WGA is a commercially available kit
for whole-genome amplification from single cells suitable for array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), which is currently the gold
standard for genetic diagnosis of CNA. However, labor and reagent costs
limit aCGH applicability. Here we introduce for the first time a rapid,
high-throughput low-pass Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS)-based method for
CNA analysis (LPCNA) on single cells, enabling simultaneous profiling of
multiple cells at lower cost and effort.Methods: Six single cells from
NCI-H23, NCI-H661 and NCI-H1650 cell lines and 19 white blood cells
(WBCs) were amplified using Ampli1 WGA Kit. Only 5l (1/10th of total WGA
product) were used as sample input for LPCNA. Purified WGA products were
processed for each sample in a single-tube, one-step reaction resulting
in IonTorrent-compatible indexed libraries. Samples were pooled and
size-selected to recover fragments with a length ranging from 300 to 400
bp. Following purification and template preparation, pools were sequenced
on Ion 318v2 Chips. Array CGH was performed for comparison, using Agilent
SurePrint 4180k arrays as previously reported. CNA analysis was performed
using Control-FREEC for low-pass WGS data, or Agilent Genome Workbench
for aCGH.Results: By exploiting the deterministic nature of Ampli1 whole
genome amplification, we devised a method to generate IonTorrent
compatible libraries in a single reaction, drastically reducing time of
bench work and cost.Method accuracy has been assessed by comparing the
copy number profiles generated by our approach with about 870,000
reads/sample (average genome coverage of 0.064x, range 0.051-0.073) with
those obtained by a validated aCGH method. Very good agreement in gain
and loss profiles was achieved for all single tumor cells analyzed. As
expected WBC analysis resulted in normal copy-number profiles with
autosomes copy number = 2, with minimal false-positive rate (<0.6% at a
resolution of 760kb with 618k reads).Highlights: This innovative low-pass
sequencing approach for CNA detection on single cells enables high level
multiplexing on different NGS platforms. The approach is highly scalable
and flexible. From few (6-8) samples (IonTorrent PGM, 318v2 Chip), up to
96 samples (Ion Proton, Ion PI Chip v3) can be processed in a single run.
This approach meets the need for rapid results (Introduction: Genome-wide
profiling of copy-number alterations (CNA) in single cells enables the
characterization and investigation of genomic heterogeneity and evolution
in tumor cell populations such as individual circulating tumor cells
(CTCs), or disaggregated solid tumors. Ampli1 WGA is a commercially
available kit for whole-genome amplification from single cells suitable
for array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), which is currently
the gold standard for genetic diagnosis of CNA. However, labor and
reagent costs limit aCGH applicability. Here we introduce for the first
time a rapid, high-throughput low-pass Whole Genome Sequencing
(WGS)-based method for CNA analysis (LPCNA) on single cells, enabling
simultaneous profiling of multiple cells at lower cost and
effort.Methods: Six single cells from NCI-H23, NCI-H661 and NCI-H1650
cell lines and 19 white blood cells (WBCs) were amplified using Ampli1
WGA Kit. Only 5l (1/10th of total WGA product) were used as sample input
for LPCNA. Purified WGA products were processed for each sample in a
single-tube, one-step reaction resulting in IonTorrent-compatible indexed
libraries. Samples were pooled and size-selected to recover fragments
with a length ranging from 300 to 400 bp. Following purification and
template preparation, pools were sequenced on Ion 318v2 Chips. Array CGH
was performed for comparison, using Agilent SurePrint 4180k arrays as
previously reported. CNA analysis was performed using Control-FREEC for
low-pass WGS data, or Agilent Genome Workbench for aCGH.Results: By
exploiting the deterministic nature of Ampli1 whole genome amplification,
we devised a method to generate IonTorrent compatible libraries in a
single reaction, drastically reducing time of bench work and cost.Method
accuracy has been assessed by comparing the copy number profiles
generated by our approach with about 870,000 reads/sample (average genome
coverage of 0.064x, range 0.051-0.073) with those obtained by a validated
aCGH method. Very good agreement in gain and loss profiles was achieved
for all single tumor cells analyzed. As expected WBC analysis resulted in
normal copy-number profiles with autosomes copy number = 2, with minimal
false-positive rate (<0.6% at a resolution of 760kb with 618k
reads).Highlights: This innovative low-pass sequencing approach for CNA
detection on single cells enables high level multiplexing on different
NGS platforms. The approach is highly scalable and flexible. From few
(6-8) samples (IonTorrent PGM, 318v2 Chip), up to 96 samples (Ion Proton,
Ion PI Chip v3) can be processed in a single run. This approach meets the
need for rapid results (<7h turnaround time for library preparation) and
affordable cost required for massively parallel single-cell analysis such
as multiple tumor cells or CTCs.This work has been carried out within IMI
CANCER-ID consortium (www.cancer-id.eu).

