Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellular phenotypes of a novel series of 3-phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase inhibitors


PHGDH (3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase) is the first enzyme branching
from glycolysis into the serine synthetic pathway and it oxidizes
3-phosphoglycerate into phospho-hydroxypyruvate using nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) as cofactor.[1] Increases in PHGDH expression
at both mRNA and protein levels have been observed in nearly 70% of
estrogen receptor-negative breast cancers; in addition a fraction of
malignant breast and melanoma cells are dependent on elevated expression
of 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH).[2] Furthermore, serine
starvation has been shown to have a dramatic effect on tumor growth
during in vivo mouse xenograft experiments.[3] PHGDH has been a target of
interest in the pharma/biotech industry for several years since the
initial reports in early 2012 of its relevance in cancer2 where PHGDH
amplified and overexpressing cancer cell lines have been shown to possess
unique sensitivity to PHGDH knockdown that cannot be rescued by
nutritional serine. The mechanisms underlying these studies have been
subject to intense investigation but remain unclear. We have been able to
successfully identify first in class small molecule inhibitors of this
target with nanomolar cellular potency, high degree of selectivity and
oral bioavailability. In several cancer cell lines, these compounds
inhibited glucose derived serine flux with nanomolar median inhibitory
concentrations without significantly affecting glucose derived lactate.
These compounds also inhibited glucose derived serine in animal studies
and have the potential to be highly useful tools for understanding the
role of PHGDH in tumor progression. The data presented here will provide
unexpected insights on the role of PHGDH in serine biosynthesis and the
dependency of cancer cells on PHGDH catalytic function.References[1]
Snell, K. Enzymes of serine metabolism in normal, developing and
neoplastic rat tissues. Advances in enzyme regulation. 1984;
22:325-400.[2] Cantor, J.R.; Sabatini, D. M. Cancer Cell Metabolism: One
Hallmark, Many Faces, Cancer Discovery. 2012; 2(10):881-898.[3] Maddocks
et al., Serine starvation induces stress and p53-dependent metabolic
remodeling in cancer cells Nature, 2013, 493(7433):542-6

