Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SON and its splice variants regulate MLL1/2 complex-mediated
H3K4me3 and transcription of leukemia-associated genes


SON is a poorly characterized nuclear protein that is particularly
abundant in hematopoietic cells/organs and embryonic stem cells. This
protein was recently identified as a splicing co-factor required for
proper cell cycle progression and maintenance of stem cell pluripotency.
Although SON's function in RNA splicing was recently highlighted, SON was
originally identified as a DNA-binding protein and a potential regulator
of transcription. However, the mechanism by SON controls transcription
and its disease relevance are completely unknown.To investigate SON's
function in genome-wide gene regulation, we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) in K562 human leukemia cells
using SON antibodies. SON ChIP-seq results demonstrated that most of
SON-binding sites are located within the promoter of target genes which
include signaling mediators, transcription factors and cell cycle
regulators. Our ChIP-qPCR revealed that knockdown of SON causes enhanced
recruitment of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)1/2 complexes, but not
MLL3/4 and SET1A/B complexes, to the SON target chromatin, resulting in
significant increase of tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3)
levels. Surprisingly, the C-terminus of SON directly interacts with
MLL-binding region of menin and interrupts menin interaction with MLL1/2.
These findings demonstrate an inhibitory effect of menin-SON interaction
on menin-MLL1/2 interaction, reducing H3K4me3 and MLL1/2 complex
assembly.In addition to full-length SON (SON F), two C-terminally
truncated splice variants of SON (SON B and E) have been predicted in
genome databases. To address the clinical significance of SON splice
variants, we examined whether SON splice variants are differentially
expressed in the condition of acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Interestingly, the expression levels of alternatively spliced SON
isoforms, but not full-length SON, were significantly increased in human
AML patient bone marrow/blood samples and mouse models of leukemia. The
short isoforms of SON retain its DNA-binding ability, thereby competing
with the full-length SON for target chromatin interaction. However, the
short isoforms lack the menin-binding ability and could not inhibit
MLL1/2 complex assembly. Importantly, overexpression of a short isoform
of SON increased MLL complex-mediated H3K4me3 and markedly enhanced
replating potential of hematopoietic progenitors.Taken together, our
study reveals that the MLL1/2 complex activity is competitively regulated
by full-length SON and its alternatively spliced isoforms, and that
target genes of MLL1/2-menin are aberrantly controlled by overexpressed
short SON in AML patients. Furthermore, our findings strongly suggest the
significant roles of SON splice variants in aberrant transcriptional
initiation in leukemia and leukemic stem cell maintenance.

