Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of an injectable copper
clioquinol formulation: repurposing of a topical antifungal for treatment
of cancer


Clioquinol is an FDA approved antifungal and antiprotozoal drug that has
recently garnered attention for its anti-cancer activities. In vitro
studies with CQ activity suggest that its mechanism of activity may be
dependent its ability to bind and transport copper. CQ binds copper to
form a stable dimeric complex (2 mol CQ:1 mol Cu ((CuCQ2)). Although
therapeutically interesting, CuCQ2 is virtually insoluble in aqueous
solutions and therefore it has been difficult to develop formulations
suitable for administration. To address this, a liposomal CuCQ2
formulation was developed and characterized for maximum tolerated dose,
pharmacokinetics and efficacy in xenograft models. Liposomes (100nm)
composed of 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) and
cholesterol (CHOL) (55:45 molar ratio) were prepared to contain 300 mM
CuSO4. CQ is added to the outside of these pre-formed liposomes; at the
appropriate incubation temperature CQ crosses the liposomal membrane
where it can interact with the encapsulated Cu to form the insoluble
CuCQ2 complex which becomes trapped. The maximum tolerated dose of the
resultant formulation was determined in CD-1 mice. The pharmacokinetics
of the formulation (liposomal lipid, CQ and Cu) were measured following
intravenous administration at a well tolerated dose. Efficacy was
measured in two cancer models (sc U251 glioblastoma and i.p A2780
ovarian). The maximum tolerated dose of liposomal CuCQ2 was 30 mg/kg when
administered i.v (q2d for two weeks) and 15 mg/kg when administered i.p
(QD for two weeks). Pharmacokinetics studies with liposomalCuCQ2
administered iv at 30 mg/kg indicated an terminal elimination half-life
(t1/2) of 5.4 hr and an AUC of 994 ughr/mL. Results demonstrate that the
CuCQ2 complex remains intact upon injection. When used to treat animals
bearing established sc U251 glioblastoma tumors showed 30% smaller
tumours than those treated with vehicle alone. The activity of liposomal
CuCQ2 in the A2780 intraperitoneal cancer model will be presented. This
work describes, for the first time, a novel injectable formulation of
CuCQ2; this formulation is active against established xenograft models.
The activity of this formulation will now be assessed in the context of
copper-dependent inhibition of NFB signalling.

