Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optides (optimized knottin peptides) computationally designed to
target the oncogenic HIPPO pathway


The HIPPO pathway plays a critical role in contact inhibition, a pathway
that is commonly dysregulated in many human cancers (including liver,
colon, ovarian, and lung) and which relies on the intranuclear
interaction of the transcriptional coactivator YAP and the transcription
factor TEAD(1-4). This pathway also plays a crucial role in recovery from
injury; for example, its regulated repression allows hepatocytes to
divide and replace tissue lost to a partial hepatectomy, after which its
activation suppresses cell growth and prevents tissue overgrowth. While
small molecule enzyme inhibitors have proven to be a revelation in cancer
therapy, cell growth signaling via protein-protein interactions has
proven much more difficult to drug. While Antibodies can be effective in
targeting extracellular or cell surface epitopes, intracellular targets,
such as the interaction between YAP and TEAD, are not amenable to
antibody-based therapeutics. Optides are small disulfide-knotted peptides
(knottins) and serve to bridge these capabilities; they are large enough
to interfere with protein-protein interactions, but small enough to
penetrate into the cytosol. Examples include imperatoxin, an activator of
mitochondrial ryanodine receptors, and Tumor Paint, which contains an
optimized variant of chlorotoxin conjugated to a fluorescent probe and is
capable of accumulating in a wide range of tumor types.To test whether
Optides can abrogate oncogenic signaling mediated by protein-protein
interactions, we created libraries of computationally designed candidates
to target the TEAD/YAP interface. The library is expressed on the surface
of mammalian cells, chosen for the improved fidelity of disulfide bridge
connectivity observed in the mammalian secretory pathway as compared to
that found in yeast. By repetitive screening against soluble TEAD
protein, we are optimizing the pool of candidates for targeting TEAD. The
lead Optides will be characterized for their ability to reduce YAP-TEAD
interaction, and to impair YAP-mediated cell growth. Owing to the wide
variety of knottin scaffolds, both natural and in silico designed, this
flexible technology could be applied to other targets in order to impair
oncogenic protein-protein interactions.

