Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the mechanism of the STAT3/NF-B/EP4 signaling axis in
pancreatic cancer


Despite recent advances to pancreatic cancer (PanCA) management, the 5
year survival rate remains only 7%. This poor survival rate highlights
the importance of increasing our molecular understanding of PanCA
pathogenesis to develop effective therapies to improve patient outcomes.
We previously demonstrated that targeting the STAT3/NF-B signaling axis
with Nexrutine (a Phellodendron amurense bark extract) was able to
inhibit autophagy, ROS production, and proliferation in multiple PanCA
cell lines. Our data also indicated the potential involvement of
prostaglandin receptor EP4 in mediating these effects. To our surprise,
we observed decreased levels of EP4 in human pancreatic tumors
implicating a possible protective role. However, the mechanism behind
STAT3/NF-B signaling and its link to EP4 are still unknown. Using genetic
and chemical inhibition of STAT3 and EP4, we have sought to define the
STAT3/NF-B/EP4 signaling axis. Our results indicate that inhibition of
STAT3 via knockdown (STAT3 KD) using shRNA does not affect the
proliferative ability or viability of PanCA cell lines when compared to
non-transfected control (NTC) cells. Even though proliferation and
viability were un-affected, STAT3 KD increased Cox-2 levels in a KRAS
mutant cell line (Capan-2) and inhibited Cox-2 in a KRAS WT cell line
(BxPC-3). Inhibition of EP4 increased STAT3 and NF-B activity in KRAS
mutant cell lines while decreasing activity in the KRAS WT cell line.
Furthermore, EP4 inhibition increased protein levels of IL-6 and dual
inhibition of STAT3 and EP4 yielded increased NF-B activity and decreased
Cox-2 levels. Converse experiments in cells treated with IL-6 revealed
inhibited EP4 expression and decreased NF-B activity. This may be the
reason behind the increased STAT3 activity noted in EP4 inhibited KRAS
mutant cells and supports the notion that EP4 may be protective against
PanCA development. Taken together, these data suggests a feedback loop in
regulating the STAT3/NF-B/EP4 signaling cascade and that STAT3/NF-B
signaling axis members are differentially regulated upon STAT3 or EP4
inhibition possibly depending on KRAS status. Supported by Initiative for
Maximizing Student Development (IMSD) Training Grant (R25 GM095480;
NMJB), NCCIH (R01 AT007448; APK), and VA-MERIT Award (I01 BX 000766; APK)

