Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The amino acid transporter SNAT4: Potential role as a tumor
suppressor in melanoma


Cancer cells utilize amino acids to satisfy their need for nutrients and
fuel their accelerated growth. The amino acid glutamine has been
identified as one of the key building blocks in cancer cells, utilized
for macromolecular synthesis and energy production. Due to the increased
requirement for glutamine and other amino acids, cancer cells commonly
increase expression of amino acid transporters, such as SLC1A5 (ASCT2).
Amino acid transporters are membrane transport proteins that are used by
cells to move important amino acids in and out of the cell.
Interestingly, most amino acid transporters are upregulated in cancer to
ensure continued access to nutrients.We have recently shown that ASCT2
plays a critical role in regulating glutamine uptake in melanoma,
prostate and breast cancer. Many other glutamine transporters are
upregulated in different cancers, including SLC38 family members SNAT1,
SNAT2 and SNAT3. The role of SLC38A4 (SNAT4) in amino acid uptake and
cancer growth, however, has not been examined. Like the other SNATs,
SNAT4 is a sodium-dependent amino acid transporter that transports
neutral amino acids, such as alanine, across the plasma membrane,
although it has low affinity for glutamine. Interestingly, unlike the
other SNAT family members, our analysis showed that SNAT4 expression is
downregulated in 879/917 cancer cell lines in Oncomine. Analysis of SNAT4
mutations in patient samples using cBioPortal showed infrequent mutations
in the majority of cancers. However, the TCGA melanoma data (cBioPortal)
showed that 32 of 278 melanoma cases (11.5%) have a point mutation in
SNAT4 suggesting an important role in melanoma. These mutations included
9 SNAT4 hotspot mutations, present in 2-4 patients each. Using a SNAT4
homology model to predict loss-of-function mutants, we selected five of
these mutations to assess in a SNAT4 transport assay in Xenopus oocytes.
Two of the five hotspot mutations (G31E, S76F, G78E, G150E and S371F)
were able to completely inactivate SNAT4 alanine transport in oocytes.
Further analysis of 52 melanoma patient samples in Oncomine showed SNAT4
downregulation in all patients, suggesting that, in contrast to most
amino acid transporters, SNAT4 plays a tumor suppressor role in
melanoma.We are currently examining these mutations in melanoma cell
lines to determine their effects on cell growth. We are also examining
how SNAT4 is involved in either the import or export of amino acids and
the downstream metabolic consequences that may directly inhibit melanoma
cell growth. Through this research we will gain a better understanding of
the role of SNAT4- mediated amino acid metabolism in preventing melanoma
cell growth.

