Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic cigarette smoke exposure of bronchial epithelial cells
induces progressive epigenomic changes leading to transformation


Herein, we define a model for how cigarette smoke and chronic
inflammation induce human lung cancer via evolution of a co-ordinated
pattern of progressive cancer-associated epigenetic abnormalities which
prime cells for addiction to a single key genetic alteration, KRAS
mutation. Non-clonogenic, non-tumorigenic, epigenetically stable human
bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) were exposed to cigarette smoke
condensate (CSC) for 15 months. Earlier studies have established a
requirement for the simultaneous disruption of three oncogenes to fully
transform these cells. Genome-wide DNA methylation, expression, chromatin
changes, as well as binding to chromatin of key epigenetic regulators and
cell phenotypic features were examined over time in exposed versus
non-exposed cells. CSC exposure acutely causes, within 10 days, a change
we have previously associated with DNA damage, tightening of DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and EZH2 to chromatin. While the EZH2 binding
decreases with prolonged exposure, DNMT1 remains tightly bound to
chromatin. Chronic exposure causes progressive, but stochastically
variable, global DNA methylation changes which begin by six months and
progress over the time course of the study to include hypermethylation of
gene promoters which are frequent in human lung cancer. ChIP-seq analyses
reveal, preceding the above methylation changes, that promoters of such
methylated genes have an initial recruitment of EZH2, which begins at 10
days and then decreases with time. In contrast, recruitment of EZH2
increases with time and remains dominant for these same genes in the
non-exposed controls. Following 10 months of exposure, CSC treated cells
begin to clone in soft agar, often a feature of transformation, yet do
not form tumors in immunodeficient mice. At this time point, gene
expression studies show the top signaling pathway change is strong
activation of MAP-kinase and KRAS pathways. Yet genome-wide, exome
sequencing reveals no known lung cancer driver gene mutations.
Remarkably, overexpression of mutant KRAS alone now markedly enlarges the
soft agar colonies, and the cells are now fully transformed and form
tumors in mice. Our study reveals, in a chronic cigarette exposure model
relevant to the time course for evolution of KRAS mutant human lung
adenocarcinoma, a key initial role for smoking induced epigenetic changes
which facilitate addiction to the oncogene.

