Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel G-quadruplex with hairpin loop formed immediately
upstream of the human BCL-2 P1 promoter represses BCL-2 transcription


The abnormal overexpression of the BCL-2 protein is linked to a large
number of cancers. Elevated levels of BCL-2 are found to promote
resistance to chemotherapy and radiation. Therefore, BCL-2 is considered
to be an attractive target for cancer therapeutics. We have previously
identified a 39-base-pair GC-rich sequence located in the major P1
promoter region of the human BCL-2 gene, whose G-rich strand (Pu39) can
form two interchangeable G-quadruplex (G4) structures, a hybrid-type
G-quadruplex and a parallel G-quadruplex with a 13-nt middle loop.
However, in our functional study of the BCL-2 P1 promoter activity using
a luciferase reporter system containing this region in tumor cells, we
found that the construct with a complete G-quadruplex-knock-out Pu39
mutant is still affected by G4-interactive compounds. In this study we
report a new 29-mer G-quadruplex-forming sequence, P1G4, just downstream
of Pu39 and immediately upstream of the human BCL-2 gene P1 promoter. The
P1G4 is shown to be a transcription repressor using a promoter-driven
luciferase assay; its inhibitory effect can be markedly enhanced by the
G-quadruplex-interactive compound TMPyP4. Using NMR spectroscopy, the
P1G4 G-quadruplex is shown to be a novel dynamic equilibrium of two
parallel structures, one regular G4 with two 1-nt loops and a 12-nt
middle loop and another broken-strand G4 with three 1-nt loops and a
11-nt middle loop; both structures adopt a novel hairpin (stem-loop
duplex) structure in the long loop. Using dimethyl sulfate (DMS)
footprinting assays, we show that G-quadruplexes can readily form in the
P1G4 sequence under physiological salt conditions, and that P1G4 and
previously identified Pu39 G-quadruplexes appear to form independently in
adjacent regions. To further understand the respective function of Pu39
and P1G4, we created luciferase-constructs driven by the BCL-2 promoter
sequence including both Pu39 and P1G4, and examined their functions by
knocking out either or both of them. We found P1G4 independently and
predominantly represses BCL-2 transcription. Unlike the 1245 parallel
G-quadruplex formed in Pu39, P1G4 structure is easily compromised by
modifications in the hairpin loop, indicating the loop is crucial for the
maintenance of this dynamic structure. The dynamic equilibrium of two
closely related structures and the unique hairpin loop conformation are
specific to the P1G4 sequence and distinguish the P1G4 quadruplex from
other parallel structures, and may provide a unique target for small
molecules to modulate BCL-2 gene transcription. The presence of P1G4 and
Pu39 G-quadruplexes in adjacent regions suggests a mechanism for precise
regulation of BCL-2 gene transcription.

