Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro designer microenvironments for modeling the endothelin
axis in brain cancer


Preclinical studies in vivo have demonstrated that the endothelin (ET)
axis is implicated in drug resistance of several tumors (e.g. brain and
ovarian). Indeed, antagonists, blocking the binding of endothelin-1 to
endothelin receptors (ETRs) overexpressed by cancer cells, have shown to
make tumors more sensitive to conventional chemotherapies. In vitro,
however, mechanistic studies have been hampered by the lack of adequate
models, in which cell lines sufficiently express all key elements of the
ET axis (e.g. ETRs), as they do in xenografts.We argue that limitations
of conventional in vitro systems are mainly due to their inability to
take into account the role of the extracellular microenvironment (ME). To
overcome these limitations we have exploited the design flexibility of
the QGel Matrix technology to identify 3D cell microenvironments that
induced cancer cells to naturally express ETRs in vitro. Briefly, brain
cancer cells LN229 were grown clonogenically in differently
functionalized poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-based gels whose biological
and biophysical characteristics were combinatorially varied. AlamarBlue
assays and intracellular calcium release measurements (ICRM) were
employed to measure cell growth and functionality of ETRs in the
different gel ME over time. All assays were performed in 384-well plate
format with liquid handling devices.ETR expression and functionality was
confirmed in control cell lines when grown as clonogenic spheroids in MEs
or as monolayer on tissue culture plastic (2D). Likewise, LN229 growth
was observed in all tested MEs and in 2D. However, ETR functionality of
LN229 differed considerably depending on the ME. For instance, in 2D,
ICRM did not show ETR functionality. In contrast, clonogenically grown
cell spheroids, in gel MEs containing cell integrin binding sites, showed
significantly higher ETR functionality compared to LN229 in control gel
MEs. Ongoing studies are further investigating the influence of other
matrix characteristics (stiffness and degradability) to optimise
expression and functionality of ETRs by LN229 for drug testing
applications.These data suggest that engineered MEs are powerful tools
for the development of cell-based assays with enhanced physiological
relevance. With their proven compatibility with standard laboratory
automation systems and assay miniaturization, these in vitro disease
models can be translated to industry for making more relevant decisions
on compound efficacy in preclinical tests.

