Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olive oil-based oleocanthal and bioisosteres as c-Met inhibitors
for the control of triple negative breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women, claiming
the lives of hundreds of thousands of women each year. Dysregulation of c
Met correlates with aggressive proliferation, invasive character, and
pathological motility, especially in triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC). The Mediterranean diet is known to reduce the incidence of breast
and colon malignancies. Extra-virgin olive oil (EVOO) represents a main
ingredient in this diet. The EVOO-derived (-)-oleocanthal was shown to
target the RTK c-Met. Oleocanthal selectively inhibited the
proliferation, migration and invasion of several c-Met dependent breast
and prostate tumor cell lines. Oleocanthal exerted potent in-vivo
efficacy in an orthotopic athymic nude mouse breast cancer xenograft
model much greater than its modest in-vitro potency. Several oleocanthal
bioisosteres have been semisynthized of which the analog HVS have shown
significant activity improvement against breast cancer in vitro and in
vivo models. Selectivity profiling against a TKs panel, structurally
related to c-Met, suggested the HVS has high selectivity to both Met and
ABL1 kinases. Overexpression of ABL1 kinase is implicated in the
progression of several solid tumors concomitantly with c-Met activation,
including breast, colon, lung and other cancers. ABL1 interconnects
oncogenic Met and p53 pathways and hence dual blockage of c-Met and ABL1
activation adds significant advantages over currently approved c-Met
inhibitors and may justify its potent in vitro and in vivo activities.
Therefore, the dual c-Met/ABL1 inhibitor HVS could not only be effective
in slowing TNBC progression but also could prevent drug resistance.
Detailed molecular and cellular mechanistic studies of oleocanthal and
its bioisosteres indicate their potential for future use to control TNBC
and other c-Met-dependent malignancies. This study was supported by
NIH/NCI project 1R15CA167475-01.

