Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myc-nick promotes efferocytosis through M2 macrophage polarization


Resolution of inflammation is an active process which is important for
maintaining or restoring homeostasis in response to inflammatory insult.
Failure in resolution results in persistent and chronic inflammation
which increases the risk of cancer development. Efferocytosis, an
essential part of resolution of inflammation, is defined as phagocytic
removal of apoptotic cells, especially neutrophils, at the inflamed site,
thereby preventing exposure of tissue to toxic intracellular components.
It is carried out by a distinct group of phagocytes including
anti-inflammatory macrophages (M2 type). Therefore, M2 macrophages
represent a key component of the cellular proresolving mechanism and a
potential factor for prevention of inflammation-associated cancer.
Dysregulation, often overexpression, of c-Myc drives dedifferentiation of
cancer cells to acquire capacity for self-renewal and metastasis, which
accounts for poor prognosis in cancer patients. A cytoplasmic N-terminal
part of full length c-Myc, termed Myc-nick, has been reported to promote
differentiation of myoblasts. In the present study, we investigated
whether Myc-nick is involved in M2 macrophage polarization and promotion
of efferocytosis. We found that ectopic expression of Myc-nick in mouse
bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDM) promoted the M2 macrophage
polarization through upregulation of interleukin 10 (IL-10) and
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPAR). Furthermore,
overexpression of exogenous Myc-nick in BMDM increased capture of
apoptotic cells by BMDM through upregulation of a class of phosphatidyl
serine (PS) receptors including T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain
containing 4 (Timd4). PS constitutes one of eat-me signals carried by
apoptotic cells. PS receptors present on the surface of macrophages are
important to recognize, engulf and finally clear apoptotic cells via
phagocytosis. In addition, Myc-nick-induced efferocytosis was found to be
tightly associated with K (lysine) acetyltransferase 2A (Kat2a/Gcn5).
This may lead to the acetylation of transcription factors that regulate
expression of PS receptor proteins. In conclusion, activation of M2
macrophages by Myc-nick facilitates efferocytosis and hence resolution of
inflammation, and this may suppress inflammation-associated cancer
progression.

