Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tribble 3 as integrator of metabolic stresses during lung cancer
progression


Introduction: Tribbles pseudokinase 3 (TRIB3) has been identified as a
stress related gene. Recent studies reported the increased expression of
TRIB3 in cancers and its correlation with the poor prognosis in cancer
patients. However, other studies suggest TRIB3 as a tumor suppressor due
to its inhibitory activities toward PI3K/Akt and Mek-Erk signaling. In
the present study, we aim to investigate the expression of TRIB3 in lung
cancer cells and whether it plays a role in lung cancer progression and
responses toward chemotherapy.Methods: TRIB3 expression was determined by
RT-PCR and Western blot. A lentiviral vector was used to overexpress
TRIB3 in lung cancer cells. Small hairpin RNA constructs targeting TRIB3
were used to deplete TRIB3 expression. A CRISPR-CAS9 construct with
guiding sequence matching to TRIB3 gene was used to knock out its
expression. Cell proliferation, survival, and migration were determined
using standard techniques.Results: Through in silico analyses, we found
that high level of TRIB3 RNA was associated with poor survival of lung
cancer patients. In lung cancer cells (NCI-H358), TRIB3 expression was
markedly stimulated during metabolic stresses or ER stresses.
Overexpression of TRIB3 in cells led to decreased cell proliferation and
increased arrest at G0/G1 phase, even when the cells were not under overt
metabolic stresses. RT-qPCR analyses of cell cycle proteins revealed an
upregulation of p27, a CDK inhibitor, in cells overexpressing TRIB3.
Overexpression of TRIB3 reduced Akt phosphorylation at threonine 308.
Depletion or knockout of TRIB3 led to increased cell growth but cells
became more sensitive to stressors, leading to increased apoptotic cell
death.Conclusion: Our study reveals complex roles of TRIB3 in lung cancer
progression. Induced by metabolic stresses, TRIB3 can block cell cycle
progression through p27 in adaptive responses. Further studies are needed
to determine whether and how TRIB3 functions as a metabolic gatekeeper
during lung cancer progression.

