Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of p53 mutations on cancer invasion and
metastasis in a mouse model of colon cancer


Inactivation of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) tumor suppressor
gene plays an important role in initiating most adenomas and colorectal
cancers (CRCs). Somatic mutations in the TP53 tumor suppressor gene and
KRAS oncogene are found in roughly 60% and 40% of CRCs, respectively, and
contribute to tumor progression. In the vast majority of human CRCs, TP53
missense mutations lead to high levels of mutant p53 protein expression
and the loss of the other wild type TP53 allele. To evaluate the role of
TP53 missense mutations in CRC progression, we generated a genetically
engineered mouse model of colorectal carcinoma, via combined targeting of
Apc, Kras, and Trp53 alleles in mouse colon epithelium, focusing on
comparing phenotypic effects of the murine equivalent of the human R273H
mutation (i.e., murine R270H mutation) or a large deletion mutation of
mouse Trp53. Inactivation of one allele Apc and activation of an
oncogenic Kras allele in colon epithelium generated serrated and
hyperplastic morphologic epithelium and adenomas. The addition of either
the R270H missense mutation or the Trp53 null mutation to the Apc and
Kras mutations led to markedly shortened survival of the mice, due to the
development of multiple colon tumors in each mouse ranging from adenomas
to late stage adenocarcinomas. Evidence of invasion into the smooth
muscle and serosa area was found in both compound mice with missense or
deletion mutations in Trp53, with the Trp53R270H mutant mice displaying
an increased prevalence of deeply invasive tumors relative to the mice
with deletion of Trp53. Furthermore, we found that the missense mutant
Trp53R270H allele in combination with Apc and Kras mutations, but not the
null-mutant Trp53 allele, was strongly linked to metastases to lymph
nodes and lung. We have developed a useful mouse model of metastatic
colon cancer that recapitulates the role of TP53 mutations in cooperating
with APC and KRAS mutations in human CRC development and progression. In
addition, our findings strongly suggest a powerful role for missense
mutant p53 proteins compared to TP53 null mutations in promoting invasion
and metastasis in CRC progression.

