Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and physiological effects of splicing factor mutant
U2AF1 in human lung cell lines and in mice


The splicing factor gene, U2AF1, is commonly mutated in myeloid neoplasms
and occasionally in solid tumors such as lung adenocarcinomas (LUADs),
yet the molecular and physiological consequences of U2AF1 mutations are
not well understood. Through genome editing of the endogenous locus, we
created a common U2AF1 mutant allele (U2AF1-S34F) in an immortalized
human bronchial epithelial cell line, and we inactivated the U2AF1-S34F
allele in two LUAD cell lines that naturally harbor this mutation. Cells
expressing U2AF1-S34F deployed altered splicing of many transcripts, and
they displayed a S34F-characteristic sequence pattern at the proximal 3
splice site, as previously reported. Remarkably, S34F-associated
alternative splicing patterns remained unaffected by changes in the
amount of mutant U2AF1 protein, as long as the ratio of mutant and
wild-type U2AF1 remained constant, as evidenced by RNA
interference-mediated knockdown of the expression of both mutant and
wild-type alleles. On the other hand, perturbing the ratio of mutant and
wild-type U2AF1, either through overexpression or allelic-specific
inactivation of wild-type U2AF1, greatly affected S34F-associated
splicing. These results suggest that the ratio of mutant and wild-type
U2AF1, rather than the absolute amount of either protein, is critical in
controlling splicing outcome. Expression of U2AF1-S34F does not cause
cell transformation and LUAD cells with endogenous U2AF1-S34F expression
are not dependent on the U2AF1-S34F allele. Instead, wild-type U2AF1 is
absolutely required for cell survival in the presence of the mutant
allele. To study the effect of U2AF1-S34F in vivo, we created transgenic
mice carrying a conditional mutant allele, MG-S34F, at the endogenous
U2af1 locus. By crossing the MG-S34F mice with mice carrying a Mx1-Cre
transgene and treating the progeny with poly IC, we activated MG-S34F by
Cre-mediated recombination to express U2af1-S34F in bone marrow cells.
This resulted in cytopenia in multiple blood cell lineages. Similar
results were observed in recipient mice following non-competitive
transplant. Bone marrow cells expressing U2af1-S34F were competitively
disadvantaged in repopulating the hematopoietic system in irradiated
mice, suggesting defective hematopoietic stem cell function, and we are
currently assessing the long-term impact of U2af1-S34F expression on the
incidence of myeloid neoplasms.

