Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutated cancer cell-specific cell death activity of alkylating
Pyrrole-Imidazole polyamide conjugates targeting a variety of oncogenic
driver gene mutations


Cancer may be recognized as non-self by antibiotics such as minor groove
binders, which show self / non-self recognition partially due to
preferential DNA sequence recognition and distinguish from other non-self
bacteria. We learned minor groove binders produced from Streptomyces and
synthesized Pyrrole-Imidazole polyamide indol-seco CBI conjugate to
alkylate specific sites in the cancer genome.Although a tremendous amount
of studies has been made to directly target oncogenic drivers, such as
RAS and MYC, yet no drug is clinically available because of difficulties
to develop RAS- or Myc-targeted anti-cancer therapeutics due to the
smooth 3D surface topology. One of major limitations of targeting the RAS
pathway may be intrinsic or acquired resistance as seen in the other
molecular target therapy. New approaches that directly target driver
genes may provide a more direct route to helps address unmet medical
needs for refractory cancer conquest.We therefore synthesized several
Pyrrole-Imidazole polyamide conjugates, each of which specifically
alkylated KRAS codon 12 mutant DNA (G12D or G12V), amplified MYCN or
mutated DNA of PI3K E542K mutation. All three conjugates reduced
expression of the mutated oncogenic-protein by RNA transcription
inhibition and induced cancer cell death at low dose (1 to 50 nM). Low
dose tail vein injections of conjugates-targeting KRS or MYCN also
demonstrated significant anti-tumor effects on xenograft models of human
tumors harboring oncogenic mutated driver with minimum host toxicity, but
not in xenografts harboring wild type or non-recognized mutations. We
also performed a series of biological searches for toxicities by applying
Modified SHIRPA (behavioral and functional analysis of mouse phenotype)
to test any pathological phenotypes and examinations of blood and urine
in ICR mice. Modified SHIRPA screening, blood chemistry, blood cell
analysis and urea tests exhibited no toxicologically significant changes.
Additionally, we examine pharmacokinetics of PI polyamide conjugates In
vivo using LC-mass and fluorescent imaging of tumor-bearing mice.
Intriguingly, 48 hours after the administration the highest fluorescence
intensity was observed in the tumor-cell nuclear and almost no
fluorescent intensity in all other organs, tissues and cells. These data
suggest that sequence-dependent alkylating approach using antibiotic
mimics of alkylating PI-polyamide conjugates, may open a new strategy not
only targeting point mutation of driver oncogene but also targeting key
driver gene in the cancer amplicon. This approach should be used for
future Precision cancer medicine.

