Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between TNBC and stromal components via secreted factors
enhances cell motility that can be attenuated by a CXCR1 inhibitor


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) as a metastatic disease is currently
incurable. Unfortunately reliable and reproducible methods for testing
drugs against metastasis are not available. We have previously developed
a robust metastatic model in which mice are pretreated with tumor
cell-conditioned media (TCM) from human TNBC cells (MDA-MB-231 and
SUM149) for 2 weeks prior to tumor cell inoculation. In this model we
found reproducible metastases in lymph nodes (LN) and lungs within 4-5
weeks after orthotropic tumor inoculation. We have discovered that the
TNBC tumor cells secrete large amounts of interleukin-6 (IL-6) that
educates lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC) in the LN and lungs. Stat3, a
transcription factor, gets activated and induces the synthesis of CCL5
and VEGF among other factors. CCL5 recruits the tumor cells to the LN and
lungs; VEGF helps build blood vessels in the LN to facilitate tumor cell
survival; VEGF produced in the lung helps the tumor cells extravasate
into the lung. We have confirmed the importance of these factors by
showing that inhibitors of these factors significantly inhibit
metastasis.In this report, using a human antibody array, we identified
factors secreted by fibroblasts (HGF, IL-6, IL-8, CCL7, MIF, GDF-15,
EMMPRIN and VEGF) and by macrophages (CXCL5, IL-8 and uPAR) upon
induction by MDA-MB-231 TCM. We ranked the expression level of each
factor by real time qRT-PCR and determined that interleukin 8 (IL-8) was
the top candidate. We confirmed by ELISA that IL-8 secreted from either
fibroblasts or macrophages treated with MDA-MB-231 TCM was upregulated
compared to treatment with serum free media (SFM). Our data showed that
the proliferation of MDA-MB-231 cells incubated with conditioned media
(CM) from TCM-induced fibroblasts or TCM-induced macrophages was enhanced
compared to SFM treatment. Furthermore, MDA-MB-231 cell migration, a key
step in tumor metastasis, was promoted by CM from TCM-induced fibroblasts
or macrophages. Significantly, inhibition of the IL-8 signaling pathway
by Reparixin, an inhibitor of the IL-8 receptor CXCR1, abrogated the
upregulation of MDA-MB-231 cell proliferation and migration induced by
TCM-induced fibroblasts or macrophages.These findings implicate IL-8
signaling as a critical event in TNBC cell proliferation and migration
via crosstalk with stromal components. Further, these studies suggest
that IL-8 acts as a key regulator orchestrating TNBC metastatic breast
cancer. Therefore, we have provided evidence that supports the hypothesis
that functional antagonism of the IL-8 signaling pathway has the
potential to circumvent TNBC breast cancer growth and metastasis.

