Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hPaf1/PD2 interacts with OCT3/4 in maintenance of the self-renewal
process of ovarian cancer stem cells


Background: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecological
malignancy among women with more than 85% of the patients manifesting
tumor recurrence. Emerging evidence suggests that a small population of
cells within the tumor - the cancer stem cells (CSCs) is capable to
giving rise to the entire histopathology of the tumor and is responsible
for mediating drug resistance, recurrence, and disease aggressiveness.
Previously, hPaf1(human RNA polymerase II associated factor1)/PD2
(Pancreatic Differentiation2) - a core component of RNA polymerase II
associated factor (PAF) complex, was shown to be overexpressed in
pancreatic CSCs and involved in the maintenance of mouse ESCs. Hence, we
hypothesized that hPaf1 is involved in the maintenance of self-renewal
property of ovarian CSCs (OCSCs). In this study, we investigated the
functional role of hPaf1 in OCSCs which has not been explored
before.Methods: Expression of hPaf1, cancer stem cell marker ESA, and
self-renewal protein OCT3/4 was analyzed using confocal microscopy on OC
tissue array. Side population (SP) was isolated from two OC cell lines
OVCAR3 and A2780 by Hoechst staining using flow-cytometer, and
characterized using tumor sphere assay. Immunoblotting was performed on
characterized SP and NSP (non-SP) for OCSC and self-renewal markers.
Transient knockdown of hPaf1 in SP was performed to understand how hPaf1
affects the CSC phenotype through immunoblotting, confocal microscopy,
colony formation assay, and tumor sphere formation assay. To determine
the interaction between hPaf1 and OCT 3/4, reciprocal
co-immunoprecipitation was performed in SP/OCSCs.Results: There was a
significant overexpression and considerable co-localization of hPaf1/PD2
with ESA and OCT3/4 in OC tissues compared to normal ovary tissues. SP
from OVCAR3 formed larger and greater number of tumor spheres compared to
NSP cells. Moreover, SP isolated from OVCAR3 and A2780 showed higher
expression of hPaf1 along with CSC markers (CD44, CD133, ESA, CD24), and
self- renewal proteins (-CATENIN, SOX2, OCT3/4, SHH, and HER2). Transient
knockdown of hPaf1 resulted in a significant decrease in expression of
CSC markers and self-renewal proteins. In addition, functional
characteristics of CSCs such as in vitro tumor formation capacity in
non-adherent media and colony formation ability were impaired upon
knockdown of hPaf1 suggesting that hPaf1 is involved in maintenance of
the CSC phenotype. We also observed that hPaf1 physically interacts with
OCT3/4 in OVCAR3 SP cells which provides a mechanism for the maintenance
of OCSCs by hPaf1.Conclusion: Altogether, hPaf1/PD2 is overexpressed in
OCSCs and its knockdown resulted in loss of OCSC phenotype. Moreover,
hPaf1 is responsible for the maintenance of OCSCs through its interaction
with OCT3/4. Hence, therapies that are able to abrogate hPaf1 mediated
self-renewal of OCSCs represent potential therapeutic avenues to overcome
tumor relapse in OC.

