Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adenosine A2a receptor blockade as a means of enhancing immune
checkpoint inhibition and adoptive T-cell therapy


Adenosine signaling through the A2a receptor (A2aR) has pleiotropic
immunosuppressive effects on a broad range of immune cells. Extracellular
adenosine levels, which are typically very low in normal tissues, are
elevated in the tumor microenvironment, allowing increased signaling
through the A2aR. Previously, our lab and others have shown increased
rejection of tumors in A2aR-null mice, demonstrating that adenosine
signaling through A2aR limits immunologic response to tumors.Present work
in our lab demonstrates the ability of a potent and specific, orally
administered A2aR antagonist, CPI-444, to enhance immunologic response in
mice. First, A2aR blockade with CPI-444 (1 mg/kg) in the peri-vaccination
period led to significant expansion of antigen-specific T cells over
untreated controls. Interestingly, antigen-specific CTLs from CPI-444
treated mice showed significantly lower expression of inhibitory
checkpoint receptors, including PD-1 and TIM-3. Second, in an MC38 tumor
model, daily treatment with CPI-444 (100 mg/kg) led to tumor growth
suppression and survival benefit compared with vehicle-treated controls.
Notably, tumor infiltrating regulatory T cells had significantly lower
CTLA-4 and FoxP3 expression in CPI-444 treated mice.These initial
immunologic findings of enhanced early CTL expansion and suppression of
inhibitory co-signaling have important implications for applying A2aR
blockade to immunotherapy in cancer. First, given the ability of CPI-444
to augment CTL expansion, we investigated its application to a
therapeutic adoptive T cell transfer system using OVA-expressing B16
melanoma cell line. In mice with established tumors, daily CPI-444 (100
mg/kg) treatment initiated on the day of adoptive transfer of activated
OVA-specific OT-I T cells led to suppressed tumor growth and increased
survival versus vehicle treated controls. Second, in light of our data
demonstrating its ability to suppress PD-1 in CTLs, we theorized that
CPI-444 may lower the threshold for effective anti-PD-1 therapy and
achieve synergistic effects as combination therapy. Indeed, daily CPI-444
(100 mg/kg) treatment combined with anti-PD-1 treatment showed robust
antitumor effect in the CT26 tumor model, with complete tumor rejection
in 7/9 mice (vs. 2/10 mice in the anti-PD-1 alone group). Survival was
markedly improved in mice receiving combination treatment versus either
CPI-444 or anti-PD-1 alone. In as much as increased adenosine in the
tumor microenvironment is partly a consequence of dysregulated cancer
cell metabolism, we hypothesized that targeting tumor metabolism would
enhance the efficacy of A2aR antagonism. To this end, inhibition of tumor
glutamine metabolism potently augmented the efficacy of CPI-444 in a CT26
model. Overall, our data suggest that A2aR antagonism can enhance the
efficacy of immunotherapy in the form of checkpoint blockade and adoptive
cellular therapy.

