Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mathematical modeling for prediction of secondary BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations in ovarian cancers with deleterious germline BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations


Background:DNA damaging agents such as cisplatin or carboplatin and
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) have clinical activity in
germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-associated ovarian cancers. However,
BRCA1 or BRCA2-mutated tumors often develop resistance to these drugs.
Restoration of BRCA function due to secondary BRCA mutations has been
recognized as one of the clinical resistance mechanisms. The aim of this
mathematical analysis is to study the emergence and frequency of
secondary BRCA mutations in a cohort of BRCA-deficient in silico ovarian
cancer-positive cases.Methods:We develop a 2D stochastic cell-cycle
specific mathematical model of BRCA-deficient ovarian cancer growth and
progression prior to and post-treatment, which includes debulking
surgery, platinum-based chemotherapy or PARPi. This is a continuum model
based on a combination of ordinary differential equations using
Gompertzian growth kinetics subject to random discrete-time jump
processes. This approach enables us to reflect the inter-individual
heterogeneity in disease progression and drug administration reported in
published data. Calculations are performed for in silico cancer-positive
growth curves in which the inception of the first ovarian malignant cell
is assumed to have already occurred.Results:Our modeling approach
generates an empirical cumulative distribution of disease-free survival
times prior to recurrence or disease progression, given the heterogeneous
cancer progression illustrated by our in silico cohort. Our preliminary
computational results indicate that an initially rare resistant cell
clone carrying a secondary BRCA mutation pre-exists to treatment in circa
90% of the simulated progression curves. For the remaining 10% of the
simulated curves, it is more likely that the secondary mutations are
acquired during chemotherapy or PARPi via increased mutation rates,
possibly conferred by the increasing amount of damaged DNA lesions caused
by the cancer treatment.Conclusions:Our mathematical model provides some
insight on the dynamics of secondary BRCA mutations that cannot be
accessed through existing genomic analysis methods, as current DNA
sequencing depth thresholds cannot detect the presence of rare tumor cell
clones carrying such mutations. We predict that a large proportion of
initially resistant cell clones with restored BRCA function more likely
originate prior to rather than post-treatment. If such clones get
selected for by subsequent platinum-based chemotherapy or PARPi in a
Darwinian fashion, our model generates an empirical distribution of
disease-free survival times prior to recurrence. This may have direct
implications on the possible duration of subsequent treatment response in
our simulated ovarian cancer-positive population.

