Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated copy number and gene expression genomics analysis
and RNAi approach identifies and validates the KIFC1 kinesin as a
malignant cell selective target in triple negative breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) lack oestrogen (ER), progesterone
(PR) and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) receptors, and have
limited targeted treatment options. Large scale genomic and
transcriptomic studies have advanced our understanding of the changes
which occur in TNBCs. However, the substantial number of copy number and
gene expression alterations present in TNBCs makes it difficult to
identify putative drivers, biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets of the
disease. To overcome this problem, we have carried out an integrative
computational and RNAi based approach to identify genes required for
proliferation of TNBC.Copy number and gene expression alterations were
analysed using Affymetrix Human Exon HTS1.0 and SNP6.0 data of 152
primary breast tumours enriched for a TNBC phenotype and 9 normal breast
epithelium. These analyses revealed 141 candidate genes whose upregulated
gene expression is copy number driven in TNBC. The functional dependence
on each of these genes was subsequently examined using RNAi in an array
of 17 breast cancer and non-malignant cell lines using 6-8 cell lines per
gene covering the widest possible range of expression levels for that
gene. We validated a malignant cell specific functional dependence on 37
of the 141 genes using this method.STRING analysis of validated hits
reveals a subset of genes involved in the process of cell division and
mitosis including the previously characterised mitotic kinase TTK. Of
these, we further validated KIFC1 (HSET) which is known to play a role in
clustering supernumerary centrosomes, a common occurrence in breast
cancer. We show that siRNA and shRNA mediated depletion of KIFC1
decreases cell viability and clonogenic ability specifically in
centrosome amplified cell lines, which can be rescued upon introduction
of an si/shRNA resistant KIFC1. KIFC1 depletion also produces a high
level of catastrophic multipolar mitoses in centrosome amplified but not
in non-amplified cell lines. Furthermore, in-vivo studies show that
inducible depletion of KIFC1 suppresses tumour growth of centrosome
amplified cell line xenografts.Our work has identified and functionally
validated novel drivers, and potential therapeutic targets in TNBC. The
data presented here shows KIFC1, a druggable kinesin motor protein is a
promising target for therapeutic intervention being expressed through
gene copy gain in a significant proportion of TNBCs. We validate its role
in cancer-specific amplified centrosome clustering showing KIFC1 plays an
essential role in aiding the survival of breast cancer cells that have
supernumerary centrosomes in both in-vitro and in-vivo contexts.

