Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-137/DCLK1 axis: A novel mechanism regulating
tumorigenicity of colon cancer stem cell


Background: The understanding of colon cancer stem cell (CSC) biology is
essential to developing new treatments, however, little is known about
the molecular mechanisms underlying the acquisition of colon CSC
properties. Furthermore, the similarity of the predisposition, including
the surface markers, between colon CSCs and normal colon stem cells makes
it difficult to develop a practical approach that targets colon CSCs.
MicroRNA (miRNA) is one of the important factors regulating CSC
properties. In addition, doublecortine-like kinase 1 (DCLK1), a
microtubule-associated kinase, has been proposed to be a distinctive
marker for colon CSCs. In the present study, we aimed to identify miRNAs
that potentially target DCLK1 and unveil the role of the miRNA/DCLK1 axis
in colon CSC properties.Material and Methods: Human colon cancer and
normal colon specimens were dissociated into single cells and sorted by
flow cytometry to separate the stem cell enriched population
(EpCAM+/CD44+/CD66a-) and stained with anti-DCLK1 antibody. The
expression profile of 384 miRNAs and the expression of DCLK1 in the colon
CSC and normal colon stem cell populations were determined using a
qRT-PCR. A luciferase activity assay and Western blotting were performed
to evaluate the relationship between the miRNA and DCLK1. A lentiviral
expression system was designed to investigate the miRNA phenotypes. We
adopted an organoid assay and in vivo tumorigenicity assay to examine the
influence of the miRNA on CSCs.Results: MiRNA-137 was highly expressed in
the normal colon stem cell population whereas the DCLK1 mRNA expression
was significantly upregulated in the colon CSC population. Actually,
DCLK1-positive colon cancer cells were widely distributed in the colon
cancer specimens, while DCLK1-positive epithelial cells were rarely
detected in normal colon tissues, including the crypt bottoms. We
confirmed that the activity of the luciferase gene linked to the 3UTR of
DCLK1 was decreased and that the protein level of DCLK1 was suppressed in
the miRNA-137 transduced SW480 cells. The transduction of exogenous
miRNA-137 suppressed the organoid development of colon cancer cells as
well as shRNAs against DCLK1. The defect in organoid development by the
transduction of miR-137 or shRNAs were substantially rescued by
co-expression of the exsogenous DCLK1. Although miRNA-137 overexpression
did not affect the organoid development of the normal intestine,
miRNA-137 knockdown promoted the organoid development of normal colon
cells. Xenograft tumor formation and growth were markedly suppressed in
the miRNA-137-transduced SW480 cell-injected mice.Conclusion: These
results suggest that miRNA-137 has the potential to suppress the
tumorigenicity of colon CSCs through the inhibition of DCLK1 and that the
dysregulation of the miRNA-137/DCLK1 axis plays an important role in
colon CSCs.

