Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A network biology screen reveals ligand-receptor pathway
connections and resistance mechanisms to RTK-directed therapies in cancer
cells


Purpose: Although there are many well-defined signaling pathways in tumor
cells that provide druggable targets, emergence of growth factor-mediated
resistance and parallel pathway compensation frequently occurs, limiting
the effectiveness of these treatment strategies. The purpose of this
study was to model cancer cell responses to combinations of growth
factors (ligands) and targeted investigational therapies in order to
identify which signaling pathways are mechanistically related. The
results presented here demonstrate the use of network biology-based
phenotypic screening and modeling to reveal unexpected behaviors,
identify positive and negative biomarkers, and guide novel treatment
strategies.Methods: To assess the effect of ligands and RTK-directed
antibodies in combination with targeted investigational therapies in
cancer cells, we conducted a high throughput viability screen in 3D
cultures. A library of 87 small molecules targeting different components
of signaling and metabolic pathways was used in combination with growth
factors and therapeutic antibodies. The therapeutic antibodies included
in the screen were MM-121 (anti-ErbB3), MM-131 (anti-Met/EpCAM), MM-141
(anti-IGF-1R/ErbB3), and MM-151 (anti-EGFR). Using these data, we
inferred a pathway connectivity model to identify pathway crosstalk and
novel and effective combination strategies, which were then further
evaluated in vitro and in mouse xenograft models.Results: Overall, we
found that ligand-mediated resistance varies depending on the cancer
type. For example, HGF and EGF play particularly strong roles in gastric
and colorectal cancer cells, respectively. Interestingly, a few cases
were found in which a ligand reduced cell viability compared to control,
but this had no effect on drug response. In most cases where a ligand
rendered cells insensitive to a certain drug treatment, a combination
with the appropriately matched therapeutic antibody re-sensitized cells
to the drug, suggesting that a combination strategy could potentially be
used to overcome ligand-mediated resistance. Among the findings that were
observed in multiple cell lines, MM-131 combined well with EGFR-directed
agents in HGF responsive tumor cells, and MM-141 combined well with
metformin in colorectal and lung cancer cell lines. These findings were
further validated in vivo.Conclusions: Growth factors for EGFR, Met,
ErbB3, and IGF-1R decrease sensitivity to a wide range of targeted
investigational agents in cancer cell lines. These effects, however, are
not general, but instead are dependent on the type of cancer cell being
treated. Insights from this screen may help guide the future clinical
development of MM-121, MM-131, MM-141 and MM-151.

