Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The G protein-coupled P2Y6 pyrimidoceptor protects colorectal
cancerous epithelial cells from apoptosis: Is this receptor a novel
target against colorectal cancer


BACKGROUND. Colorectal cancer (CRC) originates from the accumulation of
genetic mutations and epigenetic deregulation of tumor suppressor genes
(TSGs) and oncogenes, most prominently APC, K-RAS, and TP53. As a result,
transformed intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) acquire an evolutionary
growth advantage leading to tumor formation. Like other solid tumors,
various types of immune cells, and immunomodulatory molecules, including
extracellular nucleotides, such as adenosine 5-triphosphate (ATP) and
uridine 5-diphosphate (UDP), are found in the vicinity of colorectal
tumors and promote tumor formation. In this context, activation of the G
protein-coupled P2Y6 receptor (P2Y6R) by UDP could contribute to the
formation of tumor-promoting microenvironment by modulating the immune
response, as we previously reported, but also by coordinating resistance
to apoptosis, one of the hallmarks of human CRC.METHODS: Colorectal
cancer was induced in P2ry6 gene knockout mice (P2Y6/) using azoxymethane
along with dextran sulfate sodium challenges. Mice were euthanatized and
the number and size of tumor measured. Tissues were fixed and stained
prior to histological characterization by a pathologist. In vitro,
receptor expression level was determined by qPCR analysis in normal and
cancerous IECs as well as from CRC tumor biopsies. Cell growth curves and
clonogenic soft agar assays were realized to determine the effect of
P2Y6R stimulation on cell growth and tumorigenic potential. Finally, the
impact of P2Y6R activation on apoptosis was determined by analyzing
apoptosis markers by western blotting.RESULTS: Invalidation of the P2ry6
gene in mice lead to a reduction in the number and size of colorectal
tumors, which correlated with the ability of the activated P2Y6R to
induce cancerous cell growth in both classical cell growth assays and
clonogenic soft agar experiments. Furthermore, P2Y6R stimulation with UDP
is not only stimulating cell growth but it also protects colorectal
cancerous epithelial cells from TNF-induced apoptosis by a molecular
mechanism involving the increase expression of the X-linked inhibitor of
apoptosis protein (XIAP).CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we have shown that
sustained activation of P2Y6R could contribute to intestinal
tumorigenesis by blocking the apoptotic process and by stimulating cell
growth. These results suggest that P2Y6R could be a prime target to
reduce colorectal carcinogenesis.

