Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptidomimetic Src kinase inhibitor KX-01 sensitizes estrogen
receptor -negative breast tumor xenografts to tamoxifen by inducing ER
re-expression


Unlike breast cancer that is positive for estrogen receptor (ER) or
amplified/overexpressed HER2/neu, there are no targeted therapies for
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). ER is silenced in TNBC through
epigenetic changes including DNA methylation and histone acetylation.
Restoring ER expression in TNBC tumors may sensitize patients to
endocrine therapy. Expression of c-Src kinase and ER are inversely
correlated in breast cancer suggesting that c-Src inhibition may lead to
re-expression of ER in TNBC. KX-01 is a peptide substrate targeted Src
kinase/pretubulin inhibitor in clinical trials for solid tumors. At low
dose, KX-01 is an effective Src kinase inhibitor in breast tumor
xenografts in mice, but does not affect microtubules. MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-468 TNBC xenografts in NUDE mice were treated with low dose (1
mg/kg b.wt. BID) KX-01 for 40 days. KX-01 treatment decreased Src kinase
activity in tumors and increased ER mRNA and protein.
Immunohistochemistry and Western blot demonstrated that the epithelial
markers progesterone receptor and E-cadherin were increased, whereas the
mesenchymal markers vimentin and nuclear -catenin were decreased,
suggesting a mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) in the tumors. At
the ER promoter in MDA-MB-231 tumors, KX-01 treatment led to enrichment
of transcriptionally active (acetyl-H3, acetyl-H3Lys9) chromatin marks.
There was no change in ER promoter methylation as assessed by methylation
PCR analysis and bisulfite sequencing. KX-01 treatment did not alter
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) levels or activity in tumors, but did
result in HDAC1 dissociation from the ER promoter, and a concomitant
recruitment of RNA Polymerase II as assessed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Tamoxifen-resistant MDA-MB-231 xenografts in
NUDE mice were treated with vehicle, tamoxifen alone (5 mg pellet; 60 day
release), KX-01 alone (1 mg/kg b.wt. BID), or KX-01 + tamoxifen for 40
days. KX-01 alone and KX-01 + tamoxifen reduced tumor volume by 59% and
70%, respectively, compared to vehicle. Tumor volume for the KX-01 +
tamoxifen group was significantly reduced compared to the KX-01 alone
group (P = .023), and tumor weight of the KX-01 + tamoxifen group was 32%
lower compared to the KX-01 alone group (PUnlike breast cancer that is
positive for estrogen receptor (ER) or amplified/overexpressed HER2/neu,
there are no targeted therapies for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC).
ER is silenced in TNBC through epigenetic changes including DNA
methylation and histone acetylation. Restoring ER expression in TNBC
tumors may sensitize patients to endocrine therapy. Expression of c-Src
kinase and ER are inversely correlated in breast cancer suggesting that
c-Src inhibition may lead to re-expression of ER in TNBC. KX-01 is a
peptide substrate targeted Src kinase/pretubulin inhibitor in clinical
trials for solid tumors. At low dose, KX-01 is an effective Src kinase
inhibitor in breast tumor xenografts in mice, but does not affect
microtubules. MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 TNBC xenografts in NUDE mice were
treated with low dose (1 mg/kg b.wt. BID) KX-01 for 40 days. KX-01
treatment decreased Src kinase activity in tumors and increased ER mRNA
and protein. Immunohistochemistry and Western blot demonstrated that the
epithelial markers progesterone receptor and E-cadherin were increased,
whereas the mesenchymal markers vimentin and nuclear -catenin were
decreased, suggesting a mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) in the
tumors. At the ER promoter in MDA-MB-231 tumors, KX-01 treatment led to
enrichment of transcriptionally active (acetyl-H3, acetyl-H3Lys9)
chromatin marks. There was no change in ER promoter methylation as
assessed by methylation PCR analysis and bisulfite sequencing. KX-01
treatment did not alter histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) levels or activity
in tumors, but did result in HDAC1 dissociation from the ER promoter, and
a concomitant recruitment of RNA Polymerase II as assessed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Tamoxifen-resistant MDA-MB-231 xenografts in
NUDE mice were treated with vehicle, tamoxifen alone (5 mg pellet; 60 day
release), KX-01 alone (1 mg/kg b.wt. BID), or KX-01 + tamoxifen for 40
days. KX-01 alone and KX-01 + tamoxifen reduced tumor volume by 59% and
70%, respectively, compared to vehicle. Tumor volume for the KX-01 +
tamoxifen group was significantly reduced compared to the KX-01 alone
group (P = .023), and tumor weight of the KX-01 + tamoxifen group was 32%
lower compared to the KX-01 alone group (P< 0.01). Only the KX-01 +
tamoxifen group exhibited reduced levels of ER targets pS2, c-Myc and
cyclin D1 indicating that estradiol signaling was attenuated by tamoxifen
only in tumors treated with KX-01. In MDA-MB-468 tumors, tamoxifen alone
(10 mg pellet; 60 day release) and KX-01 alone (1 mg/kg b.wt. BID) had no
effect on tumor volume compared to vehicle, but KX-01 + tamoxifen reduced
tumor volume 67% compared to vehicle (P = 0.0025). Collectively, these
data demonstrate that the peptidomimetic Src inhibitor KX-01 can restore
ER expression in TNBC through changes in histone acetylation that
sensitize TNBC tumors to endocrine therapy (tamoxifen).

