Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of effector mimicking with in silico fragment screens
is an effective approach for the development of Ras inhibitors


Targeting Ras proteins directly has proven to be exceptionally
challenging because they lack deep pockets on the surface that can
provide for effective interactions with small molecules. Several shallow
pockets have been identified on Ras surface. However, their positioning
does not allow for simultaneous targeting with a single small molecule.
To generate high affinity Ras binders, we have combined fragment-based
drug design and in silico screening of fragment libraries with mimicking
of Ras effectors. We have chosen Ras effector NORE1A for mimicking
because it has one of the most compact continuous Ras-binding interfaces.
Peptide mimetic of the central part of the interface was chemically
rigidified and optimized to expand into additional pockets adjacent to
Ras's NORE1A binding interface. These included one previously described
pocket (Sun et.al 2012, Maurer et al, 2012) along with two newly defined
ones. In particular, we have identified a new pocket between helix 2 and
strands 2 and 3 of Ras protein. The pocket is not highly populated and is
present in only 9 out of 71 analyzed Ras structures. The apparent binding
region appears disordered in seven published structures suggesting that
the fold of the pocket may be environmentally regulated and is likely
affected by crystallization conditions. In silico screening of specially
constructed virtual libraries consisting of millions of compounds allowed
for identification of several potential binders. Two fragment-like
molecules have been tested for Ras binding to verify the predictions.
Binding assay that utilized microscale thermophoresis revealed that: 1)
both compounds bind to WT, G12D and G12V mutants of K-Ras; 2) one of the
compounds has higher affinity towards GTP-bound than to GDP -loaded wild
type and G12V mutant of K-Ras (KD 0.9 mM and 3.2 mM respectively), but
binds with approximately same KD 3.3 mM to GDP and GTP-bound G12D K-Ras.
We also utilized for screening a novel virtual library of synthetically
accessible molecules that can be prepared in one step using well
established chemistries and easily obtainable reagents. This resulted in
additional potential ligands for the pocket. Two compounds were prepared
and proven to bind with affinities in low millimolar range. The use of
the ligands identified from virtual screens allowed for the design of a
NORE1A mimetic with MWTargeting Ras proteins directly has proven to be
exceptionally challenging because they lack deep pockets on the surface
that can provide for effective interactions with small molecules. Several
shallow pockets have been identified on Ras surface. However, their
positioning does not allow for simultaneous targeting with a single small
molecule. To generate high affinity Ras binders, we have combined
fragment-based drug design and in silico screening of fragment libraries
with mimicking of Ras effectors. We have chosen Ras effector NORE1A for
mimicking because it has one of the most compact continuous Ras-binding
interfaces. Peptide mimetic of the central part of the interface was
chemically rigidified and optimized to expand into additional pockets
adjacent to Ras's NORE1A binding interface. These included one previously
described pocket (Sun et.al 2012, Maurer et al, 2012) along with two
newly defined ones. In particular, we have identified a new pocket
between helix 2 and strands 2 and 3 of Ras protein. The pocket is not
highly populated and is present in only 9 out of 71 analyzed Ras
structures. The apparent binding region appears disordered in seven
published structures suggesting that the fold of the pocket may be
environmentally regulated and is likely affected by crystallization
conditions. In silico screening of specially constructed virtual
libraries consisting of millions of compounds allowed for identification
of several potential binders. Two fragment-like molecules have been
tested for Ras binding to verify the predictions. Binding assay that
utilized microscale thermophoresis revealed that: 1) both compounds bind
to WT, G12D and G12V mutants of K-Ras; 2) one of the compounds has higher
affinity towards GTP-bound than to GDP -loaded wild type and G12V mutant
of K-Ras (KD 0.9 mM and 3.2 mM respectively), but binds with
approximately same KD 3.3 mM to GDP and GTP-bound G12D K-Ras. We also
utilized for screening a novel virtual library of synthetically
accessible molecules that can be prepared in one step using well
established chemistries and easily obtainable reagents. This resulted in
additional potential ligands for the pocket. Two compounds were prepared
and proven to bind with affinities in low millimolar range. The use of
the ligands identified from virtual screens allowed for the design of a
NORE1A mimetic with MW< 1000. The data along with previously published
studies show that in silico screens for Ras binders are challenging
because of the highly flexible and allosteric nature of the protein.
However, utilization of several structures rather than focusing on just
one can significantly improve the prediction power of virtual screens.
Computational data along with binding studies strongly suggest that a
combination of in silico screening with rational optimization of effector
mimetics is a promising approach for the development of clinically useful
inhibitors for thus far non-druggable Ras.

