Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of duvelisib with either ibrutinib or dexamethasone
prevents mTOR-dependent feedback in aggressive B-cell lymphoma cell lines


BackgroundDuvelisib (IPI-145), an oral dual inhibitor of PI3K- and PI3K-,
is in clinical development for the treatment of hematological
malignancies. We previously reported on a high throughput combination
screen evaluating duvelisib in combination with standard of care and
emerging agents in lymphoma cell lines. Results showed dexamethasone and
ibrutinib have significant synergy with duvelisib in selected diffuse
large B-cell and follicular lymphoma cell lines. Based on these results
we sought to better understand the mechanism of this
synergy.MethodsDuvelisib alone and in combination with dexamethasone or
ibrutinib was evaluated in DoHH2 and SU-DHL4 lymphoma cell lines and
xenograft models. Cellular signaling was measured by western blot and
flow cytometry using phospho-specific antibodies. In vitro, specific
inhibitors of ERK (SCH-772984), pan-PI3K (GDC-0941), PI3K-mTOR
(PF-04691502), mTORC1 (Rapamycin), and mTORC 1/2 (AZD-8055) were used to
evaluate the contribution of these pathways to potential feedback loops.
Apoptosis was measured by caspase 3/7 activation, PARP cleavage, and by
western blotting and qRT-PCR for pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
members after duvelisib or combination treatment.ResultsWestern blotting
revealed that cell lines treated with duvelisib alone showed inhibition
of phosphorylated (p)AKT at serine 473 only out to 12 hours, with mTORC2
dependent re-phosphorylation of AKT evident at 24 hours. Combination with
dexamethasone or ibrutinib prevented this reactivation and also inhibited
downstream signaling effectors pPRAS40 and pS6. Combination of duvelisib
with dexamethasone also significantly reduced p-4EBP1, a regulator of cap
dependent translation initiation, leading to the decreased presence of
c-MYC 6 hours after treatment. Enhanced caspase 3/7 activation was seen
in both cell lines 4-6 hours post combination treatment compared to
monotherapies and was accompanied by a decrease in anti-apoptotic MCL-1
protein and an increase in pro-apoptotic BIM protein. These changes
correlated to the appearance of cleaved PARP and eventual cell death. In
support of the in vitro studies, in vivo studies with xenografts
generated from these cell lines revealed that duvelisib in combination
with either dexamethasone or ibrutinib led to greater tumor growth
inhibition compared to single agent administration.ConclusionsSynergy
between duvelisib and dexamethasone or ibrutinib was observed in
aggressive lymphoma cell lines. Mechanistic studies revealed a combined
effect on apoptotic pathway family members and inhibition of mTOR
signaling, which blocked both reactivation of pAKT and translation
initiation. These data provide a rationale for exploring these
combinations clinically and suggest that suppression of mTOR-driven
survival signaling may be an important mechanism for the observed
combination synergy.

