Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of 6-Phosphofructo-2-Kinase (PFKFB3) for the treatment
of breast cancer


Glucose uptake by tumors is stimulated by estradiol (E2) administration
in estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer patients. Notably, this
E2-induced metabolic flare is predictive of the clinical effectiveness of
anti-estrogens and, therefore, downstream metabolic regulators of E2 are
expected to have utility as anti-breast cancer agents. Although the
stimulation of glucose metabolism by E2 has been demonstrated, relatively
little is known about the precise downstream effectors required for E2 to
stimulate glucose metabolism in breast cancer. We have demonstrated that
the expression of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 3
(PFKFB3), a key regulator of the glycolytic flux, is elevated in breast
cancer lymph node metastases and that exposure of ER+ human MCF-7 and
T-47D breast cancer cells to E2 causes a rapid increase in 14C-glucose
uptake and glycolysis that is coincident with an induction of PFKFB3 mRNA
(via ER binding to its promoter), protein expression and the
intracellular concentration of its product, fructose-2,6-bisphosphate
(F26BP). Importantly, we also found that selective inhibition of PFKFB3
expression and activity using siRNA or a PFKFB3 inhibitor, PFK158,
markedly reduces the E2-mediated increase in F26BP, 14C-glucose uptake
and glycolysis. In the current study, we sought to determine if
co-administration of PFK158, with ICI 182,780 (fulvestrant), would offer
a greater anti-tumor effect. In unpublished results, we demonstrated that
the combination of the anti-estrogen, fulvestrant, with PFK158 results in
greater regressions of MCF-7 xenografts than either drug alone in athymic
BALB/c mice. In addition to regulating glucose metabolism, PFKFB3 has
been found to be a regulator of the cell cycle via cyclin dependent
kinases. We postulated that the combination of PFK158 with the newly
FDA-approved CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib may result in a synergistic
decrease in tumor cell growth. We found that exposure of breast cancer
cells to palbociclib and PFK158 causes a synergistic increase in cell
cycle arrest and apoptotic cell death. In addition, we observed a
synergistic decrease in phospho-retinoblastoma protein (Rb), a key
downstream target of CDK4/6. Importantly, we found that the combination
of PFK158 and palbociclib did not cause an increase in cell cycle arrest
or apoptosis in normal human mammary epithelial cells. Taken together,
these data indicate that PFKFB3 inhibitors such as PFK158 may have
clinical utility for the treatment of ER+ breast cancers when combined
with anti-estrogen agents and/or CDK4/6 inhibitors.

