Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carnosic acid induces cell cycle arrest of B16F10 cells and
synergizes with carmustine and lomustine in vitro and in vivo


Carnosic acid (CA), one of the purified components of rosemary, has shown
anti-inflammatory, chemo-preventive, and anticancer activities. In this
study, we treated melanoma cell line B16F10 with CA and detected the
anticancer effects. After 24-hour treatment, CA decreased cell
proliferation rate, wound healing activity, and inhibited colony
formation of B16F10. Additionally, CA induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest,
up-regulated p21 expression, and down-regulate cyclin E, cyclin D and
CDK4 expression. Carmustine (BCNU) and Lomustine (CCNU) are used in
clinical treatment of melanoma. To assay the combinational effects of CA
and BCNU or CCNU, B16F10 cells were treated with CA, BCNU, CCNU alone, or
CA combined with BCNU or CCNU. Our results showed, BCNU and CCNU arrested
cell cycle at G2/M phase after 24-hour treatment. Dramatically, CA
enhenced BCNU- and CCNU-induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase, and
decreased cyclin B1 and p-CDK1 expresion. In the in vivo xenograft model,
B16F10 cells (5105) were inoculated subcutaneously in C57BL/6 mice, and
the tumor grew for one week. The mice were divided into six groups and
provided different treated strategies: control, CA (50 mg/kg) alone, BCNU
(50 mg/kg) alone, CCNU (25 mg/kg) alone, CA combined with BCNU, and CA
combined with CCNU. After two-week treatment, compared with control
group, CA had better treated effects than BCNU or CCNU. Compared with CA,
BCNU or CCNU treatment alone, the combined strategies inhibited the tumor
growth in melanoma mice model more effectively. Furthermore, BCNU and
CCNU treatment in melanoma mice caused high values of aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT). However, CA
significantly decreased AST and ALT values caused by BCNU and CCNU in
combined trestment group. Therefore, CA is more safe and effective than
BCNU and CCNU, and the combined treatment strategies of CA and BCNU or
CCNU result in an increased antitumor efficacy. CA may be suitable for
translation to future clinic.

