Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lenvatinib in combination with everolimus demonstrated enhanced
antiangiogenesis and antitumor activity in human RCC xenograft models


Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is an oral multiple receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) inhibitor that selectively inhibits the kinase activities of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptors VEGFR1 (FLT1), VEGFR2
(KDR), and VEGFR3 (FLT4), in addition to other proangiogenic and
oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
receptors FGFR1, 2, 3, and 4; the platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
receptor PDGFR; KIT; and RET. Lenvatinib showed antitumor activity
against various tumor types mainly through its potent inhibition of
angiogenesis, and is currently marketed for the treatment of patients
with radioactive iodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer.
Recently, lenvatinib in combination with everolimus has shown longer
progression free survival compared to lenvatinib or everolimus alone in
renal cell carcinoma in Phase 2 study. The aim of this study is to
elucidate the activity of the combination of lenvatinib and everolimus in
preclinical human RCC xenograft models.We examined antitumor activity in
two human RCC (A-498 and Caki-1) xenograft models orally treated with
lenvatinib (10 mg/kg), everolimus (30 mg/kg), and the combination of
lenvatinib and everolimus for 1 or 2 weeks. The antitumor proliferation
and antiangiogenic effects were evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC)
using anti Ki67 antibody and anti CD31 antibody, respectively. The
induction of apoptosis was detected by TUNEL assay. To analyze the gene
expression profile of tumor samples, microarray analysis were also
conducted.The antitumor activity of the combination of lenvatinib and
everolimus was greater than that of either agent administered alone in
A-498 and Caki-1 xenograft models. The combination caused tumor
regression and had no remarkable body weight loss. IHC analysis revealed
decrease of microvessel density in lenvatinib and combination groups, and
also decrease in the proportion of proliferative cells in everolimus
treated and combination-treated group in A-498 model. In TUNEL assay,
significant induction of apoptosis was observed only in the
combination-treatment group. The analysis of gene expression profile in
A-498 xenograft tumors also supported these results: lenvatinib alone
upregulated hypoxia-related genes and everolimus decreased
proliferation-related genes. The combination of these 2 drugs induced
blends of the gene expression changes caused by each single treatment.Our
results indicate that treatment of lenvatinib in combination with
everolimus caused significant antitumor effect by combining the potent
antiangiogenic activity of lenvatinib as well as direct antitumor
activity of everolimus in A-498 model. These preclinical results provide
one of the mechanisms to support the significant clinical benefit
observed in RCC with the combination of lenvatinib and everolimus.

