Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SUV420H1 enhances the phosphorylation and transcription of ERK1 in
cancer cells


The oncogenic protein ERK1, a member of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) cascade, is a signaling molecule involved
in various types of human cancer. Functional regulation by
phosphorylation of kinases in the ERK pathway has been extensively
studied, however methylation of the ERK1 protein has not been reported to
date. Over the past decade, a number of protein methyltransferases have
been identified and reported to methylate histone proteins as well as
non-histone substrates related to various molecular functions that have
pivotal roles in tumorigenesis. To identify candidate enzymes that may
methylate ERK1, we performed an in vitro methyltransferase assay using
various recombinant methyltransferases and found that SUV420H1 methylates
ERK1. Mass spectrometry analysis validated our findings and identified
ERK1 to be tri-methylated by SUV420H1 at lysines 302 and 361. Given that
some protein methylation is known to affect protein phosphorylation, we
then investigated the biological importance of the individual K302 and
K361 methylated lysine residues on the phosphorylation status of ERK1.
Substitution of methylation sites (lysine to arginine) diminished
phosphorylation levels of ERK1 (Thr202 and Tyr204), supporting that
methylation of these respective residues enhances ERK1 phosphorylation
levels. Concordantly, siRNA-mediated SUV420H1 knockdown reduced
phosphorylated ERK1 protein levels as visualized on immunoblot, while it
interestingly also suppressed ERK1 at the transcript level. SUV420H1
knockdown caused a significant growth-suppressive effect in two squamous
cell carcinoma head and neck (SCCHN) cell lines, and flow cytometric
cell-cycle analysis showed a significant reduction in the proportion of
cells at the S phase, and an increase of those at the G0/G1. Our results
indicate that overexpression of SUV420H1 may result in activation of the
ERK signaling pathway through enhancement of ERK phosphorylation and
transcription, thereby providing new insights in the regulation of the
ERK cascade in human cancer.

