Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMVC specifically binds the major G-quadruplex structure formed in
the c-MYC promoter to lower c-MYC levels


The c-MYC proto-oncogene is one of the most deregulated genes in human
cancers. Transcriptional repression of c-MYC is considered as one of the
attractive strategies in targeting c-MYC. Previous studies revealed that
the c-MYC promoter nuclease hypersensitive element (NHE) III1 region,
which regulates 80-95% of total c-MYC transcription, can form DNA
G-quadruplex (G4) and that stabilization of the c-MYC G4 could repress
c-MYC gene expression. We have previously determined the molecular
structure of the major G-quadruplex formed in the c-MYC promoter NHE
(MycG4), which is an intramolecular parallel-stranded structure. BMVC, a
carbazole derivative, was designed as a fluorescent probe for recognizing
telomeric G4. However, we found that BMVC binds to MycG4 with much
greater affinity and specificity. Cellular studies showed that BMVC was
enriched in the nucleus at 48 hr after treatment, leading to markedly
reduced c-MYC expression levels. Promoter-driven luciferase assays
revealed that BMVC could enhance the inhibitory effects of MycG4,
suggesting BMVC can repress c-MYC expression in vivo through
stabilization of MycG4. To understand the molecular interactions between
BMVC and MycG4, we have determined the molecular structure of the
complexes of BMVC with MycG4 by NMR. BMVC appears to bind the 5-end of
the MycG4 with very high affinity, as shown by the slow-exchange binding
on the NMR timescale. The structure of the 5-end complex of BMVC and
MycG4 shows that BMVC is paired to the flanking adenine with specific
hydrogen bonding interactions, while the BMVC-adenine plane stacks nicely
on the 5-end G-tetrad of MycG4. Compared to the previous MycG4 complex
with a quindoline compound, the tighter and more specific binding of BMVC
appears to be imparted by the novel arched shape of BMVC and specific
pairing recognition of BMVC with the flanking bases of MycG4. BMVC can
also bind to the 3-end of MycG4 with lower affinity to form a second
complex. However, the 3-end complex shows much more dynamic conformation
and less specific interactions. Our results indicated that the cellular
targets of BMVC include not only telomeric G4, but also the c-MYC
promoter G4. Because of the inherent fluorescence and novel binding mode
of BMVC, our study provides useful information for future design of
improved carbazole-based anticancer agents or specific cellular
fluorescent probes, as well as insights into specific recognition of
MycG4 by small molecules.

