Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo analysis of EGFR family signalling as a bypass mechanism
in prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancers (PCa) rely on androgenic ligands and the
androgen receptor (AR) for their growth and survival, making AR
inhibition a predominant therapeutic strategy for these tumors. Some
prostate tumors however fail this therapy due to bypass mechanisms that
emerge as a result of prolonged AR targeting. This in vivo study
attempted to assess the expression and activation of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) family (whose role is well-documented in PCa) in
response to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT).Methods: Nude mice were
implanted (s.c.) with CWR22 tumors (human-patient-derived,
androgen-dependent AD) and its castration-resistant (CR) subline
CWR22-Rv1 (relapsed CWR22). Androgen deprivation (i.e. AR inhibition) was
achieved by surgical or sham castration of mice. Tumors were analyzed
(immunohistochemistry/immunoblot) for EGFR/ErbB2/ErbB3/AR proteins and
proliferative/apoptotic markers.Results: Castration caused significant
tumor regression in AD but not CR tumors. in vitro viability assays
demonstrated that castration (mimicked by using charcoal-stripped serum,
css) did not slow down CR cells to the same degree as it did AD cells. At
baseline, intratumoral EGFR protein was unchanged in R22 tumors, ErbB2
levels decreased and ErbB3 protein increased in Rv1 tumors. Castration
increased ErbB3 but not EGFR or ErbB2 proteins in CWR22 tumors.
Phosphorylated forms of these receptors were generally difficult to
detect but there was more phosphorylated ErbB3 protein in Rv1 tumors.
Downstream of the EGFR family, there was less phosphorylated Erk but not
Akt protein in CWR22-Rv1 tumors. Castration decreased Erk protein in AD
tumors but increased it in CR tumors. Immunohistochemical quantification
revealed that cytoplasmic EGFR and ErbB3 proteins were elevated in CR
tumors but reduced in AD tumors. Castration greatly decreased Ki-67
staining in AD but not in CR tumors while the number of TUNEL-positive
nuclei and intensity of PARP staining decreased in castrated CR but not
in AD tumors. ErbB3 and AR proteins were significantly correlated with
DNA damage and proliferation in CWR22 tumors but only nuclear AR levels
and proliferation were significantly correlated in CR tumors.Conclusions:
We conclude that androgen deprivation therapy may alter EGFR and ErbB3
protein levels and localization in androgen-dependent and
castration-resistant tumors. The EGFR family is typically activated at
the cell surface hence their presence and activity there, in response to
castration, may initiate signalling pathways encouraging tumor cell
proliferation and survival.

