Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: One-carbon metabolism and colorectal cancer risk according to
molecular subtypes: a Bayesian network learning approach


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a heterogeneous disease caused by
a number of distinct pathways defined by genetic and epigenetic events.
These molecular subtypes differ in prognosis and treatment options, and
recent studies also imply differences in etiology. One-carbon metabolism
has been extensively studied in relation to incident CRC risk because of
its involvement in nucleotide synthesis and methylation reactions, yet
only a few studies have evaluated if associations differ over CRC
subtypes. In this study, we investigated a targeted panel of circulating
metabolites and a set of single nucleotide polymorphisms involved in
one-carbon metabolism in relation to the risk of overall CRC and CRC
subtypes approximated by mutations in the BRAF and KRAS oncogenes,
microsatellite instability (MSI), or CpG island methylator phenotype
(CIMP).Methods: This was a prospective population-based nested case
control study of 613 CRC cases and 1190 matched controls. The data
included plasma concentrations of 14 one-carbon metabolites, 17 related
single nucleotide polymorphisms, and other lifestyle-related information
for all subjects, and clinical and molecular information for the tumors.
In order to account for interactions and dependencies between variables,
we applied multivariate Bayesian network learning in combination with
more traditional univariate multinomial logistic regression to
investigate independent relations to subtype specific CRC risk.Results:
Preliminary findings show that vitamin B6 (Pyridoxal 5-phosphate, PLP)
and vitamin B2 (riboflavin) had the strongest independent relations to
overall CRC risk in the multivariate analyses. Folate, glycine, vitamin
B6, and the RFC1 80G>A polymorphism displayed signs of independent
relations to CRC subtypes. In univariate multinomial logistic regression
models, plasma folate expressed the strongest etiologic heterogeneity,
and was more clearly related to the risk of CIMP low/high tumors, tumors
with MSI, or tumors without KRAS mutation, respectively.Conclusions: This
study investigated a large set of prediagnostic circulating metabolites
and single nucleotide polymorphisms related to one-carbon metabolism
using multivariate statistical learning. We found that some components
showed signs of subtype specific relations, of which the association for
folate was clearest. Our results suggest that the role of one-carbon
metabolism in colorectal carcinogenesis may differ between specific
molecular pathways.

