Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing identifies NF-kappaB pathway regulators
frequently mutated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


IntroductionNasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a unique epithelial
malignancy with a high prevalence in Southeast Asia. To date, the genomic
abnormalities leading to the pathogenesis of NPC remain unclear. Thus, we
sought to characterize the mutational landscape in NPC tumors using
next-generation sequencing approaches and to identify significantly
mutated genes and pathways.Methods124 NPC primary tumors were examined to
define the mutational landscape with whole-exome sequencing (WES) and
targeted re-sequencing. Mean target coverage of tumor and blood samples
was 70X and 49X in WES, and 190X and 68X in targeted resequencing,
respectively. Somatic SNPs and INDELs were called with MuTect and
VarScan2, respectively. MutSigCV was applied to identify potential driver
events in tumorigenesis. Verification rate for somatic mutations was 95%.
The functional consequences of mutations in candidate genes were
evaluated by the luciferase promoter, cell proliferation, and colony
formation assays.ResultsThe mutation rate of NPC is relatively low, with
a median of 0.9 somatic mutations per megabase. Mutational signature
analysis revealed two signatures in NPC, the ubiquitous signature in
cancer characterized by C>T transitions predominantly occurring at NpCpG
trinucleotides and the APOBEC-related signature characterized by C>G and
C>T mutations at TpCpN trinucleotides, which is related to the innate
immune APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases.MutSigCV analysis identified
significantly mutated genes, NFKBIA, TP53, CYLD, KMT2D, DMXL1, KMT2C,
GPR144, RYR2, BOD1L1, AKAP9, and CEP192, with q values less than 0.1.
Pathway and gene ontology analysis identified several pathways/terms with
enriched somatic mutations including cell cycle phase transition,
chromatin modification, cell death, immune response, p53 pathway, viral
carcinogenesis, and the canonical NF-B signaling pathways. TP53 is the
most frequently mutated gene (7.3%, 9/124). Almost all somatic mutations
fall into the DNA binding domain of TP53, including well-known hotspot
and gain-of-function mutations.Multiple loss-of-function (LOF) mutations
were detected in NF-kB negative regulators, including NFKBIA (encodes IB
protein), CYLD, and TNFAIP3. Mutations in NFKBIA were shown to alter the
tumor suppressive function of IB.ConclusionsIn this study we detected an
APOBEC-related signature in NPC. Several NF-kB negative regulators,
including NFKBIA and CYLD, were mutated in a subset of NPC primary
tumors, which may contribute to pathogenesis of NPC through NF-kB
signaling pathway. These data provide an enhanced road map for
understanding the molecular basis underlying NPC and also provide insight
for exploring new therapies.AcknowledgementThis work was supported by the
Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
People's Republic of China Grant number AoE/M006/08 to MLL.

