Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different patterns of SIRT1, KLF4, DAPK1 and SPG20 methylation in
B lymphocytes correlate with the clinical parameters of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma subtypes


Background. DNA methylation is one of the best studied epigenetic
modifications and one major constituent of the epigenome of a cell. It
contributes to normal development as well to carcinogenesis. Nowadays,
many efforts are being made in order to use DNA methylation as a
biomarker. The aim of our work is to characterize the expression and
methylation of SIRT1, HIC1, BCL6, KLF4 and other genes relevant for
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) pathogenesis. Methods. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) on 72 formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue sections (FFPE).
B-lymphocytes were purified from 36 biopsies of follicular hyperplasias
(non-malignant B-lymphocytes), follicular lymphomas (FL) and diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL). Gene expression were analysed by
quantitative retrotranscribedPCR (qRTPCR). Quantitative CpG promoter
methylation analysis was performed by pyrosequencing after bisulfite
conversion or by Methyl II array qPCR on genomic DNA. Results. In a total
of 72 FFPE samples of follicular hyperplasias (n = 17), FL (n = 36) and
DLBCL (n = 19), SIRT1 staining is localized in the germinal center of the
majority of follicular hyperplasias and FL samples. SIRT1 localizes
preferentially in the centroblasts of the GC of the follicles where it
correlates with Ki67. BCL6 is uniformly positive in follicular
hyperplasias and FL, but heterogeneously distributed in DLBCL.
Interestingly, SIRT1 and BCL6 expression correlate in FL.By quantitative
pyrosequencing we analyzed 3 CpG sites for the SIRT1 promoter
(corresponding to the binding sites for CREB, ARID and PPARG
transcription factors). Follicular hyperplasias display higher
methylation levels (52.88%) than FL (38.36%) and DLBCL (32.65%) on SIRT1
promoter suggesting a possible inverse correlation between tumor
aggressiveness and SIRT1 methylation.Next, we selected a panel of genes
whose expression is linked to lymphoma pathogenesis. By Methyl II array
qPCR, we show that BCL6 methylation does not vary among samples. KLF4,
DAPK1 and SPG20, show statistically significant methylation increases in
FL and DLBCL compared to follicular hyperplasias, indicating a possible
role of these proteins in lymphoma pathogenesis. On the contrary, no
significant differences are observed for the other markers MZB1, MGMT,
LMO2 and ASXL1. Notably, KLF4, DAPK1 and SPG20 mRNA expression levels
anti-correlate with their promoter methylation in FL.Conclusions.
Epigenetic changes in SIRT1 methylation inversely correlate with NHL
aggressiveness (decreasing in the order: follicular hyperplasias - FL -
DLBCL), while KLF4, DAPK1 and SPG20 show a methylation increase that
correlates with tumor aggressiveness. These data suggest that different
patterns of methylation correlate with the clinical and prognostic
parameters of these NHL subtypes.

