Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of HIF-1 by hnRNP A18 contributes to tumor promotion
under hypoxic conditions


The RNA-binding protein heterogenous ribonucleoprotein A18 (hnRNP A18) is
a new protein translation regulator found to be elevated in many cancers.
Previous work from our lab has shown that hnRNP A18 is able to bind and
regulate the translation of a group of mRNAs under stress conditions,
including hypoxia. Hypoxia has largely been recognized as an innate
characteristic of solid tumors and plays numerous cellular and
physiologic roles such as cell proliferation, invasion, migration,
metastasis, and angiogenesis. Given its extensive function in solid
tumors, combined with computational results showing a possible hnRNP A18
signature motif in the 3UTR of HIF-1, we sought to determine if hnRNP A18
binds HIF-1 mRNA and how this affects tumor promotion and growth.
Results: Our data indicates that hnRNP A18 protein is able to bind HIF-1
mRNA. Under hypoxic conditions, down-regulation of hnRNP A18
significantly decreases HIF-1 mRNA stability, leading to reduced amounts
of HIF-1 protein levels in melanoma cells. Treatment with CoCl2 increases
hnRNP A18 protein levels in melanoma cells, but not in normal
melanocytes. Additionally, colony survival assay demonstrates that
down-regulation of hnRNP A18 decreases cells survival rates under a
hypoxic environment. The functional significance of this effect was
observed in a mouse xenograft model where down-regulation of hnRNP A18
significantly reduced melanoma and breast tumor growth.
Immunohistochemistry staining of xenograft specimens showed overlapping
localization of hnRNP A18 to the tumor hypoxic regions. Lastly, proteome
profiling of the xenograft tumors showed a significant decrease of key
angiogenic-related factors (e.g., angiogenin, endoglin, VEGF) when hnRNP
A18 is reduced. Conclusion: Heterogenous ribonucleoprotein A18 is able to
regulate HIF-1 mRNA and modulate its protein levels under hypoxic
conditions. The oxygen-deprived regions generated in the central core of
a solid tumor leads to up-regulation of hnRNP A18 and consequently HIF-1,
resulting in tumor growth and promotion. New therapeutics targeting hnRNP
A18 would therefore be a logical next-step in developing a novel
mechanism-based therapy for cancer treatment.

