Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular mechanisms of obesity driving breast cancer etiology
and prognosis in post-menopausal women


This study aims to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms of obesity
driving breast cancer etiology and prognosis as post-menopausal women
with high body mass index (BMI) have increased breast cancer risk and
poorer prognosis.We examined the differential gene expression of breast
tumors from 441 post-menopausal women part of the Nurses Health Studies.
Primary analysis was performed between women with BMI of This study aims
to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms of obesity driving breast
cancer etiology and prognosis as post-menopausal women with high body
mass index (BMI) have increased breast cancer risk and poorer
prognosis.We examined the differential gene expression of breast tumors
from 441 post-menopausal women part of the Nurses Health Studies. Primary
analysis was performed between women with BMI of <25, 25 to This study
aims to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms of obesity driving
breast cancer etiology and prognosis as post-menopausal women with high
body mass index (BMI) have increased breast cancer risk and poorer
prognosis.We examined the differential gene expression of breast tumors
from 441 post-menopausal women part of the Nurses Health Studies. Primary
analysis was performed between women with BMI of <25, 25 to <30, 30 to 35
and 35 while secondary analysis was performed using BMI as a continuous
variable. Analyses were adjusted for age of diagnosis, year of diagnosis,
post-menopausal hormone therapy, alcohol consumption, microarray batch
and ER status.In the primary analysis, differentially expressed genes
associated with BMI were identified in pairwise analyses comparing women
with BMI 35 with women in lower BMI categories (This study aims to gain
insights into the molecular mechanisms of obesity driving breast cancer
etiology and prognosis as post-menopausal women with high body mass index
(BMI) have increased breast cancer risk and poorer prognosis.We examined
the differential gene expression of breast tumors from 441
post-menopausal women part of the Nurses Health Studies. Primary analysis
was performed between women with BMI of <25, 25 to <30, 30 to 35 and 35
while secondary analysis was performed using BMI as a continuous
variable. Analyses were adjusted for age of diagnosis, year of diagnosis,
post-menopausal hormone therapy, alcohol consumption, microarray batch
and ER status.In the primary analysis, differentially expressed genes
associated with BMI were identified in pairwise analyses comparing women
with BMI 35 with women in lower BMI categories (<25 vs. 35, n = 58
significant genes; 25 to This study aims to gain insights into the
molecular mechanisms of obesity driving breast cancer etiology and
prognosis as post-menopausal women with high body mass index (BMI) have
increased breast cancer risk and poorer prognosis.We examined the
differential gene expression of breast tumors from 441 post-menopausal
women part of the Nurses Health Studies. Primary analysis was performed
between women with BMI of <25, 25 to <30, 30 to 35 and 35 while secondary
analysis was performed using BMI as a continuous variable. Analyses were
adjusted for age of diagnosis, year of diagnosis, post-menopausal hormone
therapy, alcohol consumption, microarray batch and ER status.In the
primary analysis, differentially expressed genes associated with BMI were
identified in pairwise analyses comparing women with BMI 35 with women in
lower BMI categories (<25 vs. 35, n = 58 significant genes; 25 to <30 vs.
35, n = 29; 30 to 35 vs. 35, n = 12; FDRThis study aims to gain insights
into the molecular mechanisms of obesity driving breast cancer etiology
and prognosis as post-menopausal women with high body mass index (BMI)
have increased breast cancer risk and poorer prognosis.We examined the
differential gene expression of breast tumors from 441 post-menopausal
women part of the Nurses Health Studies. Primary analysis was performed
between women with BMI of <25, 25 to <30, 30 to 35 and 35 while secondary
analysis was performed using BMI as a continuous variable. Analyses were
adjusted for age of diagnosis, year of diagnosis, post-menopausal hormone
therapy, alcohol consumption, microarray batch and ER status.In the
primary analysis, differentially expressed genes associated with BMI were
identified in pairwise analyses comparing women with BMI 35 with women in
lower BMI categories (<25 vs. 35, n = 58 significant genes; 25 to <30 vs.
35, n = 29; 30 to 35 vs. 35, n = 12; FDR<0.05); no significant genes were
identified in the other pairwise comparisons. In the secondary analysis
which considered BMI as a continuous value, two genes, NCOA3 and PTPN1,
were significantly up-regulated in breast tumors with increasing BMI
(FDRThis study aims to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms of
obesity driving breast cancer etiology and prognosis as post-menopausal
women with high body mass index (BMI) have increased breast cancer risk
and poorer prognosis.We examined the differential gene expression of
breast tumors from 441 post-menopausal women part of the Nurses Health
Studies. Primary analysis was performed between women with BMI of <25, 25
to <30, 30 to 35 and 35 while secondary analysis was performed using BMI
as a continuous variable. Analyses were adjusted for age of diagnosis,
year of diagnosis, post-menopausal hormone therapy, alcohol consumption,
microarray batch and ER status.In the primary analysis, differentially
expressed genes associated with BMI were identified in pairwise analyses
comparing women with BMI 35 with women in lower BMI categories (<25 vs.
35, n = 58 significant genes; 25 to <30 vs. 35, n = 29; 30 to 35 vs. 35,
n = 12; FDR<0.05); no significant genes were identified in the other
pairwise comparisons. In the secondary analysis which considered BMI as a
continuous value, two genes, NCOA3 and PTPN1, were significantly
up-regulated in breast tumors with increasing BMI (FDR<0.05). Gene set
enrichment analyses suggested that tumors from post-menopausal women with
increasing BMI have increased inflammation and decreased
carcinogen/anti-cancer drug metabolism.These molecular insights have
further elucidated breast cancer etiology in post-menopausal women with
high BMI.

