Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RET-mediated invasion in three-dimensional microenvironment models


RET is a receptor tyrosine kinase expressed in cells derived from the
neural crest. RET activation and signalling is mediated by soluble
ligands of the Glial Cell-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF) family. RET
signalling plays critical roles during embryogenesis, mediating
directional cell migration, proliferation, and survival. In addition to
its normal developmental roles, oncogenic mutations or aberrant
expression of RET are also linked to tumor spread and metastasis in
multiple human tumor types. Specifically, activating mutations of RET
have been identified in multiple-endocrine neoplasia type 2, while
expression of wildtype RET is linked to increased local invasion in
breast and pancreatic tumors. Previous studies of RET-mediated invasion
and metastasis have used standard 2D culture methodologies, which may not
be reflective of the in vivo microenvironment. Here, we have developed an
in vitro 3D model of tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis to
characterize the signals critical to these processes.Using SH-SY5Y cells,
a neuroblastoma cell line that endogenously expresses RET, we assessed
anchorage-independent growth and invasion into a surrounding collagen
matrix in response to RET stimulation with GDNF. We have quantified the
contributions of several RET downstream signalling pathways by
individually blocking SRC, PI3K, FAK, STAT3, MEK, and integrin -1
signals, for their effects on RET-mediated cell growth and invasion in 3D
culture. Our data demonstrate that inhibiting either PI3K or MEK
decreases the invasive potential of SH-SY5Y cells in response to RET
activation, while inhibition of STAT3 had little effect. We have also
shown that integrin -1, FAK or SRC inhibition completely blocked
invasion, consistent with an integrin dependent mode of invasion in
SH-SY5Y cells. Additionally, we showed that FAK and SRC signalling were
critical for SH-SY5Y survival in 3D microenvironments. While several
RET-mediated signalling pathways have been implicated in cell motility
and invasion in two-dimensional culture models, our findings suggest that
specific signals may differ in their importance in a three-dimensional
microenvironment. We are currently using our 3D models to further
characterize the contributions of RET signalling to tumor cell
invasiveness. These data may provide further insight into the role of RET
expression in in vivo tumor spread.

