Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of soluble protein biomarkers in NSCLC serum samples by
meso scale discovery electrochemiluminescence platform


Identification of soluble biomarkers has become a critical non-invasive
approach for disease diagnosis and monitoring in the treatment of solid
tumors. Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is the most common form of
lung cancer, accounting for approximately 85% of all lung cancers
worldwide. The EGFR family of genes is known to be highly expressed in
NSCLC tumors and play a critical role in the progression of the disease.
Although patients initially respond well to EGFR TKI therapy, acquired
resistance occurs through several mechanisms, including compensatory cMET
pathway activation (Robinson et al. 2013). Previous reports have
demonstrated that soluble forms of EGFR, Her2 and cMET are generated
through either alternate splicing of mRNA or proteolytic cleavage of the
full length receptors (Wilken et al. 2013). Serum concentrations of these
receptors can be correlated with prognosis as well as treatment response
(Gregorc, 2004, Kasahara, 2010 Heinmoller, 2003). Soluble receptor
ligands, including Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), have also been
evaluated in NSCLC and a strong correlation has also been observed
between the levels of serum HGF and disease outcome in patients treated
with EGFR-TKIs (Kasahara et al. 2010).In this study, we evaluated
concentrations of sEGFR, sMET, sHER2,, and HGF in NSCLC versus healthy
normal serum samples via meso scale discovery (MSD) platform. Inventoried
and custom MSD assays were optimized to measure these proteins in a
training set consisting of 19 NSCLC and 16 normal healthy serum samples.
Significantly lower concentrations of sEGFR and sHER2 were observed in
the NSCLC serum samples compared to normal (p value = 0.0092 for both
receptors), whereas, in contrast, the levels of HGF were significantly
higher in the NSCLC patient samples (p value Identification of soluble
biomarkers has become a critical non-invasive approach for disease
diagnosis and monitoring in the treatment of solid tumors. Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is the most common form of lung cancer, accounting
for approximately 85% of all lung cancers worldwide. The EGFR family of
genes is known to be highly expressed in NSCLC tumors and play a critical
role in the progression of the disease. Although patients initially
respond well to EGFR TKI therapy, acquired resistance occurs through
several mechanisms, including compensatory cMET pathway activation
(Robinson et al. 2013). Previous reports have demonstrated that soluble
forms of EGFR, Her2 and cMET are generated through either alternate
splicing of mRNA or proteolytic cleavage of the full length receptors
(Wilken et al. 2013). Serum concentrations of these receptors can be
correlated with prognosis as well as treatment response (Gregorc, 2004,
Kasahara, 2010 Heinmoller, 2003). Soluble receptor ligands, including
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), have also been evaluated in NSCLC and a
strong correlation has also been observed between the levels of serum HGF
and disease outcome in patients treated with EGFR-TKIs (Kasahara et al.
2010).In this study, we evaluated concentrations of sEGFR, sMET, sHER2,,
and HGF in NSCLC versus healthy normal serum samples via meso scale
discovery (MSD) platform. Inventoried and custom MSD assays were
optimized to measure these proteins in a training set consisting of 19
NSCLC and 16 normal healthy serum samples. Significantly lower
concentrations of sEGFR and sHER2 were observed in the NSCLC serum
samples compared to normal (p value = 0.0092 for both receptors),
whereas, in contrast, the levels of HGF were significantly higher in the
NSCLC patient samples (p value <0.0001). No significant difference in
sMET concentration was observed between NSCLC and normal serum. Based on
this data, it was determined that a ratio of protein concentration of
each soluble receptor (EGFR, Her2 and cMET) to HGF yielded a greater
differentiation between NSCLC and normal samples (p value Identification
of soluble biomarkers has become a critical non-invasive approach for
disease diagnosis and monitoring in the treatment of solid tumors.
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is the most common form of lung
cancer, accounting for approximately 85% of all lung cancers worldwide.
The EGFR family of genes is known to be highly expressed in NSCLC tumors
and play a critical role in the progression of the disease. Although
patients initially respond well to EGFR TKI therapy, acquired resistance
occurs through several mechanisms, including compensatory cMET pathway
activation (Robinson et al. 2013). Previous reports have demonstrated
that soluble forms of EGFR, Her2 and cMET are generated through either
alternate splicing of mRNA or proteolytic cleavage of the full length
receptors (Wilken et al. 2013). Serum concentrations of these receptors
can be correlated with prognosis as well as treatment response (Gregorc,
2004, Kasahara, 2010 Heinmoller, 2003). Soluble receptor ligands,
including Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), have also been evaluated in
NSCLC and a strong correlation has also been observed between the levels
of serum HGF and disease outcome in patients treated with EGFR-TKIs
(Kasahara et al. 2010).In this study, we evaluated concentrations of
sEGFR, sMET, sHER2,, and HGF in NSCLC versus healthy normal serum samples
via meso scale discovery (MSD) platform. Inventoried and custom MSD
assays were optimized to measure these proteins in a training set
consisting of 19 NSCLC and 16 normal healthy serum samples. Significantly
lower concentrations of sEGFR and sHER2 were observed in the NSCLC serum
samples compared to normal (p value = 0.0092 for both receptors),
whereas, in contrast, the levels of HGF were significantly higher in the
NSCLC patient samples (p value <0.0001). No significant difference in
sMET concentration was observed between NSCLC and normal serum. Based on
this data, it was determined that a ratio of protein concentration of
each soluble receptor (EGFR, Her2 and cMET) to HGF yielded a greater
differentiation between NSCLC and normal samples (p value <0.0001, =
0.0041,and 0.0327 respectively). Cut-off values to define NSCLC versus
normal patients were established for each ratio and validated in a
blinded independent cohort, consisting of 50 NSCLC and 12 healthy normal
serum samples. PPV and NPV were then calculated to determine sensitivity
and specificity for each protein ratio. Results from the validation study
show an almost complete separation between healthy and NSCLC patient
samples (p value Identification of soluble biomarkers has become a
critical non-invasive approach for disease diagnosis and monitoring in
the treatment of solid tumors. Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is the
most common form of lung cancer, accounting for approximately 85% of all
lung cancers worldwide. The EGFR family of genes is known to be highly
expressed in NSCLC tumors and play a critical role in the progression of
the disease. Although patients initially respond well to EGFR TKI
therapy, acquired resistance occurs through several mechanisms, including
compensatory cMET pathway activation (Robinson et al. 2013). Previous
reports have demonstrated that soluble forms of EGFR, Her2 and cMET are
generated through either alternate splicing of mRNA or proteolytic
cleavage of the full length receptors (Wilken et al. 2013). Serum
concentrations of these receptors can be correlated with prognosis as
well as treatment response (Gregorc, 2004, Kasahara, 2010 Heinmoller,
2003). Soluble receptor ligands, including Hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF), have also been evaluated in NSCLC and a strong correlation has
also been observed between the levels of serum HGF and disease outcome in
patients treated with EGFR-TKIs (Kasahara et al. 2010).In this study, we
evaluated concentrations of sEGFR, sMET, sHER2,, and HGF in NSCLC versus
healthy normal serum samples via meso scale discovery (MSD) platform.
Inventoried and custom MSD assays were optimized to measure these
proteins in a training set consisting of 19 NSCLC and 16 normal healthy
serum samples. Significantly lower concentrations of sEGFR and sHER2 were
observed in the NSCLC serum samples compared to normal (p value = 0.0092
for both receptors), whereas, in contrast, the levels of HGF were
significantly higher in the NSCLC patient samples (p value <0.0001). No
significant difference in sMET concentration was observed between NSCLC
and normal serum. Based on this data, it was determined that a ratio of
protein concentration of each soluble receptor (EGFR, Her2 and cMET) to
HGF yielded a greater differentiation between NSCLC and normal samples (p
value <0.0001, = 0.0041,and 0.0327 respectively). Cut-off values to
define NSCLC versus normal patients were established for each ratio and
validated in a blinded independent cohort, consisting of 50 NSCLC and 12
healthy normal serum samples. PPV and NPV were then calculated to
determine sensitivity and specificity for each protein ratio. Results
from the validation study show an almost complete separation between
healthy and NSCLC patient samples (p value <0.0001, AUC = 1)for all three
ratios tested (sEGFR/HGF, sHER2/HGF and sMET/HGF), with a PPV = 100%,
98%, 100% and NPV = 100%, 100%, 85.7%, respectively. Overall, these
findings indicate potential clinical applications for these protein pairs
as non-invasive biomarkers of NSCLC diagnosis, prognosis and treatment
monitoring to support emerging TKI therapies

