Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CoGAPS matrix factorization algorithm infers feedback
mechanisms from therapeutic inhibition of EGFR that increases expression
of growth factor receptors


Next generation sequencing technologies enable precise personalized
medicine. Thus, patients with oncogene driven tumors are currently
treated with targeted therapeutics such as EGFR inhibitors. However, drug
interactions with other activated signaling pathways in treated tumors
often alter predicted therapeutic response. Therefore, bioinformatics
algorithms are needed to infer unanticipated molecular interactions from
anticipated molecular response to targeted therapeutics in diverse
genetic backgrounds. To model heterogeneous genetic backgrounds in HNSCC,
we use HaCaT cells with forced overexpression of EGFR, HRAS, and PIK3CA.
Previously, the CoGAPS matrix factorization algorithm was shown to infer
the specific signaling pathways that were activated in these HaCaT
knock-in constructs from gene expression data. In this study, we
evaluated whether CoGAPS could also delineate unanticipated signaling
changes from anticipated cellular signaling response caused by targeted
therapeutic in diverse genetic backgrounds. To delineate these signaling
responses, we measured gene expression after treating the modified HaCaT
cells with three EGFR targeted agents (gefitinib, cetuximab and afatinib)
for 24 hours. The CoGAPS matrix factorization algorithm distinguished a
gene expression signature associated with the anticipated silencing of
the EGFR network and a signature associated with unanticipated
transcriptional feedback in HaCaT constructs that were sensitive to EGFR
inhibitors. Notably, the feedback signature showed that EGFR gene
expression itself increased in cells that were responsive to EGFR
inhibitors. The CoGAPS algorithm further associated such feedback with
increased expression of several growth factor receptors by the AP-2
family of transcription factors. Once transcribed, these growth factor
receptors may ultimately compensate for EGFR inhibition in these
sensitive cells. Our data suggest, that CoGAPS gene expression signatures
delineate on target and feedback effects of drugs related to therapeutic
sensitivity in diverse genetic backgrounds.

