Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational regulation by eIF4E and its contribution to
tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer


Breast cancer is one of the prevalent causes of cancer in women and its
occurrence has been rising in the last few decades. Two thirds of breast
cancer patients are ER-positive and can receive tamoxifen (TAM)
treatment. Unfortunately, many of the patients eventually develop
resistance to tamoxifen. Identifying a molecular marker associated with
tamoxifen resistance would help in designing better therapeutic
strategies to overcome this. In eukaryotes, translation initiation is the
most regulated step. Abnormal translation machinery underlies a variety
of human diseases including cancers. Eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E (eIF4E) is the least abundant initiation factor and is believed
to be the rate limiting step for translation initiation. Overexpression
of eIF4E in cells selectively promotes translation of mRNAs involved in
cell proliferation, apoptosis and tumor progression. Recently, eIF4E
overexpression has been implicated in drug resistance in melanoma1. We
hypothesized that eIF4E may also be involved in tamoxifen resistance. The
aim of this study was to characterize the role of eIF4E in tamoxifen
resistance and identify novel molecular targets that may be
translationally regulated.Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of eIF4E
showed up-regulation in human breast cancer samples compared with
non-tumor counterparts. In silico analysis predicted that ER and FOXM1
have a long and highly structured 5-UTR, which are sensitive to the
expression level of eIF4E. Polysomal fractionation confirmed that ER and
FOXM1 mRNA were more actively translated in MCF7 than in MCF10A. The
correlation between eIF4E and ER/FOXM1 were further confirmed in tissue
microarray (TMA). The role of eIF4E in conferring TAM resistance was
studied by MTT assays. Overexpression of eIF4E induced TAM resistance
while knockdown eIF4E sensitized cells to TAM. Additionally,
overexpression of eIF4E upregulated ER/FOXM1 expression at protein level
while knockdown eIF4E downregulated their expression at protein level.Our
results show that eIF4E induced TAM resistance possibly through
translational regulation of ER/FOXM1. eIF4E is a promising biomarker for
anti-estrogen drug responsiveness and a future therapeutic target for
treating drug resistant breast cancer patients.Reference:1. Zhan Y, et
al. The role of eIF4E in response and acquired resistance to vemurafenib
in melanoma J Invest Dermatol. 2015 May;135(5):1368-76.(2178 characters
without spaces)

