Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innovative cancer treatment of human lung cancer cells PC-9 with a
synthetic retinoid Am80 and EGCG via inhibition of HDAC4 and HDAC5


A synthetic new retinoid Am80 (tamibarotene) is used for treatment of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients with resistance of
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). To potentiate efficacy of Am80, we
challenged combination treatment of Am80 and EGCG on human lung cancer
cell line PC-9. It is now well accepted that EGCG acts as synergist with
numerous anticancer compounds, and that the average reduction of tumor
volume for in vivo genograft mouse models implanted using various human
cancer cell lines was 70.3% with combinations of 13 anticancer compounds
and EGCG. We previously reported that combinations of NSAIDs (sulindac
and celecoxib) or other retinoids (ATRA, 13-cis-RA and 9-cis-RA) and EGCG
synergistically induced apoptosis of the cells along with strong
expression of growth arrest and DNA-damage inducible gene 153 (GADD153)
and death receptor (DR5) gene. Our objective was to investigate the
mechanism of the synergistic induction for GADD153-DR5 apoptosis pathway.
The proteomic analysis of lysine-acetylated proteins was conducted with a
shotgun analysis using nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS in PC-9 cells. We found that the
numbers of acetylated proteins were different: 551 acetylated proteins
were found in non-treated cells, 331 proteins in cells treated with
combination, and 59 proteins were common in both cases. Acetylation was
mainly found in non-histone proteins, chaperons, transcription factors,
and enzymes. The combination increased acetylated p53 (Lys382) about
3-fold compared with non-treated cells. In addition, combination
significantly decreased the protein amounts of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
4 and HDAC 5 to 50% and 20%, respectively, but not HDAC6 among Class II
HDACs. Class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, and 3) were not decreased. All the
results suggest that combination of Am80 and EGCG induces GADD153-DR5
apoptotic pathway, and reduces the amounts of HDAC4 and HDAC5 resulting
in changing protein acetylation.

