Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor is a
pro-differentiating factor in neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is the most common cancer in infancy. Current therapies are
only modestly effective; patients with high-risk disease have less than a
50% chance of survival. High-risk neuroblastoma is characterized by
undifferentiated neuroblasts and low Schwannian stroma content. The tumor
stroma contributes to the suppression of tumor growth by releasing
soluble proteins, including heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), which
act to promote neuroblast differentiation.Here we identify
heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HBEGF) as a
potent pro-differentiating factor in neuroblastoma. Using microarray
analysis, HBEGF mRNA expression is decreased in neuroblastoma compared to
benign disease, correlating to an increase in mortality. HBEGF protein is
expressed only in stromal compartments of tumor specimens, with tissue
from high-stage disease having decreased stroma and HBEGF. Soluble HBEGF
increased neuroblast differentiation and decreased proliferation, while
HBEGF knockdown decreased neuroblast differentiation. In patient samples,
HBEGF expression correlates with SOX10, a neural crest differentiation
marker, and the cell cycle inhibitor, CDKN1A. Alternatively, HBEGF
negatively correlates with ASCL1, a primitive neuroectodermal marker, and
the cell cycle promoter CCND1. HSPGs, including TRIII, GPC1, GPC3, and
SDC3 further promote the differentiating effects of HBEGF treatment by
forming a complex with the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) via
glycosaminoglycan modifications, leading to activation of the Erk1/2
pathway and upregulation of the inhibitor of DNA binding transcription
factor, whose expression correlates with HBEGF in patient samples.
Inhibition of EGFR with erlotinib, lapatinib, and gefitinib diminish
HBEGF-induced differentiation.These data identify a novel member of the
pro-differentiating secretome and support the use of heparan sulfate
mimetics in neuroblastoma, while cautioning against the use of EGFR
inhibitors for neuroblastoma treatment.

