Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell multiplexed profiling of protein-level changes induced
by EGFR inhibitor gefitinib


Single-cell molecular analysis has become increasingly important in
biomedical research, especially in the field of cancer research, where
cell heterogeneity is a characteristic feature. We developed a
multiplexed single-cell protein detection assay for the C1 system that
can isolate and process 96 individual cells in parallel. The assay uses
oligonucleotide-conjugated antibodies, which produce a detectable DNA
amplicon only when they bind to the target protein. The resulting DNA
amplicons are quantified by qPCR on the Biomark HD system. Data are
analyzed using the Singular Analysis Toolset. A total of 50 antibody
binders were developed for this assay to target proteins related to
apoptosis, cell cycle, cell proliferation, tumor suppressors, biomarkers,
stem cells, growth factors and proteins associated with specific cancers,
such as breast and prostate cancers. The assay can be performed in a
48-plex format, which yields over 4,600 datapoints in two days. Assay
sensitivity and specificity were assessed using recombinant proteins and
various cell lysates. To demonstrate the usefulness of this assay, we
used it to profile the protein level changes in A431 cells treated with
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor gefitinib. EGFR is a
member of ErbB family of type I tyrosine kinases, whose overexpression
and mutations are involved in a variety of cancers. While much effort has
been made to investigate the consequences of EGFR activation or
inhibition, hardly any information is available regarding how EGFR
regulation changes protein expression in single cells. Using a
multiplexed protein assay, we discovered some interesting co-expression
patterns of proteins in single cells. We also demonstrated that TNFRSF10B
was upregulated, while MET, GATA3, BRCA1, CCNB1, Ki-67 and CCNA2 were
downregulated by gefitinib treatment. Notably, the reduction of the cell
cycle-related proteins CCNB1 and CCNA2 and the cell proliferation marker
Ki-67 was consistent with the inhibited cell growth by gefitinib. In
addition, we measured mRNA expression to investigate the association
between protein and mRNA levels in single cells. Single-cell
analysisdetermining protein changes and analyzing the correlation between
different proteins at the single-cell levelyields valuable information
that is not achievable using bulk-cell analysis.

