Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue stiffness and hypoxia regulate breast cancer stem cells
through ILK


The mechanical and chemical properties of the cellular microenvironment
can influence the phenotype of cancer cells. The hypoxic conditions
within solid breast tumors can contribute to invasiveness and the
formation of breast cancer stem cells (CSCs). Integrin-linked kinase
(ILK) is a critical mediator for mechanotransduction, a process that
converts exogenous mechanical stimuli into biochemical signals. Yet, it
is unclear how the physical properties of the tumor microenvironment,
including matrix stiffness and hypoxia, integrate to direct the formation
of the breast CSC niche.Using an innovative engineered culture model, we
found that stiff and hypoxic microenvironments activate integrin
signaling and a stem-like gene signature in breast cancer cells,
suggesting that integrin signaling, matrix mechanics and oxygen tension
cooperatively promote the formation of breast CSCs. Stiff and hypoxic
microenvironments promote integrin signaling and the expression of CSC
markers including CD44 and Nanog. Knocking down ILK reverts the CSC
phenotype of invasive breast cancer cells on stiff matrix, and abrogates
their ability to form mammospheres and colonies in soft agar. In
contrast, ectopic expression of ILK enhances CSC properties. ILK promotes
integrin signaling and the CSC phenotype through the PI3K/Akt pathway.
Stiff microenvironments promote tumor formation and metastasis in ovo.
ILK depletion significantly abrogates the tumorigenenic and metastatic
potential of invasive breast cancer cells in ovo. Importantly, we found
that breast cancer cells expressing ILK and the CSC marker CD44 were only
present in the regions of tumors predicted to be stiff in breast cancer
patient samples.Our data suggest that ILK act as an essential
mechanosensor that regulates breast CSC phenotype in response to matrix
mechanics and oxygen tension to regulate the formation of breast CSCs.

