Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 overexpression promotes angiogenesis and metastasis through
dysregulation of MMP-9 and TIMP-1 pathway


MDM2 is a multifunctional oncogene that has been associated with highly
prevalent and aggressive cancers such as colon and prostate. MDM2
promotes a negative regulation of p53 activities and thus can prevent
several of p53 protective effects including DNA repair, cell cycle
control and apoptosis. Several pharmacological blockers that target the
N-terminal domain of MDM2 leading to a disruption of MDM2-p53 interaction
are being developed. For instance, nutlin-3 is the prototype of this
family and has been shown to confine the tumor growth in many cancer
types. Recently, it has been confirmed that MDM2 also promotes metastasis
and angiogenesis through activation of number of mediators such VEGF and
HIF-1. However, mounting evidence suggests that MDM2 has p53 independent
functions. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms by which MDM2 promotes
the metastatic ability of tumors might provide an invaluable therapeutic
target and a potential prognostic biomarker. Particularly, MMP-9/TIMP-1
dysregulation has been known to be associated with cancer progression and
metastasis. This system is involved in the digestion of extracellular
matrix and thus a release of several sequestered cytokines and growth
factors such as TGF1. Among the release cytokines, TGF1 has been proven
to be involved in promoting the MMP-9 expression and consequent
metastatic events. Therefore, we hypothized that MDM2 promotes
angiogenesis and metastasis through dysregulation of TIMP-1/MMP-9
pathway. Hence, the goal of our study was to evaluate the influence of
MDM2 on tumor angiogenesis and metastatic ability through dysregulation
of TIMP-1/MMP-9 pathway. To test our hypothesis, LNCaP prostate cancer
and MDM2-transfected LNCaP-MST cell lines were used. On the other hand,
nutlin-3 at the dose of 20 M for 24 hours were used to examine the
influence of MDM2 in regulating MMP-9/TIMP-1 in LNCaP and LNCaP-MST
cells. Utilizing qPCR and western blotting techniques, we obtained data
which suggest that MDM2 positively regulates the expression of MMP-9 and
negatively regulates TIMP-1. We observed that MMP-9 overexpressed in
LNCaP-MST, and this overexpression was reversed after nutlin-3 treatment
in LNCaP-MST by 0.40 fold. Conversely, the results showed a complete
abolishment of TIMP-1 protein level in LNCaP-MST, and nutlin-3 does not
seem to impact TIMP-1 level. The data suggest that MDM2 positively
impacts MMP-9 in a p53 dependent fashion as opposed to TIMP-1, which is
negatively regulated by MDM2 independent of p53. In the same connection,
TGF1 overexpression was reversed by 0.51 fold in LNCaP-MST after nutlin-3
treatment as shown by the qPCR results. Altogether, this project would
provide a significant insight into understanding cancer metastasis
processes with respect to MDM2 activity (The financial support from the
Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale is gratefully
acknowledged).

