Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of poly-A and ribo-depletion RNA-seq library construction
protocols on transcriptomic analysis of samples from patients with
haematological malignancies


RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) is a versatile tool for characterization and
quantification of transcriptomes. It has become the main approach to
elucidate the transcriptomic landscape in leukemia. However, the
knowledge about the advantages and disadvantages of RNA-seq in clinical
decision-making and the suitability of mainstream RNA-seq library
preparation methods for leukemia research are still in their infancy.
Here, we have generated and sequenced polyadenylation selection (PA) and
ribo-depletion (RD) RNA-seq libraries from acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patient samples and compared their
fusion-gene, differential expression and related pathways and variant
discovery abilities.Our analysis demonstrated that the RD protocol
provided, on average, 5% more uniquely mapped reads than the PA protocol
(81.5% of reads). Overall, 60%, 35%, and 3% of the reads in the RD
libraries mapped to exonic, intronic, and intergenic regions,
respectively. The corresponding numbers in the PA libraries were 76%,
21%, 3%, suggesting that PA captures more mature RNAs than the RD
preparation and provides a higher read coverage for exon regions. The RD
preparation was also marginally better in removing ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs)
than the PA protocol. Regarding transcript quantification, both RD and PA
produced fairly equivalent measures of RNA abundance. The patient-matched
PA and RD libraries showed a high correlation (r = 0.96) that was
slightly less than that seen between technical replicates (r = 0.98) but
slightly more than that seen between library-matched sample from patients
with the same disease (r = 0.93), indicating that inter-patient variance
is the main source of variance in RNA-seq studies. Interestingly, based
on a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis using known
leukemia gene signatures or gene targets of 17 clinically used drugs in
AML and ALL treatment, the PA is more optimal than the RD method for
disease classification (area under curve 0.69 vs. 0.65) and personalized
cancer therapy guidance (AUC of 0.73 vs, 0.71). Finally, both methods
equally detected known fusion genes, which were supported with high
number of reads on fusionjunctions. However, in the case of lowly
expressed fusion transcripts, only the RD method was able to detect
fusions.In conclusion, both protocols produced consistence measures and
were of similar usability. However, RD preparation captured more
transcriptomic features and was more suitable for fusion-gene discovery,
which may be of clinical relevance for sub-typing leukemia patients. The
PA method on the other hand had higher overall sensitivity and
specificity in gene expression analyses and was, based on our results,
more suitable than RD for clinical classification and drug treatment
guidance.

