Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK1/2 inhibitors with distinct modes of inhibition confer
different response profiles in KRAS mutant cancers


The clinical benefit of targeting the MAPK pathway is demonstrated by the
success of RAF and MEK inhibitors in the treatment of melanoma. However,
response to such agents is short-lived due to the onset of resistance
mechanisms that result in reactivation of ERK signalling. Additionally,
many BRAF- and KRAS-mutant cancers exhibit de novo resistance. As the
direct targeting of ERK may overcome the limitations of RAF or MEK
inhibitors, there are several ERK1/2 inhibitors in development. SCH772984
(SCH, Merck-Schering) is an example of an ERK1/2 inhibitor that in
addition to inhibiting ERK catalytic activity also inhibits the
phosphorylation of residues within the ERK activation loop. Several
ERK1/2 inhibitors have been described that inhibit ERK catalytic activity
without modulating ERK phosphorylation e.g GDC-0994 (GDC, Genentech).
Here we aim to characterise the biological relevance of the different
modes of ERK inhibition.We investigated the biochemical mechanism by
which SCH inhibits ERK phosphorylation and demonstrated that it prevents
the phosphorylation of ERK by MEK (T202/Y204), but does not affect MEK
activity.We characterised the effects of the distinct modes of ERK
inhibition on ERK substrates, cellular pERK levels, pathway feedback
activation and sensitivities of cell lines with different genetic
backgrounds.In BRAFV600E-mutant cells e.g A375 (melanoma) and Colo205
(colorectal), 16 hr treatment with SCH and GDC significantly inhibited
the phosphorylation of RSK (ERK substrate). SCH significantly inhibited
ERK phosphorylation, whereas GDC did not modulate pERK levels. Neither
compound induced pathway feedback activation. In proliferation assays
A375 and Colo205 cells had remarkably similar sensitivities to SCH (EC50
40 nM and 30 nM, respectively) and GDC (EC50 = 140 nM in both).In
contrast to BRAF-mutant cells, SCH and GDC treatment conferred pMEK
induction in the KRAS-mutant cell line HCT116 (while still significantly
inhibiting RSK phosphorylation). This is likely to be attributable to the
feedback-driven C-RAF activation commonly associated with MAPK pathway
inhibition in KRAS-mutant cells. In addition to pMEK, GDC also conferred
an induction of pERK. However, SCH overcame pathway feedback and
inhibited the ERK phosphorylation. The inhibition of pathway feedback
conferred by SCH was associated with increased sensitivity of HCT116
cells to SCH (EC50 = 30 nM) compared to GDC (EC50 = 1.1 M). In a cell
panel screen comprising 25 BRAF-mutant and 63 KRAS-mutant cell lines, SCH
and GDC had similar activity in BRAF-mutant cell lines. However, although
KRAS-mutant cell lines were sensitive to SCH, they were largely resistant
to GDC. These data suggest that due to their ability to overcome MAPK
inhibitor-induced pathway feedback, ERK inhibitors that also inhibit the
phosphorylation of ERK would be more effective in KRAS-mutant cancer than
those that inhibit ERK activity alone.

