Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MCPIP1 affects growth, angiogenesis and metastasis of clear cell
renal cell carcinoma


IntroductionClear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common
type of renal cell carcinomas. During diagnosis, metastasis is found in
over 30% of patients. Despite conducted targeted therapy, survival time
of patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma ranges from three months
to two years. Recent reports indicate an important role of inflammatory
and angiogenic processes in the ccRCC development. Monocyte Chemotactic
Protein-1 Induced Protein (MCPIP-1) is a novel multifunctional modulator
involved in the regulation of inflammatory response, apoptosis and
angiogenesis. However its role in tumorigenesis is unknown.AimThe main
objective of our study was to determine the role of anti-inflammatory
protein MCPIP1 in growth, angiogenesis and metastasis of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma.Materials and methodsccRCC cell lines (Caki-1 and Caki-2)
were transduced with MCPIP1 shRNA and control shRNA lentiviral vectors
and selected with puromycin. The level of genes and protein involved in
proliferation, angiogenesis and metastasis were studied by real-time PCR,
western blot and flow cytometry. Chemotaxis and invasion assay were
performed to check migration and invasion. To study the level of
proangiogenic factors ELISA and LUMINEX assays were used. NOD-SCID mice
were used in in vivo experiments.ResultsOur study shows that MCPIP1
downregulation increases proliferation rate, survival and migration
properties of ccRCC cells. Additionally reduction of MCPIP1 protein level
increases the expression of pro-angiogenic factors such as SDF1, VEGF and
IL8 what was paralleled by an increased migration of endothelial cells
toward conditioned media from MCPIP1 deficient ccRCC cells. We also
demonstrate, that silencing of MCPIP1 protein in ccRCC leads to an
increase in tumor growth in vivo, after subcutaneous injection of
NOD-SCID mice. We observed a significant increase in the number and the
area of blood vessels in tumors formed by cells with downregulation of
MCPIP1 and greater ability to metastasize to the lungs.ConclusionsWe
showed that reduction of MCPIP1 protein level in ccRCC cells is crucial
for tumor growth, blood vessel formation in the emerging tumor and
metastasis. Moreover, ccRCC cells with downregulation of MCPIP1 secreted
factors and proteins essential for the process of angiogenesis. Obtained
results may contribute to increased understanding of the biology of clear
cell renal cell carcinoma, which in the future may help in identifying
new, more effective therapeutic purposes or improving existing
ones.AcknowledgementThis study was supported by research grant from the
National Science Centre to KM 2013/09/D/NZ/00249 and grant from the
Jagiellonian University BMN 7/2015. Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics
and Biotechnology of the Jagiellonian University is a partner of the
Leading National Research Center (KNOW) supported by the Ministry of
Science and Higher Education

