Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of quaternary amine linkers for ADCs: Application to
auristatin E and tubulysin


The recent clinical success of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) has
spawned an increased effort to identify new technologies, and the
development of new drug-linker chemistry is vital to expand the scope of
conjugatable payloads. The tertiary amine functional group is a common
structural motif present in many bioactive compounds, including
antimitotics of the auristatin and tubulysin classes. Traditionally,
conjugation of tertiary amines required drug derivatization or
modification to remove an N-alkyl group, thus creating a readily
conjugatable secondary amine. However, identifying appropriate
modifications that do not compromise the activity of the drug is
frequently time consuming and often unsuccessful. To eliminate the need
for such structural modifications, we sought a method for stable
conjugation and facile release through the tertiary amine functional
group by creating linkers with a quaternary amine point of attachment. To
validate the linker strategy, quaternary amine-based cleavable linkers
bearing auristatin E were synthesized and evaluated as ADCs. The
conjugates were stable in rodent plasma, and were potent and
immunologically specific both in vitro and in vivo in a Hodgkin lymphoma
xenograft model. A second application of this technology has been
demonstrated with tubulysins, another class of potent antimitotics
containing a tertiary amine at the N-terminus. A cleavable quaternary
amine linker containing a tubulysin analog was synthesized and ADCs were
prepared and evaluated. The tubulysin conjugates were potent and
immunologically specific across a panel of cancer cell lines, including
multiple MDR-positive lines. Furthermore, the tubulysin conjugate
displayed bystander activity in an in vitro co-culture assay. The
quaternary amine linkers represent an advance in linker technology and
will enable the evaluation of drug classes previously inaccessible as
ADCs.

