Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic biomarkers for pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has the lowest 5-year-survival
rate of common cancers (Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has the
lowest 5-year-survival rate of common cancers (< 7%), but despite
intensive research efforts over the past several decades, its dismal
prognosis has barely improved. Recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have linked several genetic factors with pancreatic cancer, but
there is generally poor overlap in the results from such studies,
presumably due to population heterogeneity. In this study, we collected
previously published pancreatic risk loci from multiple GWAS studies, and
correlated these loci with clinical information gathered on a
well-characterized cohort of 148 PDAC patients from the University Health
Network in Toronto Canada, and several other North American hospitals,
which have undergone whole-genome sequencing. Using this cohort, we
attempted to identify prognostic genomic biomarkers by correlating the
germline genomic alterations observed in our cohort to overall survival
(OS). By understanding the mechanism of germline variants that alter OS,
we hope to develop insights that will lead to improved detection and
therapy for PDAC patients.Among the 67 published risk loci we tested
using a multivariate Cox proportional hazard model, we found a strong
positive association of the single nucleotide polymorphism rs4785367
(RefSNP alleles: C/T on forward strand; MAF = 0.474) with overall
survival of PDAC donors: HR = 0.426; CI = 0.268 - 0.686; p-value =
0.00029. A more detailed analysis at the genotype level revealed that the
presence of the homozygous minor allele has a stronger effect than either
the heterozygous or homozygous major allele. The SNP falls within the
intergenic region between the ZNF423 and TMEM188 genes, within the exon 2
of lncRNA RP11-305A4.3 and overlaps a CTCF regulatory domain. Preliminary
gene expression analysis from RNA sequencing data on a subset of PDAC
donors (n = 28) shows that patients carrying the minor allele have
significant higher TMEM188 expression than of the major type (p-value =
0.012), suggesting that this allele may influence the course of PDAC via
TMEM188 activity. A recent study linked the gene product to activation of
NK cells, which in turns increases the defense mechanism against the
pathogens, infections and transformed tumors. These findings suggest a
possible molecular mechanism influencing the course of PDAC. We are also
exploring the effect of the presence of the minor allele on the
regulatory CTCF region, by applying an integrative pipeline for risk SNP
analysis to pancreatic cancer. This will possibly detect the effect on
the NANOG motif binding and/or on CTCF looping.In summary, the present
study detected the rs4785367 as a prognostic biomarker for pancreatic
cancer, with the novelty of increased TMEM188 gene expression being
linked to the presence of the alternate allele in PDAC patients. Further
investigations on this and on assessing the effect of the polymorphism on
the regulatory CTCF feature are in progress.

