Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the anthrax toxin receptor (ANTXR1) as the high
affinity cellular receptor for Seneca Valley Virus (SVV)


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an extremely aggressive and almost
universally lethal form of lung cancer, which accounts for approximately
15% of all lung cancer diagnoses annually. Novel and more effective
therapies are desperately needed for SCLC, as the standard treatment has
not improved in almost three decades. Recently, oncolytic viruses have
shown strong anti-cancer efficacies in tumors with high levels of
selectivity for cancer cells.The oncolytic picornavirus, Seneca Valley
Virus (SVV), has previously been shown to infect and lyse cancer cells
with neuroendocrine features, notably SCLC and pediatric brain tumors.
Pre-clinical mouse models and early phase clinical trials have confirmed
the ability of SVV to home directly to the tumor through the vasculature,
specifically infect tumor cells without affecting normal cells, and
replicate to high viral titers intratumorally even after the production
of neutralizing antibodies. However, the clinical development of SVV has
been hindered by the inability to identify patients who would benefit
from SVV virotherapy because essential host proteins for viral entry,
including the cellular receptor, have not been characterized.Using genome
wide loss-of-function CRISPR screens in the SCLC cell line H446 and
haploid cell line HAP1, we identified the anthrax toxin receptor 1
(ANTXR1) as an essential host protein for SVV. Interestingly, ANTXR1 is
also one of the receptors for the toxin of Bacillus anthracis and has
been previously described as being upregulated in tumor endothelial
cells. Secondary screens performed in both cell lines confirmed gene
knockout of ANTXR1 conferred resistance to SVV. We established that in
multiple permissive SCLC and pediatric cancer cell lines that loss of
ANTXR1 protein expression using CRISPR gene knockout leads to a loss of
SVV permissivity. Re-expression of ANTXR1 in ANTXR1 knockout cell lines
was sufficient to rescue SVV permissivity. Furthermore, the expression of
the ANTXR1 protein in two non-permissive SCLC cell lines led to a
conversion in SVV permissivity. A direct and high affinity interaction
was confirmed between SVV and ANTXR1 using co-immunoprecipitation assays.
Additionally, we discovered that ANTXR1 is the major binding determinant
for SVV on cells using a binding assay with fluorescently labeled SVV.
Lastly we determined using previously published gene expression data from
the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) that non-permissive lines which
do express ANTXR1 can be explained by the presence of an intact and
active innate immune response pathway. These findings identify ANTXR1 as
the high-affinity cellular receptor for SVV. Furthermore, these data
identify a predictive biomarker for SVV permissivity that could lead to
defined selection criteria for subsequent clinical trials testing SVV in
both SCLC and pediatric brain cancer patients.

