Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New small molecules targeting MYC:MAX interactions that inhibits
tumor cell growth in a MYC-dependent manner


Deregulated expression of MYC family oncogenes MYC, MYCN and MYCL (here
collectively referred to as MYC) occurs in many types of human tumors,
and is often associated with aggressive tumor development and poor
prognosis. In mouse tumor models, inactivation of MYC often leads to
tumor regression with well-tolerated side effects, suggesting that MYC is
a potential and suitable target for anti-cancer therapy. At present there
are no drugs targeting MYC in the clinic, and transcription factors like
MYC are considered difficult to target. However, MYC function is strictly
dependent on interaction with cofactors, and targeting such interaction
may be a plausible way to combat Myc. We have used cell-based screens
utilizing Bimolecular Fluorescence Complementation (BiFC) and split
Gaussia luciferase (G-Luc) to identify small molecule inhibitors of the
interaction between MYC and its essential partner MAX. Several potent
MYC:MAX interaction inhibitors have been identified in these screens and
have been validated by other protein-protein interactions (PPI) assays
such as in situ Proximity Ligation Assay (isPLA), Fluorescence Resonance
Energy Transfer (FRET), Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) and
coimmunoprecipitations. In general the identified molecules fall into two
categories: those that inhibit MYC:MAX interactions not only in cells but
also in vitro using purified MYC and MAX, and those that inhibit the
interaction in cells but not in vitro, suggesting an indirect mode of
action. Molecules of both categories inhibit cell growth and viability of
a variety of tumor cells in culture with high efficacy in a MYC-dependent
manner. So far, one of the molecules have been utilized for cancer
treatment in mouse tumor models and found to significantly inhibit tumor
growth and improve survival. These molecules have the potential to become
important tools in the studies of MYC function in cells and in vivo as
well as potentially basis for drug development for treatment of
MYC-driven tumors. We have thus provided proof of principle that our
screening systems are able to identify potent PPI inhibitors and we are
at present setting up similar systems to screen for inhibitors of other
MYC:cofactor interactions of relevance for specific tumor types.

