Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a specific RNA aptamer targeting non-small cell
lung cancer by in vivo SELEX


In vivo selection of the RNA aptamers by systematic evolution of ligands
by exponential enrichment (SELEX) has demonstrated a great targeting tool
for diagnostics and treatments in the clinic. In this study, in vivo
selection of specific RNA aptamer for cells was established through the
use of tumor-bearing xenograft mice injected with human non-small cell
lung cancer NCI-H460 cells. Briefly, a synthetic DNA pool was first
transcribed in vitro using mutant T7 RNA polymerase (Y639F), which is
capable of recognizing 2-fluoropyrimidines to produce nuclease-resistant
RNA. PEGylated RNA library was then constructed to produce stable PEG-RNA
molecules. A cDNA library was produced and was further transcribed for an
RNA pool. The enriched nuclease-resistant PEG-RNA pool was re-injected
into NCI-H460 tumor-bearing mice again. After multiple cycle selections
in vivo, the cDNA pool was cloned into T-vector for sequencing analysis
for enriched RNA motifs.On round 8 of SELEX selection, an enriched RNA
sequence (RA16) was identified at a frequency of 21.2%. The RA16
preparation was further enriched up to 94.7% on round 11. To characterize
the specificity in vitro, NCI-H460 cells, along with additional tumor
cells or normal control cells, were incubated with Cy3-labeled RA16 or
the initial RNA library. The specific fluorescent binding was observed
for HCI-H460 and H1299 cells, but not for HEK293T, Hela, and H226 cells.
Binding affinity (Kd 92 nM) for RA16 was determined by flow cytometry
using FITC-labeled RA16 to HCI-H460 cells. Meanwhile, cryosections from
various organs of tumor-bearing mice also revealed strong binding of RA16
with HCI-H460 tumors but only slightly with lung tissue. No any
significant binding was detected in other tissues of tumor-bearing mice
or in any normal tissues of control mice.Furthermore, a
quantitative-RT-PCR was performed to trap specific RA16 sequence from
various tissues of control or tumor-bearing mice. The selected RNA
aptamer RA16 or the initial RNA library was injected into tumor-bearing(n
= 4) and normal control mice (n = 4). Total RNAs were extracted from the
mouse tumor or from heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney 3.5 hrs post
injection. There was an enrichment of 44.33.6-folds for the injected RA16
in mouse tumors treated by RA16 preparation comparing with mouse tumors
treated by the initial RNA library. No significant enrichment of RA16 was
detected in any other tissues of tumor-bearing mice or tissues from
normal control mice. Significantly, in vivo tumor imaging study with
Cy5.5-labeled RA16 showed that aptamer RA16 was gradually migrated toward
tumor site and enriched with time at tumor area in mice. Our studies thus
strongly suggests that RNA aptamer RA16 was specifically selected for
targeting human NCI-H460 cells, as well as xenograft tumor tissues with
high affinity both in vitro and in vivo.

