Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel linker to enable alcohol-containing payloads for the
preparation of antibody-drug conjugates


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have emerged as important therapeutics
for treating cancer as evidenced by the recent FDA approval of
brentuximab vedotin Adcetris and trastuzumab emtansineKadcyla, and the
large number of ADCs (>35) currently in clinical trials. ADCs are
composed of two core units: the targeting antibody and the drug-linker.
The drug-linker typically consists of a cytotoxic payload, a moiety for
covalent attachment to the antibody, and a conditionally cleavable linker
that is stable in circulation but releases the cytotoxic payload upon
internalization into a target cell. The released payload will possess a
residual chemical functional group that is used for attachment of the
drug to the cleavable linker. Functional groups that have been exploited
within the ADC field for this purpose include amines (primary and
secondary), thiols, and carboxylic acids. Unfortunately, many potential
ADC payloads do not possess any of these functional group handles that
allow for stable conjugation and release of the drug in an unmodified
form. Use of these payloads often requires modification of the drug
structure to introduce a handle for conjugation. To avoid this, we have
developed new linker chemistry, the methylene-alkoxy-carbamate (MAC),
which enables direct conjugation of drugs through alcohol functional
groups. Such groups are present on a diverse array of synthetic drugs and
cytotoxic natural products, thus, expanding the potential chemical space
available for payload selection. As proof-of-concept, we have linked
Auristatin E through the secondary alcohol of the norephedrine residue
and characterized the stability and in vivo activity of the resulting
ADCs. To further define the potential applicability of the MAC unit, we
have examined its stability and release properties with a series of model
systems including primary, secondary, and tertiary alcohols as well as a
phenol. We have also explored the effect of substitution of the MAC
nitrogen on these properties. This novel linker chemistry is currently
being applied to new payloads that were inaccessible with previous
technology.

