Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxicity profile of contemporaneous PD-1 inhibitor immunotherapy
and radiotherapy


Purpose/Objectives: PD-1 inhibitors are approved for treatment of
metastatic melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and under
active investigation for treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). Prior studies suggest that the majority of patients with these
malignancies are likely to receive palliative radiotherapy at some point
during their care. Growing preclinical and clinical evidence suggests
that if delivered optimally, radiotherapy and immunotherapy may
synergize. However, there is currently limited data on the safety of
contemporaneous treatment with PD-1 inhibitors and radiotherapy and how
this combination affects the risk of immune-related or
radiotherapy-related adverse events. We aimed to evaluate toxicity in
patients with metastatic melanoma, RCC, and NSCLC following
contemporaneous treatment with PD-1 inhibitors and
radiotherapy.Materials/Methods: We retrospectively reviewed records from
patients with metastatic melanoma, RCC, and NSCLC cancer treated with
PD-1 inhibitors and palliative radiotherapy. To account for delayed
immune/radiation-mediated effects, patients were included who received
radiotherapy either within 75 days prior to a PD-1 inhibitor or within 75
days after. Patient demographics, treatment parameters, and
immune-related (ir-AE) and radiotherapy-related adverse events were
recorded using CTCAE v4.0.Results: Fifteen patients (7 melanoma, 4 RCC, 4
NSCLC) underwent 23 courses of palliative radiotherapy and a median of 8
doses of PD-1 inhibition between 2011-2014. Median follow up from date of
metastatic diagnosis was 32 months. Radiotherapy courses included both
brain (n = 6)/non-brain (n = 17) and fraction sizes ranging from 3-8 Gy
(total doses 8-36 Gy). Radiation was given 19-43 days prior to PD-1
inhibition (n = 7) or 30-75 days afterwards (n = 19). One patient
completed a course of radiotherapy the same day as receiving PD-1
inhibition. Any grade immune-related adverse events were observed in 3
patients (20%). Only 1 of those 3 patients who had received radiation to
the skull base was thought to have ir-AEs likely attributable to the PD-1
inhibitor (Grade 2 pericarditis, anemia, and rash). Radiation-related
adverse events were observed in 1 patient (7%), who developed moderate
mucositis and dysphagia following submandibular radiation to a dose of 30
Gy. No patients developed pneumonitis, despite 7 patients (47%) receiving
radiation with fields that partially irradiated the lung.Conclusions: In
this early clinical experience, the contemporaneous receipt of PD-1
inhibitors and palliative radiotherapy did not seem to confer an
increased risk of toxicity beyond the expected level associated with each
independently. Thus, prospective studies to explore combined treatment
with these modalities would likely be safe if undertaken.

