Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer target enrichment panels using advanced molecular inversion
probes (MIPs) with ability to reduce amplification bias and detect low
frequency variants


Next generation sequencing (NGS) of enriched targets is increasingly
being used to discover and track mutations in genes implicated in cancer.
Amplicon-based target enrichment approaches are frequently used with
cancer samples because there is no sample library preparation needed and
primer-based approaches are typically efficient with sequencing reads.
However, traditional amplicon approaches don't scale up well and may have
PCR and coverage uniformity bias. As the number of samples is increased,
a fast, reliable, and cost-effective target enrichment method is a
critical tool for mutation discovery and tracking.Existing target
enrichment approaches based on molecular inversion probes (MIPs) have
presented challenges with probe design and dependability. We have
developed HEAT-Seq (High Efficiency Amplification of Targets for
Sequencing) using advanced versions of MIPs which enable library-free
enrichment, improved scalability, and the ability to remove PCR
duplicates. We have also developed companion command line software which
trims primer sequences and removes PCR duplicates. This software uses
community standard file formats (FASTQ, SAM/BAM) and is intended to be
compatible with common best practice NGS analysis pipelines.Here we
describe two HEAT-Seq cancer panels which have been optimized to improve
coverage uniformity and probe reliability.The HEAT-Seq Oncology Panel
targets both strands for all protein coding bases in 60 cancer-related
genes where possible. The target for this design is 245 kb. With 2
million 276bp reads for each of 8 replicates, we observe an on-target
read rate of >95%. After duplicate removal, the% of target bases with at
least 20x coverage is >90%. We observe uniformity (percent of probes > =
20% of the target mean) of 90%.The HEAT-Seq Ultra Hot-Spot Panel is a
mutation-focused design that provides ultra-deep sequencing coverage
capability for sequencing of mutation hot-spots in 53 cancer-related
genes to detect low frequency variants in heterogeneous samples. The
target for this design is 30.5 kb. With 500,000 276bp reads for each of
24 replicates, we observe an on-target read rate of 80%. After duplicate
removal, the% of target bases with at least 20x coverage is >95%. We
observe uniformity (percent of probes > = 20% of the target mean) of 95%.
We also observed detection of validated low frequency variants down to
1%.In summary, both panels have been shown to capture cancer-related
genes and target regions at depths sufficient to identify and track
genomic variants.

