Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying differential dependency networks accounting for
response to NEDD8-inhibitor in large-scale cancer cell line data


The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) houses molecular profiles of 800
human long term cell lines spanning several different histological types
of cancer. In addition, Cancer Therapeutics Response Portal (CTRP)
provides drug response measurements for 481 small molecules. Integration
of these data enables investigation of the molecular correlates of drug
response (sensitivity and resistance). In this current effort, we studied
the NEDDylation small molecule inhibitor, MLN4924, in the context of
genomic data to uncover novel mechanistic correlates of drug response
across the panel of cell lines. We recently reported (Jung and Kim 2016
NAR) development of a robust computational method that shows promise to
identify novel insights when applied to multi-dimensional data sets as
outlined above. The Evaluation of Differential Dependency (EDDY) employs
Bayesian networks to represent statistically distinct differences in
relationships between genes within a specific biological pathway as
queried between two conditions, in this instance, cell lines that are
sensitive and those that are non-sensitive to MLN4924. While EDDY has
been successfully employed in the analysis of specific diseases such as
TCGA adrenocortical carcinoma, its statistical rigor incurred a
prohibitive computational load to assess conditional differences across
larger datasets. Recent computational enhancements to EDDY enable
processing of larger datasets in reasonable time while maintaining
sensitivity. The capability of analyzing broader pan-cancer datasets such
as CCLE has enabled EDDY to become more capable in identifying general
trends across disease subtypes. Specifically, we demonstrate the enhanced
EDDY in analysis of MLN4924 response across the CCLE data set combined
with CTRP data set.Initial outcomes from EDDY point to both anticipated
and unanticipated biological determinants of response. For example, it is
noted that specific oncogenic pathways, such as those centered on PIK3CA,
appear to show differential dependencies in the sensitive and
non-sensitive cell lines. We also observe genes and candidate pathways
related to apoptotic mechanisms that may reveal mechanistic insights to
predicting drug response. Specifically, genes and pathways associated
with certain apoptotic mechanisms around mitochondrial proteins and
glutathione peroxidase may serve as unique determinants of drug response.
Multidimensional data analyzed by EDDY uncovers candidate mechanisms of
vulnerability to specific small molecule inhibitors, which may guide
development of predictive models for treatment planning when using agents
with highly context-dependent efficacies. Supported by NIH U01CA168397

