Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hotair promotes glioma cell cycle through a b-catenin mediated
mRNA network


Background:LncRNA hotair is an oncogene that involves in the progression
of several cancers. Previously we and others have reported that hotair
promotes glioblastoma progression by regulating cell cycle. However,
further mechanism still needs to be explored. The wnt/b-catenin signaling
pathway is a crucial factor in the development of many cancers. B-catenin
is a nuclear transcription factor that regulates multiple genes involved
in cell proliferation, survival and EMT that contribute to glioma
development.Methods:Positive correlation genes of hotair were picked up
from CGGA (Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas) database by bioinformatics
analysis. Real Time PCR is used to test the mRNA expression levels in U87
cells and astrocytes. Western blot is emplored to determine PKM2
expression after knocking down hotair. Further more, and nude mouse
glioma intracranial model is employed to examine in vivo impact of hotair
on GBM.Results:Hotair is a cell cycle related lncRNA as previously
reported. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that various genes play
important roles on cell cycle are positively correlated with hotair.
Theses genes might be the executors of hotair on cell cycle regulating.
We constructed a top 18 hotair-related genes network by connectivity. To
test the hypothesis, we knock down hotair expression in U87 cells, and
found out that FOXM1, CCNA2, CEP55, CENEP, CCNB2, HMMR, NCAPG, NUSAP were
down-regulated significantly. In addition, overexpression of hotair in
astrocytes could upregulate the mRNA of those genes. To further explore
the regulatory mechanism, we analyed the promoter of these
hotair-regulated genes and found out b-catenin/TCF4 binding site on all
of them. This indicated that hotair might upregulate cell cycle
associated genes through b-catenin/TCF4 pathway. FH535 is an inhibitor of
wnt/b-catenin. The mRNA expression of these genes could be suppressed by
FH535 treatment, which confirms the promoter analysis. It is reported
that PKM2 could promote b-catenin nuclear translocation. Interestingly,
we found out that binding site of miR-330 exists on both of hotair and
PKM2 mRNA. Knocking-down of hotair inhibited PKM2 mRNA and protein
expression in U87, U87vIII, U251 and LN229 cells. Further more, hotair
siRNA could inhibit glioma growth in vivo.Conclusion:Our data indicated
that hotair promotes glioma cell cycle through a b-catenin mediated mRNA
network, and hotair could be a a biomarker and therapeutic target in
glioblastoma. Meanwhile, there are still a lot of work to be done.

