Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B-Catenin gene expression and its mutations: promising and key
component in the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


INTRODUCTION AND AIM: Wnt signaling pathway plays a critical role in stem
cell self-renewal and proliferation of leukemic stem cells and its
association with the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has
also been described. Beta-Catenin, a key regulator of Wnt signaling is
highly expressed in cancers. Its role has been recently documented in AML
however its prognostic significance in AML is not clear. The present
study was carried to determine the potential prognostic implications of
B-catenin expression and mutations in de novo AML patients.METHODS: We
performed the gene expression of B-Catenin and its mutations analysis in
exon 3. We investigated the expression of B-Catenin gene in bone marrow
and/or blood samples by quantitative PCR using SYBR-Green chemistry and
analysis was done by CT Method. 18S RNA and B2M genes were used as
reference genes. B-Catenin mutations analysis was by done direct DNA
Sanger sequencing.RESULTS: Total 117 de novo non M3 AML patients and 40
healthy controls were included for the gene expression and analyzed for
their clinicopathologic and prognostic significance. Median age for
entire cohort (n = 117) was 17.0 years (Range 1-60 years) with
male:female ratio of (1.8:1). FLT3-ITD mutation was positive in 11 (9.5%)
patients. Only 4% of AML patients showed genetic alterations in exon 3 of
B-catenin and no significant correlation with base line characteristics.
B-catenin showed a significantly increased mRNA expression with a 5 fold
rise as compared to healthy controls (pINTRODUCTION AND AIM: Wnt
signaling pathway plays a critical role in stem cell self-renewal and
proliferation of leukemic stem cells and its association with the
pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has also been described.
Beta-Catenin, a key regulator of Wnt signaling is highly expressed in
cancers. Its role has been recently documented in AML however its
prognostic significance in AML is not clear. The present study was
carried to determine the potential prognostic implications of B-catenin
expression and mutations in de novo AML patients.METHODS: We performed
the gene expression of B-Catenin and its mutations analysis in exon 3. We
investigated the expression of B-Catenin gene in bone marrow and/or blood
samples by quantitative PCR using SYBR-Green chemistry and analysis was
done by CT Method. 18S RNA and B2M genes were used as reference genes.
B-Catenin mutations analysis was by done direct DNA Sanger
sequencing.RESULTS: Total 117 de novo non M3 AML patients and 40 healthy
controls were included for the gene expression and analyzed for their
clinicopathologic and prognostic significance. Median age for entire
cohort (n = 117) was 17.0 years (Range 1-60 years) with male:female ratio
of (1.8:1). FLT3-ITD mutation was positive in 11 (9.5%) patients. Only 4%
of AML patients showed genetic alterations in exon 3 of B-catenin and no
significant correlation with base line characteristics. B-catenin showed
a significantly increased mRNA expression with a 5 fold rise as compared
to healthy controls (p<0.05). B-catenin over expression was significantly
associated with poor survival at median followup of 17 months and having
less CR rates (p = 0.03). There was no significant correlation of
B-catenin over expression vs baseline clinical characteristics like Hb,
TLC, Platelets, Cyto group (p = 0.11), blast percentage (p = 0.28),
Flt3-itd mutations (p = 0.42).CONCLUSION: These results provide the
evidence for WNT signaling activation existence in AML patients and
suggest that B-Catenin could be the key component in the pathogenesis and
can be prognostically important marker in AML. However B-catenin
expression in larger cohort of samples and with longer follow-up is
required to confirm our findings.

