Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preserving genital nerve function in prostate cancer: imaging with
a molecular imaging agent


Purpose: To establish proof-of-concept for the use of a molecular nerve
imaging agent in demonstrating nerve tissue at risk during prostate
surgery, and thus preventing iatrogenic sexual dysfunction. Erectile
Dysfunction (ED) is a common complication of all forms of prostate cancer
treatment, with incidence varying from 13-97% depending on the series
quoted. There is broad agreement that treatment related damage to the
neurovascular bundles is a root cause of the condition, with strong
indications from many studies that preservation of the neurovascular
bundles avoids post-treatment ED. The goal of this study is to use a
novel neural imaging agent based on the non-toxic Tetanus Toxin
C-fragment (TTc) to allow the visualization of the anatomy of the genital
nerves, thus facilitating nerve-sparing therapies.Materials and methods:
C57 Black male mice were anaesthetized (1-2% isofluorane/oxygen) and
injected with 40 g/10 l of fluorescently labeled TTc790 in the tunica
albuginea of the left corpus cavernosum. Animals were imaged live over a
period of 3 hours post injection with a Xenogen IVIS 200 small animal
imager. Animals were then euthanized, and the complete male reproductive
system was surgically exposed and imaged ex-vivo with a Zeiss AxioZoom16
dissection microscope. The cavernosal nerves, prostatic tissue with
intact nerve plexi were dissected and prepared for cryo-sectioning
followed by fluorescent immuno-histology using standard methods.Results:
En bloc excision of the prostate with the penis allowed imaging of the
genital nerves using the retrograde transported neural marker, TTc790. We
noted fluorescent TTc-related signal uptake along the expected course of
the nerve tract ipsilateral to the injection site, and were able to
clearly demonstrate the pelvic ganglion within the capsule of the
prostate. Immuno-histological assessment with post cryo-sectioning
confirmed our surgical microscopy findings, including our demonstration
of the pelvic ganglion.Conclusions: We demonstrate the use of TTc790 as a
nerve imaging agent for showing the anatomy of the cavernosal nerves and
pelvic ganglion complex by intra-operative fluorescent imaging. This
suggests that, with further work, image guidance could be provided to
physicians and surgeons to spare these nerves during prostate carcinoma
treatments, allowing the preservation of genital nerve function and
improving quality of life in prostate cancer survivors.

