Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanovaccine : A novel immunotherapeutic strategy to treat bladder
cancer


Introduction Bladder cancer is a significant healthcare problem.
According to the National Cancer Institute, bladder cancer is the 6th
most common type of cancer and represents 4.5% of total cancer patients
in the U.S. Intravesical therapy with Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG)
vaccine is the gold standard for treating non-muscle invasive bladder
cancer. However, BCG has several drawbacks. First, BCG is a tuberculosis
vaccine, which often fails to trigger immune response against bladder
cancer. This leads to low therapeutic efficacy and high recurrence rates.
Secondly, intravesical injection is painful and causes urinary side
effects, including burning sensation and increased frequency of
urination. Therefore, a therapeutic regimen that can specifically treat
bladder cancer and can be administered through other routes is highly
needed. Immunotherapeutic strategy using nanoparticle can fulfill these
needs. Polymeric nanoparticles encapsulating an immune adjuvant and
co-injected with a tumor-associated antigen can trigger robust immune
response against bladder cancer. Moreover, nanoparticles formulated using
the FDA approved polymer poly (lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) is approved
for human use and can be injected subcutaneously.Methods Nanoparticles
encapsulating a novel imidazoquinoline derivative that activates both
Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 7 and 8 was used as vaccine adjuvants. These
novel nanoparticle-encapsulated TLR agonists were used in combination
with a model antigen, ovalbumin, to create the vaccine. This is referred
to as nanovaccine in this study. C57BL/6 mice were vaccinated
subcutaneously with 1-5 doses of the nanovaccine or various control
treatments. Two days after the final vaccination dose, mice were
sacrificed and organs were harvested. Splenocytes and lymphocytes were
analyzed using flow cytometry.Results Nanovaccine improved dendritic cell
activation in the lymph node. Frequency of co-stimulatory molecule CD80+
dendritic cells was two fold higher in the lymph node of vaccinated
group. Greater activation of T cells and increased frequency of
antigen-specific T cells were found in the spleen of vaccinated group.
Antigen-specific CD44+ CD8 Tcell frequency was two fold higher in the
vaccinated group. Nanovaccine elevated the frequency of both
antigen-specific CD4 T cells and antigen-specific CD44+ CD4 T cells by
ten fold.Conclusion Nanovaccine generated antigen-specific immune
response that can maximize the efficacy of immunotherapy. Moreover,
nanoparticles were physically stable and remained active after
subcutaneous injection, which can overcome the administration
difficulties of current BCG therapy. Next step is to generate nanovaccine
with bladder tumor-specific antigen or using whole cell lysate and test
the therapeutic efficacy in tumor bearing mice. Generation of a bladder
cancer-specific immune response will allow stronger and durable
inhibition of tumor growth and diminished risk of progression.

