Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic deconvolution of kinase inhibitor profiles identifies
synthetic lethal targets in ERBB2-mutant and BRD4-NUT rearranged cancer


The development of targeted therapies that efficiently inhibit cancer
signaling pathways is one of the main goals of modern precision cancer
medicine. Consequently, genetic and biological phenotypic data of in
vitro screens are increasingly utilized to develop compounds directed
against distinct oncogenic alterations. However, current targeted
therapies are often limited to small genetically defined patient cohorts
due to the very finite number of proteins amenable to direct chemical
inhibition. An alternative approach is the exploitation of synthetic
lethality, i.e. inhibition of an unaltered protein required for cell
viability in a certain genetic background. Systematic chemo-genomic
analyses of cancer cell lines have been shown to be suitable tools for
the identification of novel synthetic lethal dependencies in cancer (Chan
et al. Sci Trans Med, 2011; Sos et al. PNAS, 2012; Kim et al. Cell
2013).To systematically extend this strategy to non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) we characterized the efficacy of 1505 chemical compounds
based on a variety of kinase inhibitor motifs in a high-throughput screen
against 80 NSCLC cell lines. We extracted patterns of biological activity
based on chemical and genetic information and found that potency and
selectivity of compounds are strongly related to their molecular
scaffold, but independent of their overall chemical complexity. We
thereby discovered a sunitinib derivative that exhibited exquisite
activity against ERBB2-mutant cell lines but was devoid of ERBB2 kinase
activity. Instead a kinome scan and an shRNA screen suggested a mechanism
of synthetic lethality by activity against NTRK family members. Moreover
a CDK9 inhibitor was identified as selective and potent against a midline
carcinoma cell line - a tumor entity characterized by recurrent BRD4-NUT
gene fusions. Using additional cell lines we validated the upregulation
of c-Fos and selective induction of apoptosis in BRD4-NUT positive
midline carcinoma compared to control cell lines following CDK9
inhibition. This can augment existing therapeutic approaches, which have
primarily focused on directly targeting the fusion product with
bromodomain inhibitors, and offers a novel target in this entity.In
conclusion, by systematically screening a large number of compounds
against a panel of genetically well characterized NSCLC cell lines and
incorporating chemical information we were able to derive structure
activity relationships and to identify potential synthetically lethal
targets in two genetic entities in clinical need of advanced selective
therapies.

