Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tetrandrine promotes prostate cancer cell apoptosis in part by
up-regulation of death receptors


Introduction: Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing-ligand
(TRAIL) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily. TRAIL, a
valuable agent for cancer therapy, induces apoptosis in the majority of
cancer cells, but development of resistance limits its clinical use in
many malignancies including prostate cancer. We have demonstrated that
Tetrandrine derivatives (TET), promote apoptosis in PCa cells in vitro
and in vivo. In the present study, we investigated the ability of TET to
sensitize tumor cells to TRAIL. We also investigated the role of
two-death receptors- DR4 and DR5 in overcoming TRAIL resistance in
prostate cancer cells.Methods: Prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP and LNCaP
derived C4-2b were used for this study. Cell lines were treated with TET
and TRAIL alone or in various combinations of these two for different
time points. mRNA levels were quantitated via Real Time-PCR and changes
in protein expression were analyzed by Western Blot. Cytotoxicity was
evaluated using the Crystal violet and MTT survival assay. Cells were
transfected with Lentiviral-shRNA to generate stable DR4 and DR5 single
and double knockdown cells. Apoptosis assay was done using BD Pharmingen
FITC Annexin-V Apoptosis Detection kit I.Results: LNCaP and C4-2b cells
did not show a significant response following exposure to TRAIL. Exposure
of LNCaP and C4-2b cells to TET resulted in increased mRNA and protein
levels of death receptors DR4, DR5. Pretreatment of both cell lines with
TET for 12h, followed by TRAIL treatment for another 24h increased the
apoptosis inducing potential of TRAIL in these cells. Exposure of TET
treated cells in vitro to soluble h-TRAIL in combination with TET
resulted in synergistic apoptosis response. shRNA targeting DR4 and DR5
significantly reduced the levels of DR4 and DR5 protein. There was a
reduced expression of DR4 and DR5 in the knock down cells in response to
TET in time-dependent and concentration-dependent manner. In comparison
to scrambled cells, DR4, DR5 single knockdown and DR4/DR5 double-knock
down cells showed reduced sensitivity to TRAIL and TET. These cells were
less apoptotic as compared to scrambled LNCaP cells as revealed by our
apoptosis assay data. Taken together these data suggest that TET induced
sensitization of PCa cells to TRAIL is mediated in part by
DR4/DR5.Conclusion: Our results suggest that TET induces apoptosis in
part by inducing the expression of DR4 and DR5, and provide the
proof-of-principle for a novel therapeutic strategy to sensitize cancer
cells to apoptosis.Acknowledgement: Financial support from following
Sources is gratefully acknowledged: (VA Merit Award 1BX001258; NCI
RO1-CA161880); Carroll W. Feist Endowed Chair Funds, FWCC support and
Chair commitment LSUHSC-Shreveport).

