Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SHOT-RNAs: A novel class of tRNA-derived functional RNAs expressed
in hormone-dependent cancers


Sex hormones and their receptors play critical roles in the genesis and
progression of breast and prostate cancers. We here present that sex
hormone signaling pathways promote the expression of specific tRNA halves
termed Sex HOrmone-dependent TRNA-derived RNAs (SHOT-RNAs).Screenings
using 94 cancer cell lines indicated that SHOT-RNAs are specifically and
abundantly expressed in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer
and androgen receptor-positive (AR+) prostate cancer. None of the ER
breast cancer, AR prostate cancer, or other examined cancer cell lines
from other tissues exhibited abundant expression of SHOT-RNAs.
ER-dependent accumulation of SHOT-RNAs is not limited to a cell culture
system, but it also occurs in luminal-type breast cancer patient
tissues.The expression specificity allowed us to hypothesize that sex
hormones and their receptors are the crucial molecular factors for
SHOT-RNA generation. Our hypothesis has been confirmed by the following
three observations: (1) siRNA-mediated reduction of ER or AR decreased
SHOT-RNA levels, (2) hormone-depletion from the culture medium decreased
SHOT-RNA levels, and (3) addition of the sex hormone, estrogen or
androgen, to the medium increased SHOT-RNA levels. These results indicate
the clear dependency of SHOT-RNA expressions on sex hormones and their
receptors.SHOT-RNAs are produced from aminoacylated mature tRNAs by
angiogenin (ANG)-mediated anticodon cleavage. Resultant 5- and
3-SHOT-RNAs, corresponding to 5- and 3-tRNA halves, bear 3-terminal
modifications, cyclic phosphate (cP) and amino acid, respectively. Thus,
SHOT-RNAs would not be captured by standard RNA-seq methods because the
modification inhibits adapter ligation steps. This could be the reason
why SHOT-RNAs had not been discovered in spite of their abundance and
expression specificity.To identify a comprehensive repertoire of
SHOT-RNAs, we developed a method named cP-RNA-seq in which 3-termini of
all RNAs, except for those containing a 3-terminal cP, were cleaved by a
periodate treatment, thereby selectively amplifying and sequencing only
cP-containing RNAs. The application of cP-RNA-seq to breast cancer cells
identified eight cytoplasmic tRNA species as major sources of
5-SHOT-RNAs.We further investigated the functional significance of
SHOT-RNA expression. Intriguingly, siRNA-directed reduction of each one
of the three different species of 5-SHOT-RNA severely impaired cell
proliferation, whereas 3-SHOT-RNA reduction showed no impact. These
results strongly suggest that at least 5-SHOT-RNAs are expressed as
functional RNA molecules promoting cell growth.Our results have unveiled
a novel tRNA-engaged pathway in tumorigenesis of hormone-dependent
cancers and implicate SHOT-RNAs as potential candidates for biomarkers
and therapeutic targets. We will discuss our working model and future
challenges.

