Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting HuR, a RNA-binding protein, for inhibition of
pancreatic cancer EMT and CSCs


PurposeEpithelial- mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes importantly
to cancer cell metastasis, and formation of cancer stem cells (CSCs). An
RNA-binding protein, HuR, plays an important role in many solid tumors
for promoting cell proliferation, metastasis, anti-apoptosis and drug
resistance. However, the role of HuR in cancer cell EMT and CSC has not
been elucidated. Here we aim to investigate the role of HuR in pancreatic
cancer EMT and CSC, and developing a new HuR inhibitor ST-3 as an
inhibitor for pancreatic cancer EMT and CSCs.MethodsFluorescence
Polarization assay and surface plasmon resonance assay was utilized for
St-3, HuR and target mRNA binding. Scratching assay and matrigel invasion
assay were used for cell migration and invasion, whereas MTT assay for
viability. Tumor spheroid formation assay was used as an indication of
CSCs. Western blot and RT-qPCR was used for protein and mRNA
expression.ResultsKnockdown of HuR with siRNA inhibited migration of
pancreatic cancer cells MIAPaCa-2, and suppressed the expression of
Vimentin, Snail, and increased E-cadherin expression, showing inhibition
in EMT. The suppression of Snail is due to accelerated mRNA decay.
Overexpression of HuR protected mRNA of Snail from degradation,
suggesting that Snail is a direct target of HuR. Knockdown of HuR also
decreased pancreatic cancer spheroids formation.St-3 inhibited the
proliferation of pancreatic cancer cell lines more potently in HuR-high
cells MIAPaCa-2 (IC50 2 M), than in HuR-low cells BxPc-3 and PANC-1 (IC50
6-20 M). St-3 directly bound to HuR, and inhibited binding of HuR with
its target mRNAs. St-3 treatment mimicked the HuR knockdown effects in
inhibiting cell migration, EMT, and spheroids formation.ConclusionHuR is
an important regulator in pancreatic cancer EMT and CSCs. ST-3 as a novel
HuR inhibitor inhibited pancreatic cancer EMT and CSCs. Further
investigation is under way.

