Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-administration of nicotinic acid (NA) enhances the therapeutic
index of KPT-9274 in cancer cells


We have previously described the PAK4 allosteric modulators (PAMs),
KPT-7523 and KPT-9274, as potent anti-cancer small molecules. We recently
found that PAMs also inhibit nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase
(NAMPT) enzymatic activity, a protein that forms a complex with PAK4 to
help regulate cytoskeletal structures, cell adhesion and migration. NAMPT
and nicotinate phosphoribosyl transferase (NAPRT1) catalyze the rate
limiting steps in the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) salvage
pathways. While NAMPT is frequently overexpressed in certain cancer
types, NAPRT1 is often downregulated. NAD levels can be depleted under
conditions of high metabolic demand (i.e. cancer cells) when consumed by
other enzymes including poly-ADP ribose polymerases (PARPs) and sirtuins
(SIRTs). In addition, induction of cancer cell death by NAD depletion can
be mitigated by nicotinic acid (NA) supplementation in a NAPRT1 dependent
manner. The purpose of this study is to determine whether KPT-9274
co-dosed with NA can reduce potential toxicities associated with NAD
depletion, while enhancing anti-neoplastic activity in cancers lacking
NAPRT1.Methods: Cyclex NAMPT colorimetric assay was used to examine NAMPT
enzymatic activity in vitro. NAD/NADH-Glo and Celltiter-Glo were used to
measure NAD and ATP levels, respectively. Gene expression and gene
promoter methylation was determined using quantitative PCR and sequencing
technologies. Western blot analysis was used to examine protein
expression and protein-protein interactions.Results: We have identified
an orally bioavailable dual inhibitor of PAK4 and NAMPT, KPT-9274, which
demonstrated potent anti-cancer activity in a variety of cell lines both
in vitro and in vivo. Cell death induced by KPT-9274 treatment in NAPRT1+
cells (COLO 205, Z-138, THP-1, MV-4-11) can be mitigated by NA, while
NAPRT1- cells (COLO 320HSR, JeKo-1, REC-1, U-2 OS, PC-3) remain sensitive
to KPT-9274 + NA. A reduction of both PAK4 protein levels and cell
viability is still observed in these different cell types co-dosed with
KPT-9274 + NA. In preliminary toxicology studies of KPT-9274
co-administered with NA in dogs, we observed a reduction in potential
toxicity (i.e. gastrointestinal and hematological effects). In vivo
assessment of KPT-9274 +/- NA and NAPRT1 status is on-going.Conclusions:
Here we report that the therapeutic index of KPT-9274, the first-in-class
dual inhibitor of PAK4 and NAMPT, can be enhanced when co-dosed with NA
in cancers lacking NAPRT1 protein expression in vitro. Furthermore,
KPT-9274 can still reduce steady state PAK4 levels and cell viability
regardless of NAPRT1 status. Based on these data, co-administration of NA
with KPT-9274 may be beneficial for the treatment of a wide variety of
cancers and will be tested in phase 1 clinical development.

