Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-142-3p is a candidate mediator of chloride intracellular
channel 4 (CLIC4) loss during squamous cancer progression


Chloride intracellular channel 4 (CLIC4) is a broadly expressed protein
that has been implicated in multiple cellular processes, including
cellular differentiation and apoptosis. As a soluble factor, CLIC4
translocates to the nucleus following exposure to a variety of stimuli,
including TGF-, TNF-, and etoposide. Nuclear CLIC4 potentiates TGF-
signaling by preventing the dephosphorylation of phospho-SMAD2 and 3 and
promotes growth arrest. Although its primary function is as a tumor
suppressor, CLIC4 expression is progressively diminished during cancer
progression and CLIC4 protein is excluded from the nucleus of many human
epithelial neoplasms and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cell lines. To
date, no gene deletions or mutations have been identified to account for
this phenomenon; thus, identifying the mechanism of CLIC4 loss is our
primary focus. To determine if epigenetic gene silencing is responsible,
we evaluated the methylation status of the CLIC4 promoter in a
progression panel (normal, papilloma, SCC) of epithelial cell lines by
performing bisulfite sequencing. No differential promoter methylation was
found between the cell lines, suggesting that the regulation may be
post-transcriptional or post-translational. Because microRNAs (miRNAs)
are known to regulate gene expression by mediating the degradation or
translational repression of target mRNAs, we performed a bioinformatic
analysis of the CLIC4 3 UTR, which revealed a large number of putative
targeting miRNAs. One such miRNA, miR-142-3p, has been predicted to
target CLIC4 by multiple algorithms and has been shown to interact with
the CLIC4 3 UTR by high-throughput sequencing and crosslinking
immunoprecipitation. We confirmed the functional activity of miR-142-3p
against the CLIC4 3 UTR by using a 3 UTR luciferase reporter assay and a
miR-142-3p mimic. miR-142-3p is high in the tumor tissue and plasma of
patients with head and neck SCC and is correlated with worse prognosis,
where CLIC4 expression is known to be low. Thus, miR-142-3p may be
responsible for mediating CLIC4 loss in squamous lesions and warrants
further investigation.

