Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell cycle specific effects and associated DNA damage of selective
inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE)


Nuclear export of proteins is fundamental for cell growth and function.
Selinexor is a SINE compound that is in clinical development for the
treatment of different cancers. Selinexor forms a slowly reversible
covalent bond to Exportin-1 (XPO1), preventing its association with
protein cargos, thereby resulting in their nuclear retention. XPO1 cargos
include the majority of tumor suppressor proteins (TSP) and cell cycle
regulators such as p53, p21 and p27 that have key roles in cancer
progression and drug response. It is unclear how selinexor affects cell
cycle progression in individual cells and the subsequent stress and fate
of those cells. To elucidate selinexor action, we developed cell lines
that stably express fluorescent ubiquitin cell cycle reporters (FUCCI),
and followed individual cells longitudinally using continuous time-lapse
microscopy for 72 hours. We report that in fibrosarcoma-derived HT-1080
cells that express wildtype p53 and p21, 18% of the initial cell
population became arrested with >90% in G1- or S-phase and 40% died with
64% from G1- or early S-phase after a cell cycle delay or arrest. We also
found that 42% of cells divided, but the progeny died or arrested in G1-
or S-phase of the next cell cycle - often after cell cycle arrest or
slowed cell cycle progression. Using FUCCI, we tracked the response of
cells treated acutely in specific cell cycle stages. Cells treated in
G1-phase most often arrested or died in G1- or S-phase, whereas cells
treated in G2-phase usually progressed to cell division. As FUCCI
revealed S-phase progression defects and associated cell death, we
further characterized this phenotype. Using nucleotide incorporation with
fluorescent detection, we observed that as early as 2 hours after
selinexor treatment only a subset of cells is undergoing DNA replication.
Cells that were able to replicate their DNA are doing that inefficiently
as both the rate and maximal levels of nucleotide incorporation are
significantly reduced. S-phase arrest and progression defects may
manifest as DNA double-strand breaks. We find a strong association
between S-phase status and DNA damage. In some cells, the damage occurs
within hours of selinexor treatment and appears as a striking cluster of
foci. At 8 hours, nearly 35-45% of cells contain DNA damage clusters.
Importantly, the damage clusters sometimes repair as determined by fixed
cell time-course analysis and live-cell microscopy. We are exploring the
nature of these DNA damage structures and the mechanisms of their
formation and repair. In summary, selinexor is fast acting, shows cell
cycle selectivity, results in DNA damage and is highly effective at
arresting cell growth and inducing apoptosis in tumor cells. These data
suggest that selinexor may exert anti-cancer effects even on slow growing
tumors where the bulk of the cell mass presents a G1-like state and that
it likely combines well with other cell cycle targeted therapeutics.

