Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interstitial fluid pressure alters cell motility and collective
invasion via EMT marker expression in an engineered model of a human
breast tumor


We developed a three-dimensional (3D) engineered model of a solid human
breast tumor to study the effects of interstitial fluid pressure (IFP) on
collective invasion and the expression levels of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) markers. Many solid tumors exhibit elevated IFP; as
these tumors grow, intra-tumoral vascular and lymphatic vessels collapse.
The non-functioning lymphatic system impairs drainage, and immature
hyperpermeable blood vessels cause fluid to accumulate within the
interstitial space. As a result, IFP rises steeply beyond the tumor
periphery and plateaus at pressures as high as 50 mm Hg above normal at
the tumor core. This pressure profile, in turn, leads to outward fluid
flow from the core of the tumor. IFP has been shown to affect the
migratory behavior of individual cells in 3D cell culture models, though
its role in collective cancer invasion remains unknown. Moreover, the
underlying molecular mechanisms linking IFP to changes in cell motility
remain unclear. We sought to address these questions using our engineered
model.Our 3D culture model consists of an aggregate of MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells (mimicking a solid tumor) embedded within a 3D collagen gel
that is flanked by two media reservoirs. The IFP profile experienced by
the cancer cells is established by altering the heights of the media
reservoirs on either side of the collagen, creating a hydrostatic
pressure gradient. Transcript levels of EMT markers in the aggregates
subjected to a variety of pressure profiles were determined using
quantitative real-time PCR. Expression of these markers was also
manipulated ectopically through the creation of stable cell lines.
Time-lapse imaging and cell tracking were used to determine the
persistence and motility of individual cells within the aggregates.We
found that the direction of IFP-induced flow determines the invasive
phenotype of tumor cells. Additionally, high expression levels of both
mesenchymal (Snail1, vimentin) and epithelial (E-cadherin, keratin-8)
markers were characteristic of collectively invading aggregates,
suggesting that partial EMT is important for collective invasion. Ectopic
expression and knockdown of EMT markers revealed that they are necessary
and sufficient for collective invasion in response to IFP. Time-lapse
imaging analysis demonstrated that IFP and EMT marker expression also
affect the motility and persistence of individual cells within the
aggregates, further confirming that IFP is an important regulator of
collective invasion. In conclusion, we used a robust culture model of a
human breast tumor to gain insight into the mechanisms guiding collective
invasion from primary tumors in response to IFP; IFP alters expression
levels of EMT markers, thereby regulating collective invasion.

