Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The influence of genetic and clinical factors on the outcome
following a diagnosis of small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic
type


Small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT) is the
most common undifferentiated ovarian tumor diagnosed in women below the
age of 40. While it is uncommon, with only 500 cases reported, it is an
extremely aggressive tumor, with long term survival rates of Small cell
carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT) is the most common
undifferentiated ovarian tumor diagnosed in women below the age of 40.
While it is uncommon, with only 500 cases reported, it is an extremely
aggressive tumor, with long term survival rates of <30% in early stage
disease. Recently, we discovered that SCCOHT is a monogenic disease,
attributable to germline and somatic deleterious mutations in the
chromatin remodeling gene, SMARCA4. Since then, single case reports have
been published on women affected with SCCOHT, but no large studies have
been conducted on the effect of these mutations, germline or somatic, on
the disease. Furthermore, while numerous publications have described the
therapies used in single cases or small cohorts of SCCOHT patients,
treatment remains varied, with no standardized protocols. In an attempt
to clarify which factors have an effect on the course of the disease, we
reviewed all published and a cohort of unpublished SCCOHT cases and
collected information on the following factors: stage at diagnosis, age
at diagnosis, treatment modality used (chemotherapy/radiotherapy/high
dose chemotherapy), mutation type (germline/somatic), and length of
survival. We were able to acquire information in at least 2 of these
parameters in 267 cases and performed multiple analyses. Clinically, we
found that the greatest influence on patient outcome was related to stage
at diagnosis (p Small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type
(SCCOHT) is the most common undifferentiated ovarian tumor diagnosed in
women below the age of 40. While it is uncommon, with only 500 cases
reported, it is an extremely aggressive tumor, with long term survival
rates of <30% in early stage disease. Recently, we discovered that SCCOHT
is a monogenic disease, attributable to germline and somatic deleterious
mutations in the chromatin remodeling gene, SMARCA4. Since then, single
case reports have been published on women affected with SCCOHT, but no
large studies have been conducted on the effect of these mutations,
germline or somatic, on the disease. Furthermore, while numerous
publications have described the therapies used in single cases or small
cohorts of SCCOHT patients, treatment remains varied, with no
standardized protocols. In an attempt to clarify which factors have an
effect on the course of the disease, we reviewed all published and a
cohort of unpublished SCCOHT cases and collected information on the
following factors: stage at diagnosis, age at diagnosis, treatment
modality used (chemotherapy/radiotherapy/high dose chemotherapy),
mutation type (germline/somatic), and length of survival. We were able to
acquire information in at least 2 of these parameters in 267 cases and
performed multiple analyses. Clinically, we found that the greatest
influence on patient outcome was related to stage at diagnosis (p <
0.001) and treatment modality (p = 0.01), while age at diagnosis had no
significant effect (p = 0.72). Molecularly, the presence of a germline
mutation in the patient did not affect the age of onset (p = 0.86), nor
did it have an effect on the length of survival of the patient (p =
0.63). Overall, this is the largest study conducted to date analyzing the
influence of clinical factors on the outcome of patients diagnosed with
SCCOHT, and is the first large study to analyze the effect of germline
mutations on the outcome of these patients.

