Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zebrafish adult cell dedifferentiation as a noncancer model of
cancer


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are those cells within a malignant tumor that
can self-renew and initiate new tumors, with the ability to produce all
the cell lineages that comprise the tumor. Recent studies have revealed
that cancer treatments that target the tumor without addressing CSCs
might reduce the tumor load but be unable to achieve a cure. Generation
and maintenance of CSCs through genetic and epigenetic reprogramming is
essential for tumor maintenance and resistance to therapy. Therefore,
developing therapies targeted at CSCs is critical to achieving cures for
cancer1. Yet the biology of CSCs, and particularly the process of
cellular reprogramming, is still not well understood, in part because of
the many mutations carried by these cells, only a few of which are
deterministic.In order to develop a better understanding of the
mechanistic underpinnings of adult cell dedifferentiation, we developed a
zebrafish model that utilizes adult myocyte reprogramming in the context
of muscle regeneration. Our model utilizes the lateral rectus muscle of
the eye, which can recover from >50% myectomy by reprogramming the
residual (i.e. post-mitotic) myocytes to reenter the cell cycle, remodel
the extracellular matrix, proliferate, migrate and then redifferentiate
into myocytes that reform a functional muscle (as determined by an
optokinetic response). The proliferative burst of reprogrammed myocytes
is particularly robust, with >70% of cells undergoing mitosis during the
regeneration process. Such a robust in vivo model of cell
dedifferentiation represents a unique opportunity to study the cellular,
genetic and epigenetic processes involved.We find that the
dedifferentiation process begins with activation of epigenetic regulators
to remodel chromatin, followed by activation of autophagy to remodel the
cytoplasm, followed by cell cycle reentry. Epigenetic changes include
changes in DNA and histone methylation, along with activation of genes
encoding transcription factors that are frequently found to be involved
with oncogenesis, such as myc, jun, fos, and twist. A transcriptome
analysis using deep sequencing reveals significant similarities between
the genetic signatures of dedifferentiated zebrafish myocytes and human
cancer cells. This analysis also identifies long non-coding RNAs that are
induced early during the dedifferentiation process, and work is ongoing
to annotate these lncRNAs with reference to human cancer.In summary, an
in vivo zebrafish non-cancer model of cancer can provide unique
mechanistic insights into the biology of CSCs. In addition, as an aquatic
species this model is particularly well suited for drug screening,
providing an innovative new approach to developing drugs that target
reprogramming/dedifferentiating cells.

