Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Undenatured whey protein isolate exhibit chemopreventive activity
against HPV-16 induced carcinogenesis of CD271+ oral mucosa stem cells


Oral cancer, and associated HPV-16 infection, and tobacco smoking is a
major public health concern in the Kamrup district of India. To
facilitate research on oral cancer chemoprevention, we have set up a
collaborative research team between Forsyth Institute, an oral medicine
specialized center affiliated to Harvard School of Dental Medicine, and
KaviKrishna Laboratory, a non-for profit private laboratory set up
located in Guwahati, the major city of Kamrup district, India. To study
the cellular and molecular mechanism of HPV-16 mediated carcinogenesis,
we have developed an in vitro model of HPV-16 mediated carcinogenesis of
oral squamous stem cells. In this model (Bhuyan et al. The potential role
of oral mucosa stem cell altruistic behavior as the initiating event of
malignant transformation. AACR abstract Control # 16-A-6618-AACR), the
treatment of oral mucosa cells derived from healthy volunteer with HPV-16
derived E6 protein led to expansion of a p53 deficient CD271+ expressing
oral mucosa stem cells (OMSC). Noted that CD271 cell surface marker was
recently identified as a putative marker for OMSCs. Using this in vitro
carcinogenesis model, we evaluated the potential chemopreventive role of
dietary whey protein. The E6 treated p53 deficient CD271+ cells were
treated with DMEM/F12 media containing 0.2% of Immunocal, an undenatured
whey protein (Tsai WY et al. Nutr Cancer 2000. PMID: 11525598). The p53
status as well as in vitro self-renewal activity of the CD271+ cells were
examined by ELISA, transcriptional activity assay, and methylcellulose
based clonogenic assay. We also fed Immunocal 20 gm/daily for 6 months to
5 individual with oral leukoplakia lesion with HPV-16 positivity. The
CD271+ cells obtained from the leukoplakia lesion of clinical subjects
were subjected to p53 status, and clonogenic assay. The data was compared
with CD271+ cells obtained from leukoplakia lesion of subjects taking
regular diet without whey protein supplements. We found that addition of
Immunocal whey protein led to 8-fold decrease in the expansion of CD271+
cells following E6 treatment in the in vitro model of OMSC culture.
Importantly, Immunocal treatment prevented the suppression of p53 in
OMSCs. In the preliminary clinical study, the dietary intake of Immunocal
led to complete loss of leukoplakia lesion in the 4/5 individual. In
contrast, the control subjects exhibited the presence of CD271+ cells in
the leukoplakia lesion having low p53 status, and high clonogenic
activity. We are incorporating a larger number of subjects to study the
potential chemopreventive activity of whey protein, using the locally
available affordable whey protein extracts. Conclusion: This study
indicate that whey protein extract, which is available in the local
villages of Kamrup district could serve as a chemopreventive agent
against oral cancer.

