Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Megabase-scale determination of complex genetic aberrations of
primary cancer genomes at individual DNA molecule resolution


Cancer is a disease of the genome caused by genetic aberrations such as
point mutations and rearrangements. To identify these genetic
aberrations, cancer studies rely on DNA sequencing of short reads from
highly fragmented DNA molecules that are typically less than 500 bases
long. However, genomic structural alterations and context of genetic
aberrations are much larger and cannot be effectively analyzed. To
characterize such alterations with completeness, the contiguous
relationship of variants from a given chromosome homologue must be
determined; this analysis process is referred to as genome phasing. In
this study, we demonstrate the significant advantages of genome phasing;
we utilize a new technology called linked-read sequencing that enables
tracking of individual DNA sequence reads to the input high molecular
weight DNA at single-molecule resolution through the use of barcoded
reads. We then reconstruct at megabase-scale the complex genomic somatic
events derived from the original paternal or maternal chromosome
homologues and demonstrate new insight into the undiscovered details of
cancer genome alterations. We apply this analysis to primary
gastrointestinal cancers from surgical resections; our study is a unique
achievement given that this type of phased genome sequencing analysis has
only been previously conducted on cancer cell lines.For this study, we
focus on specific categories of megabase-scale genetic aberrations: (1)
copy number variants (CNV) derived from segmental duplications, (2)
structural rearrangements, and (3) aneuploidy. As an example from gastric
cancer metastases, we identified a set of unique and site-specific FGFR2
amplification events corresponding to segmental duplications. The
structural details of this amplification were only evident using barcoded
sequence reads and phased analysis. Secondly, in a primary colorectal
adenocarcinoma we resolved a complex recombination event that covered the
majority of the chromosome 5 q-arm. It contained a set of complex
rearrangements that are difficult to determine by short read sequencing
but can be identified using linked reads. This rearrangement event arose
from a combination of a 80Mb homologous recombination that contained a
small interval 2.6Mb deletion. The allelic loss of two candidate cancer
drivers, SMAD5 and TGFB, occurred in the affected interval. Finally, to
assess aneuploidy we relied on the imbalanced ratios between paternal and
maternal chromosomal homologues to generate contiguous blocks of variants
on the order of tens and up to hundreds of megabases long. We performed
this type of analysis on a number of cancer genomes derived from primary
colorectal adenocarcinomas, and were able to robustly determine the
phased single nucleotide variant content and large-scale genomic
alterations involving entire chromosome arms.

