Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient detection of germ cell cancer related miRNAs in serum
using the TaqMan miRNA ABC purification bead kit in combination with the
Taqman advanced miRNA assays


Malignant germ cell tumors, also known as germ cell cancers (GCC), are
the most frequent cancer in young Caucasian males, with an increasing
incidence during the last decades. They are clinically and histologically
subdivided into seminomas and nonseminomas. The last can be composed of
different elements, including embryonal carcinoma (the stem cell
component), teratoma (TE) (somatic lineage) as well as yolk sac tumor
(YST) and choriocarcinoma (CHC) (extra-embryonic lineages). The currently
used serum markers, informative for both diagnosis as well as follow-up
are AFP and hCG, predominantly indicative for the presence of the YST and
CHC components. Recently, we reported that a selected set of miRNAs are
highly expressed in all histological elements of GCC, with the exception
of TE, including the miR 371-3 cluster. In addition to the presence in
the primary cancers, they can also be identified in the serum of patients
with such a malignancy, outperforming the classical markers AFP and hCG
(Gillis and Rijlaarsdam et al. Molec. Oncol. 2013; Rijlaarsdam et al.
Andrology, 2015). Here we demonstrate the power of the TaqMan Advanced
miRNA Assays (PN 478007, Applied Biosystems) in combination with the use
of the TaqMan miRNA ABC Purification Kit (PN 4473087, Applied
Biosystems), starting with 50 L human serum. The protocol includes
polyadenylation of the miRNA targets at the 3 end, followed by an adapter
ligation at the 5 end. Universal forward and reverse primers are used for
amplification, followed by detection using the Applied Biosystems 7500
RealTime PCR System. Quality controls were added using dilution
experiments of the cell lines, also included as inter-plate control, as
well as for cDNA synthesis and RT-PCR efficiency. The non-human spike-ins
ath-miR159a and cel-miR-39-3p were added as exogenous controls, while
hsa-miR-30b-5p was used as endogenous control for normalization
(reference). In total 30 GCC-related sera as well as 10 normal controls
proved the informativity as well as efficiency of the developed pipeline
in a standardized laboratory setting.

