Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of p62-dependent regulation of COX-2 in UVA response and
skin tumor progression


Skin cancer is the most common type of cancer in the US, with an
estimated 3.5 million cases diagnosed each year. Exposure to ultraviolet
(UV) radiation, namely UVA (320-400 nm) and UVB (290-320 nm), is the
major risk factor for the development of skin cancer. UVA is 20-fold more
abundant in sunlight than UVB and is the major component of tanning beds.
However, the mechanism of UVA's contribution to skin cancer remains
unclear. One putative effector of UVA in skin cancer is p62, a selective
autophagy cargo protein and substrate. We have found that UVA upregulates
p62 expression, independent of autophagy, by inducing transcription of
p62. p62 is upregulated in many types of cancer, including squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) and melanoma, and can facilitate the activation of a
number of pathways to promote cell proliferation, invasion, inflammation,
and survival. We have previously shown that p62 stabilizes Twist1 to
promote invasion and proliferation, indicating p62 can function
independent of autophagy to promote tumor progression. However, the
function of p62 in UVA-induced tumor progression is unknown. Using a
candidate gene approach, we identified a novel interaction between p62
and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), which suggests a putative function for p62
in UVA-induced skin cancer. COX-2 is a prostaglandin synthase often
overexpressed in cancer, where it correlates with poor prognosis. COX-2
promotes cell proliferation and survival, and inhibition of COX-2
prevents skin cancer development. COX-2 protein expression is induced
concomitantly with p62 in response to UVA and knockdown of p62 prevents
induction of COX-2 by UVA. As COX-2 transcription is not induced by UVA
in skin cancer cells along with p62, we assessed a possible protein-level
regulatory mechanism. Co-immunoprecipitation of endogenous p62 and COX-2
in skin cancer cells reveals a novel physical interaction between these
proteins. Therefore, we hypothesize that p62 transcription is induced by
UVA to promote stability of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and consequently,
tumor progression. This project aims to further understand how UVA
regulates p62 and thus COX-2 availability, and the functional
significance for skin tumor progression. As both p62 and COX-2 are
critical for skin tumor progression, understanding the link between these
proteins will unravel a signaling axis central to skin cancer progression.

