Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Calcineurin/NFAT pathway mediates tumor initiating cell and
drug resistance in lung cancer through SOX2 enhancer binding and ALDH
upregulation


Tumor initiating cells (TIC) are a small population of cancer cells with
enhanced tumorigenicity and drug resistance. Their stemness properties
could be activated by stress-induced cell plasticity but the mechanisms
remain to be studied. Calcium signaling is important for integrating cell
responses to intra- and extracellular stresses. The role of its
downstream pathway, calcineurin/NFAT, in lung TIC has not been explored.
This study investigated the role and mechanisms of calcineurin/NFAT in
regulating TIC and drug resistance by analyzing NFATc2 expression in
multiple TIC populations and functional evaluation using in vitro and in
vivo models. In tumor spheres and TIC isolated by marker-based flow
cytometry, NFATc2 showed overexpression and higher luciferase reporter
activities. Knockdown of NFATc2 reduced TIC marker proportions and
suppressed TIC properties including pluripotency genes expression, sphere
formation, cell mobility and drug resistance in vitro. Xenograft models
and limiting dilution assay showed shNFATc2 effectively suppressed
tumorigenesis and reduced TIC frequency. Stable NFATc2 knockdown
sensitized tumors to cisplatin and gefitinib treatment. In contrast,
TIC-supportive effects were observed in vitro and in vivo when NFATc2 was
overexpressed. Further, NFATc2 was activated in stable gefitinib or
cisplatin resistant cell lines, and knockdown of NFATc2 sensitized them
to drug treatment. These data implicated NFATc2 is involved in lung TIC
maintenance and drug resistance. To further investigate the molecular
mechanisms of how NFATc2 mediate these roles, we analyzed pluripotency
genes and observed a significant correlation between NFATc2 and SOX2
expression in lung cancer cell lines and human lung carcinomas.
Computational analysis predicted NFATc2 binding sequences in SOX2
regulatory regions. Detailed studies including luciferase reporter assay,
site-directed mutagenesis and CHIP-qRCR confirmed NFATc2 could regulate
SOX2 expression through binding to its enhancer. Furthermore,
immunohistochemistry on human lung cancers showed significant correlation
between expressions of SOX2 and the anti-oxidative stem cell marker ALDH,
suggesting SOX2 regulates ALDH expression. In vitro, NFATc2 knockdown
suppressed ALDH1A1 expression but it was rescued by SOX2 overexpression.
Vice versa, ALDH1A1 was upregulated in NFATc2 overexpressing cells but
this was prevented by SOX2 knockdown. Functionally, reactive oxidative
species (ROS) levels assessed by flow cytometry were suppressed by
activated NFATc2/SOX2/ALDH1A1 axis, while treatment with the ROS
inhibitor N-acetylcysteine reversed the sensitization of shNFATc2 on
cisplatin treatment. Together, the data showed NFATc2 is involved in the
regulation of TIC phenotypes in lung cancer. It increases drug resistance
by ROS scavenging mediated by the SOX2/ALDH1A1 axis.

