Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting mTORC1 by overexpression of PRAS40(T246A) in basal
keratinocytes suppresses proliferation and migration of keratinocyte stem
cells and skin inflammation during tumor promotion


Considerable evidence indicates a crucial role for Akt and mTORC1
signaling in cancer. Previously, we discovered that the Akt and mTORC1
signaling pathways play an important role in epithelial multistage
carcinogenesis using the mouse skin model, especially during the tumor
promotion stage. The proline-rich Akt substrate of 40 kDa (PRAS40), a
subunit of mTORC1 was originally identified as a novel Akt substrate
through Akt-mediated phosphorylation at Thr246 and this phosphorylation
is critical for mTORC1 activity. Moreover, PRAS40 has been identified to
negatively regulate mTORC1 signaling.In this study, transgenic mice were
generated that overexpress a mutant form of PRAS40 [PRAS40(T246A)] using
the bovine keratin 5 (BK5) promoter to further examine the importance of
mTORC1 signaling in epithelial carcinogenesis. BK5.PRAS40(T246A)
transgenic mice did not have a discernable gross skin phenotype. However,
these mice were significantly less sensitive to TPA-induced epidermal
hyperproliferation and hyperplasia. Overexpression of PRAS40(T246A) in
the epidermis led to significant suppression of skin tumor development
and significant reductions in tumor weight and tumor size compared to
wild-type mice. Immunoprecipitation analysis of epidermal protein lysates
from BK5.PRAS40(T246A) mice showed that PRAS40(T246A) remained bound to
raptor even after TPA treatment. BK5.PRAS40(T246A) mice also displayed
reduced mTORC1 signaling, reduced levels of cell cycle proteins and
increased autophagy signaling as well as the skin inflammatory response
in the epidermis following treatment with TPA. Notably, TPA-induced
proliferation and migration of bulge-region label retaining cells were
also significantly inhibited in BK5.PRAS40(T246A) mice. In addition,
expression of PRAS40(T246A) in basal keratinocytes significantly
inhibited keratinocyte migration both in vivo and in vitro and led to
delayed wound healing. Decreased migration and impaired wound healing may
be attributed to altered expression of EMT markers as identified in
PRAS40(T246A) epidermal cells.The current data using this novel mouse
model provides further evidence that mTORC1 specific signaling in
keratinocytes contributes significantly to the process of skin tumor
promotion by regulating proliferation and migration of keratinocyte stem
cells. In addition, the data demonstrate an important role for mTORC1
specific signaling in keratinocytes in regulating skin inflammation.
Collectively, using this novel mouse model where mTORC1 signaling is
selectively suppressed in keratinocytes has provided further evidence
that this signaling pathway regulates several important mechanistic
events involved in the process of skin tumor promotion.Research supported
by NIH Grants CA129409, CA037111, and American Cancer Research Center and
Foundation

