Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of chemokine receptor inhibition plus PD-L1
blockade potentiates antitumor effects in a murine model of breast cancer


Trafficking and expansion of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
plays a major role in the immune suppression of tumors. MDSCs express
chemokine receptors which likely mediate their recruitment to the tumor
microenvironment. Suppression of T cells is also mediated by the
interaction of programmed death-1 (PD-1) and its ligands which are
abundantly expressed in cancer cells and immune infiltrates, including
MDSCs. Here, we show that targeting both pathways through administration
of a small molecule chemokine receptor antagonist (CCX9588, which blocks
CCR1) and a PD-L1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) significantly reduced tumor
burden in mice who received orthotopic transplants of 4T1 cells, a cell
line used to model triple negative breast cancer. Primary tumor growth
was modestly reduced by either agent (PD-L1 mAb or CCR1 inhibitor) alone,
but the combination of CCR1 inhibitor plus PD-L1 mAb resulted in
significantly reduced tumor progression as compared to either of the
single agents. Furthermore, lung metastasis was also significantly
reduced by CCR1 antagonist and combination treatment. Orthotropic 4T1
cell engraftment induced robust expansion of CD11b+Ly6Ghi Ly6Chi MDSCs, a
subpopulation of which express CCR1. Analysis of the tumor infiltrating
cells revealed that CCX9588 significantly reduced the number of MDSCs and
increased CD8 T cells infiltration in primary tumors, suggesting that
CCR1 blockade of MDSC trafficking in combination with PD-L1 mAb
translates into reduced tumor burden, possibly through increased CD8 T
cell response against the tumor. Analysis of human breast cancer patient
samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database revealed that the
CCR1 ligands, MCP-7 (CCL7) and RANTES (CCL5) are present at significantly
higher levels in breast cancers as compared to normal breast tissue.
Interestingly, ligands for CCR1 and PD-1 are significantly higher in
triple negative breast cancer samples than in the other breast cancer
subtypes. These data are the first to show that CCR1 chemokine receptor
antagonists can act synergistically with PDL-1 inhibitors, and suggest a
novel approach for potentiating the activity of immune cell checkpoint
inhibitors in one of the most aggressive forms of breast cancer.

