Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A forward genetics screen of murine brain tumors identifies novel
candidate genes involved in gliomagenesis


Glioma is the most frequent malignant brain tumor in adults.
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signaling is commonly activated in
glioma. We have used a retrovirus-driven PDGFB-induced murine glioma
model that causes tumors that closely resemble human gliomas of various
grades. Knowing that retroviruses have a capacity to induce insertional
mutagenesis, we have employed whole genome sequencing to identify
potential genes that, together with PDGFB, drive glioma
development.Gliomas were induced by RCAS virus injection into the brains
of mice expressing the RCAS retroviral receptor from specific promoters.
Genomic DNA from tumor cell lines was probed for retroviral tags and
sequenced to identify genomic targets of the retrovirus. A streamlined
analysis pipeline was developed for retrovirus integration detection and
mapping to the reference mouse genome. Integration sites were analyzed
and a common integration site (CIS) label was assigned to a gene, given
that it was either tagged by a retrovirus more than once within a
discovery set or found within the Retroviral Tagged Cancer Gene Database
(RTCGD).In a small discovery subset of 15 murine gliomas, we have
identified 40 CIS, of which 37 were validated by Sanger sequencing. When
compared with previously identified CIS in RTCGD, 5.5% of them were
shared with our older screen, where we overexpressed PDGFB from another
retrovirus in order to induce glioma. Less CIS genes were shared with
other published tumor models induced by viruses driven by other cancer
genes/viruses.The majority of genes identified in our screen were tagged
twice. However, Nfic, Cuecd1, Thra, Foxj1 and Nrxn1 were tagged three
times, Ppfibp1 and Rhbg four times, and Mir29a/29b-1 seven times. As
compared to control tumor lines, two top candidate genes, Mir29a and
Ppfibp1, demonstrated significantly increased expression in tumor lines
in were they were respectively tagged. Mir29a is often found
downregulated in human tumors including gliomas, still high levels of
Mir29a are sometimes found in certain aggressive cancers and in
metastases.Interestingly, we found that specific PDGFR inhibition
negatively regulates Mir29a, indicating a possible role for PDGF
signaling in Mir29a regulation. Ppfibp1 has not been extensively studied
in cancer. However, Ppfibp1 seems to have a subgroup-specific expression
in human glioblastoma, making it an interesting candidate for further
analysis.Here we present a new screening method that can be employed to
identify genes involved in PDGFB-driven gliomagenesis. So far, we have
identified 37 candidate genes by whole genome sequencing. Two of the most
frequently tagged candidates, Mir29a and Ppfibp1 were upregulated as a
consequence of retroviral mutagenesis. Their precise role in driving
glioma formation in collaboration with PDGF is currently explored.

