Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation and implementation of screens for partial agonists and
antagonists of the ErbB4/HER4 receptor tyrosine kinase: Targeted melanona
drug discovery


Introduction: Gain-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the ErbB4
(HER4) receptor tyrosine kinase have been detected in melanoma cell lines
and these cell lines are dependent on ErbB4 expression for proliferation.
Consequently, ErbB4 antagonists hold promise as targeted melanoma
therapeutics and we have sought to identify small molecule ErbB4
antagonists. Our approach is based on the observation that the Q43L
mutant of the ErbB4 peptide growth factor agonist Neuregulin 2beta
(NRG2b) functions as a partial agonist at ErbB4; NRG2b/Q43L stimulates
ErbB4 tyrosine phosphorylation, fails to stimulate ErbB4 coupling to cell
proliferation, antagonizes stimulation of cell proliferation by ErbB4
full agonists, and causes ErbB4 down-regulation.Experimental procedures:
We have developed a high-throughput screening (HTS) strategy that can be
used to identify ErbB4 antagonists. The primary screen identifies
molecules that stimulate ErbB4 tyrosine phosphorylation. The secondary
screen distinguishes between molecules that stimulate and fail to
stimulate ErbB4-dependent proliferation. The tertiary screen identifies
molecules that antagonize agonist stimulation of ErbB4-dependent
proliferation.Results: An phospho-ErbB4 sandwich ELISA assay identifies
molecules that stimulate ErbB4 tyrosine phosphorylation with high
sensitivity and fidelity (Z >0.5). MTT assays using a cell line that
displays ErbB4-dependent proliferation distinguish between molecules that
stimulate and fail to stimulate ErbB4-dependent proliferation (Z>0.5) and
identify molecules that antagonize agonist stimulation of ErbB4 dependent
proliferation (Z>0.5). These assays have been used to identify small
molecules that stimulate ErbB4 tyrosine phosphorylation. Efforts to
determine whether these hits function as ErbB4 full agonists or partial
agonists (antagonists) are underway and will be reported. Structures of
these small molecule ErbB4 full and partial agonists may be reported,
pending submission of a provisional patent application.Conclusions: We
have validated an HTS strategy for identifying ErbB4 partial agonists
that function as ErbB4 antagonists and deployment of that strategy has
led to the identification of several hits. Such molecules may hold
promise as targeted therapeutics for melanoma and other ErbB4-dependent
tumors.

