Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy study of APX3330, a Ref-1 redox inhibitor, and
Gemcitabine in a mouse pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma model


High levels of apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease/redox factor 1
(APE1/Ref-1 or Ref-1) expression have been reported in numerous cancers
such that Ref-1 is an emerging target in a variety of cancer types. Ref-1
is a dual function protein with both DNA repair activity as well as redox
activity. Ref-1 is responsible for the repair of baseless sites in DNA
caused by alkylation and oxidative DNA damage as well as regulating
several transcription factors including HIF-1a, NFkB, AP-1, and STAT3.
Using siRNA to knockdown Ref-1 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
cells (MIA-PaCa-2), we quantitated Ref-1 expression following
transfection with scrambled control and Ref-1 siRNA using Indica Lab's
HALO CytoNuclear software. Knockdown of greater than 85% greatly
decreases the proliferation of PDAC cells, and supports Ref-1 as a target
in pancreatic cancer.To assess the efficacy of targeting Ref-1 in vivo, a
small molecule Ref-1 redox inhibitor, APX3330, was used in combination
therapy with a PDAC standard of care agent, Gemcitabine, in a PDAC
xenograft mouse model. In this study, NSG mice were treated with:
Gemcitabine (35mg/kg), APX3330 (12.5, 25, and 50mg/kg), and combinations
of APX3330 and Gemcitabine (12.5, 25, and 50mg/kg), as well as a vehicle
control group.At termination of the study, tumors were harvested, tissue
sections prepared, stained for H&E, and immunostained for Ki67 and CD31.
Slides were then imaged via Aperio's ScanScope. Immunostains were
quantitated to predict the effectiveness of the combination treatment in
a PDAC in vivo model. IHC slides from treated tumors were quantified
using Aperio's ImageScope software to determine the percent of cell
proliferation and angiogenesis in the various treatment groups.These
preclinical studies, demonstrated additive effects of combining APX3330
with Gemcitabine to reduce pancreatic tumor volumes and cell
proliferation. Significantly decreased tumor volumes in the combination
treatments of APX3330 with Gemcitabine were found compared to each agent
alone. All treatments, single or combination yielded tumor volumes
significantly different from the vehicle control.A statistically
significant decrease in cell proliferation determined from Ki67 staining
was found amongst the 12.5 and 50 mg/kg doses of APX3330, all three
combination groups, and in the Gemcitabine group compared to vehicle
control. There was a trend toward, yet not statistically significant,
increased anti-angiogenic effects in the 12.5 and 25 mg/kg dose groups of
APX3330 alone compared to all other treatment groups. This data continues
to demonstrate a single agent response of pancreatic tumor cells in a
preclinical model using APX3330, but more importantly, a novel
combination effect when APX3330 is combined with Gemcitabine in a
xenograft model, both via tumor volume and cell proliferation marker,
Ki67 supporting the use of APX3330 in combination with Gemcitabine in
PDAC patients.

