Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IRS-1/LC3 nuclear structures and glioblastoma drug resistance


Drug resistance and frequent tumor relapses are the major obstacles in
glioblastoma therapy, and recurrent tumors are practically incurable. We
previously reported that insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), which is a
typical signaling molecule for insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1
receptors, can translocate to nucleus, and that nuclear IRS-1 (nIRS-1)
was found in different tumor cells, including glioblastomas. To unravel
its function, we employed glioblastoma cell culture, animal models, and
clinical samples. Using confocal imaging, molecular cloning, subcellular
fractionation, mass spectrometry, gene expression analysis, and different
approaches to verify protein-protein interactions, we demonstrate for the
first time that nIRS-1 can form complex nuclear structures in a
restricted number of cancer cells in glioblastoma biopsies and in
intracranial glioblastoma xenografts. We also demonstrated the formation
of highly organized ring-like structures in several cell lines, following
ectopic expression of IRS-1 cloned in frame with nuclear localization
signal (NLS-IRS-1). In these nuclear structures IRS-1 localizes at the
periphery, and the core of the structure harbors a key autophagy protein,
LC3; however, other autophagy proteins or biological membranes were not
detected. In living cells expressing NLS-IRS-1-GFP fusion protein,
IRS-1/LC3 structures are highly dynamic. They rapidly exchange IRS-1
molecules with nucleoplasm and interact with other nuclear complexes
including BMI1-positive Polycomb bodies, PML bodies and Cajal bodies.
Importantly, clones and mixed populations of cells expressing the
NLS-IRS-1 and capable of forming the IRS-1/LC3 ring-like structures
undergo extensive remodeling of gene expression, which suggests a
transition to stem-like phenotype and associated resistance to several
different anticancer drugs, including temozolomide. This is the first
demonstration of IRS-1/LC3 nuclear complexes, which are highly dynamic
and may play a role in epigenetic remodeling of glioblastoma cells
towards stemness. Further studies are required to determine detailed
molecular composition and to explain how these new nuclear structures
function.

