Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting epigenetic regulation in clear cell renal cell carcinoma


Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the most common subtype of renal
cell cancer, is highly resistant to traditional radiation and
chemotherapy. Recently, targeted therapies have extended progression-free
survival, but responses are variable and no significant overall survival
benefit has been achieved; thus, treatment options are scarce for
patients bearing this disease. The majority of ccRCC cases (90%) are
characterized by bi-allelic loss of the von Hippel Lindau (VHL) gene,
followed by mutations in the epigenetic regulators PBRM1 (23%), SETD2
(8.4%), BAP1 (7.1%), and KDM5C (4.7%). The latter four genes implicate an
integral role for chromatin remodeling in ccRCC, and thus signify a new
realm of exploration and therapeutic targeting for this disease. Given
the limited number of commercially available ccRCC cell lines, and
reports that they may not accurately reflect primary tumors at the
molecular level, our lab developed a novel method to generate primary
patient-derived ccRCC (VHLmut) cells and matched normal renal proximal
tubular epithelial (VHLwt) cells from human surgical specimens with high
efficiency. This involved fluorescence-activated cell sorting of primary
tumor single cell suspensions using the cell surface marker carbonic
anhydrase IX (CA9), a HIF target which is upregulated upon VHL loss, to
establish CA9+ VHLmut and CA9 VHLwt cells. Transcriptional profiling of
VHLmut and VHLwt pairs found gene signatures that corresponded with
patient matched primary ccRCC tumors and adjacent normal tissues in The
Cancer Genome Atlas, demonstrating that these cells represent novel
models for interrogation of ccRCC biology and testing of therapeutic
strategies. Here, in the current study, these newly established cells
were utilized to screen a focused library of 30 well-characterized
drug-like compounds targeting specific components of chromatin remodeling
complexes to determine the effect on cell growth in culture. At Day 0,
786-0 (VHL) cells and VHLmut cells corresponding to four patient primary
ccRCC tumors were plated at 2,500 cells/well in 96-well black
clear-bottom plates (n = 5). Cells were then treated with the library of
chromatin-targeting drugs on Day 1 and monitored until control-treated
cells were 90-95% confluent. At endpoint, cells were fixed and stained
with DRAQ5, a DNA intercalating dye that stains DNA stoichiometrically,
for visualization on the LI-COR Odyssey CLx Imaging System. Across all
five samples, there was a significant reduction in growth observed among
cells treated with drugs targeting: i) BET bromodomains (BRD2, BRD3, BRD4
and BRDT), ii) EZH1/2, and iii) JMJD3, UTX and JARID1B. Ongoing work will
determine mechanisms of action and whether these targets are also
affected in matching VHLwt cells in order to identify compounds that may
translate well in the clinic to treat patients with ccRCC.

