Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alterations in endothelin axis during pancreatic acinar to ductal
metaplasia


Background: Acinar-ductal-metaplasia (ADM) is one the earliest
recognizable alterations in the tumorigenesis of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Inflammation-induced ADM, which is typically
reversible upon removal of inflammatory insult, becomes irreversible in
the presence of oncogenic K-Ras and progresses to Pancreatic
Intraepithelial neoplastic lesions (PanINs) and subsequently PDAC.
Endothelin (ET) axis comprising of endothelin isoforms (ET-1, ET-2 and
ET-3) and two receptors A (ETAR) and B (ETBR), has been demonstrated to
contribute to the pathobiology of pancreatitis and its components exhibit
aberrant overexpression in pancreatic cancer PDAC. However, the
expression patterns of ET axis in oncogene-associated early lesions
remain unknown. We hypothesize that alterations in ET axis contribute to
oncogene associated irreversible ADM. Thus, we studied expression pattern
of ET axis in the pancreatic inflammation in the presence and absence of
oncogenic KRas and in preneoplastic lesions.Methods: Expression of ET-1,
ETAR and ETBR was analyzed in murine models of preneoplastic lesions [KC
model: (Pdx1-Cre, KrasG12D)) by IHC. To determine the changes in ET axis
during ADM, wild type (WT) and KC mutant mice were treated with cerulein
to induce pancreatitis and tissues collected at day 0, 2, 7 and 21 days
post treatment were analyzed for mRNA and Immunofluorescence analysis.
Expression pattern of ET axis components was also determined in the
pancreas of KC and WT animals following exposure to cigarette
smoke.Results: A progressive increase in the expression of ET-1, ETAR and
ETBR was observed in the PanIN lesions in KC mice. In mice with WT Kras,
cerulein treatment resulted in a notable increase in the expression of
ET-1 and ETAR at day 2, while the levels of ETBR increased marginally;
however a recovery to basal levels was observed for all three molecules
by day 7. In contrast, significant increase (pBackground:
Acinar-ductal-metaplasia (ADM) is one the earliest recognizable
alterations in the tumorigenesis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC). Inflammation-induced ADM, which is typically reversible upon
removal of inflammatory insult, becomes irreversible in the presence of
oncogenic K-Ras and progresses to Pancreatic Intraepithelial neoplastic
lesions (PanINs) and subsequently PDAC. Endothelin (ET) axis comprising
of endothelin isoforms (ET-1, ET-2 and ET-3) and two receptors A (ETAR)
and B (ETBR), has been demonstrated to contribute to the pathobiology of
pancreatitis and its components exhibit aberrant overexpression in
pancreatic cancer PDAC. However, the expression patterns of ET axis in
oncogene-associated early lesions remain unknown. We hypothesize that
alterations in ET axis contribute to oncogene associated irreversible
ADM. Thus, we studied expression pattern of ET axis in the pancreatic
inflammation in the presence and absence of oncogenic KRas and in
preneoplastic lesions.Methods: Expression of ET-1, ETAR and ETBR was
analyzed in murine models of preneoplastic lesions [KC model: (Pdx1-Cre,
KrasG12D)) by IHC. To determine the changes in ET axis during ADM, wild
type (WT) and KC mutant mice were treated with cerulein to induce
pancreatitis and tissues collected at day 0, 2, 7 and 21 days post
treatment were analyzed for mRNA and Immunofluorescence analysis.
Expression pattern of ET axis components was also determined in the
pancreas of KC and WT animals following exposure to cigarette
smoke.Results: A progressive increase in the expression of ET-1, ETAR and
ETBR was observed in the PanIN lesions in KC mice. In mice with WT Kras,
cerulein treatment resulted in a notable increase in the expression of
ET-1 and ETAR at day 2, while the levels of ETBR increased marginally;
however a recovery to basal levels was observed for all three molecules
by day 7. In contrast, significant increase (p<0.005) in ET-1, ETAR and
ETBR transcripts was observed following cerulein treatment and these
levels continued to remain high even at 21 days post-trauma in KC mice.
The changes in the expression ETAR and ETBR were corroborated by confocal
microscopy. Cerulein treatment resulted in increased expression of ETAR
and ETBR in acinar compartment in both WT and KC mice as indicated by
their co-localization with amylase. In KC mice, cerulein induced
acinar-to-ductal metaplasia and the resulting CK19 positive ductal
components continued to express increased levels of both receptors with
distinct magnitude and kinetics. Similarly, in the smoking models,
ET-axis components exhibited a more robust and sustained overexpression
in KC mice as compared to the WT.Conclusions: The expression of oncogenic
KrasG12D results in an enhanced and sustained activation of ET-axis
following inflammatory insults in the pancreatic tissues, suggesting its
possible role in tumor initiation and progression.

