Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming the immunologic microenvironment through radiation
and Axl targeting


There is increasing evidence that hypofractionated high dose ionizing
radiation (RT) can enhance antitumor immune responses in many cancers. In
some cases the combination of RT and checkpoint immunotherapy can enhance
antitumor immune responses. Here, we developed a model to study the
genetic, microenvironmental, and immunologic factors of immune mediated
antitumor responses after radiation. Two different tumor clones from the
same parental transgenic PyMT mammary carcinoma model reveal similar
growth characteristics but different responses to RT primarily due to an
antitumor immune response. The responsive Py117 tumors increase
expression of PD-L1 after RT and the antitumor response is enhanced with
immune checkpoint antibodies (Ab) targeting PD-1 and CTLA-4. However the
unresponsive Py8119 tumors do not respond to radiation or combination
immunotherapy. Key differences in the microenvironment include greater
infiltration of suppressive macrophages, lower MHCI on tumor cells, and
low T cell infiltrates. Upon profiling differences in the tumors we found
that Axl a receptor tyrosine kinase of the TAM family associated with
invasion and metastasis in a broad range of tumors was overexpressed on
the surface of Py8119 cells but not Py117. We genetically knocked out Axl
in Py8119 cells using CRISPR/Cas technology and found greater tumor
latency and enhanced radiosensitivity in the mouse but not in culture.
The effects are largely immune mediated as the RT response was diminished
in nude mice. On analysis of the tumor cells we found that MHCI is
significantly increased and secretion of a number of chemokines is
diminished after Axl targeting. In the tumor microenvironment there was
significant decrease in macrophages, increase in myeloid dendritic cells,
and resulting influx of T cells by 10 days after RT. These data suggest
that Axl may not only mediate invasion and metastasis but can influence
immunoserveilance and response to therapy through suppression of antigen
presentation and supporting a tumor promoting immune microenvironment
through chemokine signaling.

