Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Placental characteristics and risk of cryptorchidism among
populations at high and low risk of testicular germ cell tumors


Background: Testicular germ cell tumors, which are significantly more
common among white men than black men in the U.S., are thought to be part
of a Testicular Dysgenesis Syndrome (TDS) that also includes impaired
fertility, hypospadias and cryptorchidism. The etiology of the TDS
conditions is not well understood, but the in-utero milieu is likely to
be a significant factor. As the placenta is a critically important
determinant of the in-utero milieu, placental characteristics may play a
role in determining risk of the TDS conditions. Prior evidence suggests
that placental weight, in particular, may be associated with
cryptorchidism.Methods: We examined placental characteristics (weight,
thickness, placental weight/birth weight ratio, infarct size, disorders
of membrane development, presence of macrophages in the amniotic fluid)
and cryptorchidism in a nested case-control study within the
Collaborative Perinatal Project (CPP). The CPP was a maternal-child
cohort study conducted in 12 medical centers in the U.S. between 1959 and
1965. Diagnoses of cryptorchidism made during the first year of life were
included in the case group. The analysis contrasted 413 (232 white, 181
black) boys with cryptorchidism to 23,799 (12,092 white, 11,707 black)
boys without cryptorchidism. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were calculated using unconditional logistic regression,
stratified by race.Results: Among white boys, cryptorchidism was
significantly associated with circummarginate placenta (OR: 1.7, 95% CI:
1.1-2.7) or a combination of circummarginate/circumvallate (OR: 1.3, 95%
CI: 1.0-1.8) placenta. Among black boys, cryptorchidism was significantly
associated with having at least one placental infarct greater than 3 cm
(OR: 2.3, 95% CI: 1.1-4.8) and with placental weight in the lower (OR:
1.7, 95% CI: 1.1-2.6) or higher (OR: 1.5, 95% CI: 1.0-2.3) tertile
compared with the middle tertile. No significant associations were found
between cryptorchidism and the other placental characteristics in either
white or black boys.Conclusion: These results suggest that there may be
associations between cryptorchidism and certain placental characteristics
which differ between white and black births. The race-specific findings
suggest an area where future research may prove fruitful.

