Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of the DLC1 RhoGAP tumor suppressor by point mutation
occurs commonly in human cancer and can result from Rho-dependent or
Rho-independent mechanisms


The Rho GTPases, which are frequently activated in advanced cancer,
stimulate their downstream effectors to regulate a variety of fundamental
cellular process, e.g., cell cycle, cell migration, cell-cell adhesion,
and cytoskeleton organization. The down-regulation of RhoGAPs is one
mechanism of increased Rho activity, and members of the tumor suppressor
DLC Rho-GAP family (DLC1-3) are frequently down-regulated by gene
deletion or DNA methylation in human cancers. Here we report that, in
addition, point mutations in the DLC1-3 coding regions occur frequently
in certain cancers, most of the mutants we have analyzed have reduced
tumor suppressor activity, at least two distinct mechanisms can account
for this reduction, and one mechanism appears to be Rho-independent. In
the TCGA database, DLC1 was mutated in 11% of gastric cancer (GAC), 10%
colorectal cancer (CRC), 7% of melanomas (MEL), and 6% of lung
adenocarcinoma (LAD). Most alterations were point mutations encoding a
single amino acid change. Mutation of DLC2 and DLC3 also occurred in
these tumor types, but were less frequent. The mutation frequency of
p190-A, which is a Rho-GAP from a different gene family, was even less
frequent, ranging from 4% in LAD to zero in GAC. Taken together, mutation
of at least one DLC gene or p190-A was found in about 20% of LAD, CRC,
and MEL, and 15% of GAC. In LAD, the DLC1 expression levels from the
patients with DLC1 mutations were lower than the patients with DLC1 wild
type, suggesting selection for decreased DLC1 expression in tumors
harboring mutant DLC1. We constructed expression vectors for many of the
DLC1 mutants and analyzed their phenotypes in human tumor cell lines.
Most were found to be loss of tumor suppressor function mutants, as they
were deficient for reducing growth in soft agar, cell migration, and
focal adhesion turnover. One class of deficient mutants had lesions in
the RhoGAP domain, which directly inactivated its RhoGAP activity and
increased the activity of Rho downstream effectors. A second class had
lesions in the DLC1 START (StAR-related lipid-transfer) domain, which is
known to bind caveolin. although the RhoGAP activity was normal, complex
formation with caveolin was much lower than with wild type DLC1. We
conclude that, in addition to the frequent down-regulation of DLC1
expression via gene deletion or DNA methylation in tumors, point mutation
of its coding sequence commonly inactivates the tumor suppressor activity
of DLC1 at the protein level by at least two alternate mechanisms:
attenuation of it binding to caveolin or of its RhoGAP activity, which
up-regulates RhoA and its downstream effectors. (# Contributed equally)

