Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 genomic amplification in circulating tumor DNA from patients
with cetuximab-resistant colorectal cancer


Background: Patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) harboring
wild-type KRAS benefit from epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-targeted therapy. However, patients who are treated with anti-EGFR
antibodies will eventually develop the resistance to those agents. We
previously found that HER2 amplification was one of the mechanisms
conferring resistance to anti-EGFR antibody therapy and could therefore
be a potential therapeutic target (Yonesaka et al, STM 2011). The aim of
this study was to detect HER2 amplification in circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) from patients with CRC and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR
antibody therapy.Methods: We analyzed plasma ctDNA using digital
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from 18 patients with CRC, who had been
treated with anti-EGFR antibody-based therapy (cetuximab) and
subsequently acquired resistant cetuximab. We aimed to obtain at least
100 droplets for HER2 and EFTUD2 to accurately assess the ratio. Digital
PCR data were analyzed using the QuantaSoft analytical software package
(Bio-Rad). The copy number concentration of each gene (HER2 and EFTUD2)
was estimated from the Poisson distribution. HER2 amplification with
digital PCR was defined as a HER2 ratio (HER2/EFTUD2 copy number ratio)
of 1.25 accordingly (Gevensleven H et al, CCR 2013). HER2 gene copy
number was analyzed using fluorescence in situ hybridization also in
tumor samples before and after acquisition of resistance to
cetuximab-based therapy.Results: Our data showed various HER2 copy number
in plasma ctDNA from CRC patients (median: 1.09; range: 0.94-5.18). 22%
(4/18) of patients in the cohort exhibited HER2 amplification. One of
these patients was found to be positive for HER2 amplification in matched
tumor specimens collected after cetuximab therapy, at which point
thepatient had acquired cetuximab resistance, despite being negative for
HER2 amplification prior to therapy (pre: 1.14, post: 2.78).Conclusion:
Analysis of plasma ctDNA by digital PCR could be useful for detecting
HER2 amplification in patients with CRC who were resistant to anti-EGFR
antibody therapy. We are now conducting another, large-scale study for
evaluating HER2 amplification by ctDNA in CRC patients using digital PCR.

