Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the mechanism of 2FF-induced immune modulation


Fucosylation is the process of adding a fucose sugar to a glycan chain.
The fucose analog, 2-fluorofucose (2FF), has been shown to inhibit
cellular fucosylation by depletion of the fucosylation substrate,
GDP-fucose, as well as direct inhibition of fucosyltransferases. 2FF has
shown promising activity in a number of tumor models. For example 2FF
enhanced the protective effect of a lymphoma vaccine (Okeley et al, PNAS
110, 2013), and this protection was determined to be immune dependent
since depletion of CD4 and CD8 T-Cells reduced the 2FF/vaccine activity.
Due to the complex nature of immune interactions in vivo we established
an experimental system using human PBMCs to assess how 2FF-mediated
immune changes may contribute to 2FF anti-tumor activity.Human PBMCs were
matured in the presence of 2FF for 10 days and phenotypic analysis was
performed. Using lectin binding, we found that 2FF dose-dependently
decreased cell surface fucosylation which correlated with decreased
levels of GDP-fucose and formation of GDP-2FF. 2FF-treatment alone had
minimal effect on immune cell phenotype and no significant changes in
activation or lineage markers were identified.Recently receptor
fucosylation has been shown to be critical for BCR antigen recognition
and antibody production (Li et al, J Immunol 194, 2015) as well as TLR
recognition and signaling through the scavenger receptor DC-SIGN
(Gringhuis et al, Nat Commun 5, 2014). As the TCR is reported to be
fucosylated and basal signaling and activation of this receptor is
regulated by a galectin-glycoprotein lattice we hypothesized that
afucosylation following 2FF treatment may affect TCR functionality.
During TCR engagement and activation the galectin-glycoprotein lattice is
disrupted. 2FF-treated T cells show decreased galectin-3 levels and when
activated have increased and more sustained TCR signaling, shown by
increased levels of phosphorylated TCR associated proteins. Additionally,
2FF-treated T cells show increased tetramer specific binding. These data
indicate that alteration in surface fucosylation on T cells impacts the
regulatory glycoprotein lattice that negatively influences T cell action.
Following up on this observation, in co-cultures 2FF-treated T cells
activate dendritic cells in a contact dependent and antigen specific
manner, shown by upregulation of maturation markers MHCII, CD83, CD86 and
CD40.Overall we hypothesize that 2FF-treated T cells are more easily
activated due to decreased avidity of galectin-3 binding to glycoproteins
which lowers the threshold of lattice disruption by peptide-MHC resulting
in easier TCR engagement, increased TCR signaling, and dendritic cell
maturation.

