Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzaldehyde suppresses multiple signal pathways in cancer cells
by regulating 14-3-3-mediated protein-protein interactions


Benzaldehyde is the simplest aromatic aldehyde constituent of almonds and
many fruits. Anticancer effect of Benzaldehyde was first reported in
1980, and multi-institutional clinical trials were performed in those
days in Japan. However trial was over without determination of
effectiveness, only its safety was confirmed. The underlying mechanism
why Benzaldehyde specifically suppresses growth of some particular cancer
cells but not that of normal cells has not been elucidated. Therefore, we
attempted to clarify the mechanism of anticancer effect of Benzaldehyde.
In pancreatic cancer cell BxPC3 and in non-small cell lung cancer cell
A549, we found that Benzaldehyde inhibits PI3K/AKT/mTOR, STAT3, NFB and
ERK pathways, those are major signaling pathways activated in cancer
cells. Effects of Benzaldehyde on multiple signaling pathways are found
to be derived from regulation of 14-3-3 family proteins which interact
with phosphorylation sites of various proteins of multiple signals. In
BxPC3 cells, Benzaldehyde treatment reduced the phosphorylation levels of
14-3-3-binding sites. Furthermore, we ectopically expressed seven
isoforms of 14-3-3 in HEK293T cells and found that Benzaldehyde treatment
significantly suppressed association of 14-3-3 with client proteins such
as mTOR, Rictor, cRaf, STAT3 and FOXOs. The interaction of other isoforms
of 14-3-3 with their client proteins was also partially reduced. But, the
expression levels of those seven 14-3-3 isoforms were not significantly
changed. Those data indicate that Benzaldehyde suppresses the interaction
of 14-3-3 with its client proteins. Recent reports have shown that 14-3-3
is overexpressed in many cancers and acts as a signaling hub controlling
the network of oncogenic pathways, suggesting that 14-3-3 associates with
carcinogenesis, metastasis and resistance for chemotherapy and radiation.
Hence, Benzaldehyde is considered to be a new class of anti-cancer agent
inhibiting 14-3-3-mediated tumor promoting and/or maintaining signals.

