Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC mediates FOXC2 transcriptional repression of p120-catenin in
breast cancer


Background: Protein kinase C alpha (PKC) has been studied as a predictive
biomarker for breast cancer aggressiveness and resistance to therapy. In
this study, we identified a novel signaling pathway regulated by PKC in
breast cancer cells that involves FOXC2 and p120-catenin (p120), a
prominent member of adherens junctions (AJs). We report her that PKC
causes dissolution of AJs, a mechanism which contributes to cancer cells
becoming more migratory and invasive, two key features of metastasizing
cells. Interestingly, we found that this mechanism is relevant in both
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, endocrine resistant as well as triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) (lack of ER, progesterone receptor, and
HER2/neu amplification).Methods: ER+, endocrine resistant (T47D/PKC and
T47D:A18-TAM1) and TNBC cell lines (HCC1143 and HCC1937) were cultured
according to previous publication and ATCC guidelines. Migration and
invasion assays were done in Transwell polycarbonate membranes (Corning).
Promoter activity of p120 was measured by luciferase assay using p120
reporter construct obtained from Dr. Fariborz Mortazavi (Division of
Hematology/Oncology, UCLA). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to
assess binding of FOXC2 on p120 promoter was done using ChIP-grade FOXC2
antibody (Abcam). Lipofectamine2000 (Invitrogen) was used for
transfection of PKC (Sigma) and FOXC2 (IDT) siRNAsResults and
Conclusions: We found that FOXC2 is a downstream target of PKC;
activation of PKC by a phorbol ester significantly up-regulated FOXC2
mRNA and knockdown of PKC by siRNA reduced expression of FOXC2 at both
the mRNA and protein level. Immunofluorescence staining showed that
depletion of PKC rescued E-cadherin, secondary to the recovery of p120
expression at the AJ. We demonstrated by ChIP that FOXC2 binds to the
promoter region and represses transcription of p120, indicating a novel
finding that FOXC2 is a transcriptional repressor of p120 in breast
cancer. Therefore, through FOXC2, PKC can negatively regulate the AJ
complex integrity. Correspondingly, knockdown of either PKC or FOXC2 led
to a reduction in the migration and invasion, concomitant with an
increase of p120 at the AJ. Data obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) indicates that high co-expression of PKC and FOXC2 along with low
expression level of p120 are characteristic of TNBC patients, confirming
the relevance of this signaling axis in clinical samples. In conclusion,
we have identified a new mechanism for migration and invasion in breast
cancer cells: in the presence of PKC, transcriptional repression of p120
by FOXC2 results in down-regulation of E-cadherin and dissociation of the
AJs. Notably, we demonstrated that this mechanism is relevant in two
distinct molecular subtypes of breast cancer: ER+, endocrine resistant
and TNBC. Targeting the PKC-FOXC2-p120 axis has the potential to reduce
the metastatic capacity of these cancer cells.

