Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ormeloxifene, a novel pharmacological activator of PKD1 enhances
docetaxel sensitivity in prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer (PrCa) is the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in American Men. Docetaxel (DTX) is a standard
first-line treatment for metastatic castration-resistant PrCa after the
failure of hormone therapy. However, most PrCa patients who receive DTX
experience only transient benefits and rapidly develop incurable drug
resistance. Protein Kinase D1 (PKD1), one of the serine threonine kinases
from PKD family is highly expressed in normal prostate tissues and is
suppressed during PrCa progression. Accumulative evidence suggest a tumor
suppressive role of PKD1 in PrCa, while other isoforms of PKD (PKD2 and
PKD3) act as oncogene. In this study, we identified pharmacological agent
Ormeloxifene (ORM) which selectively activates PKD1 and inhibits
metastasis associated protein 1 (MTA1), thus induces sensitivity to DTX
treatment in PrCa cells.Materials and Methods: We have used
androgen-independent human PrCa cells (C4-2) which show low PKD1
expression compared to other PrCa cell lines. Cells were treated with 10
and 15 M doses of ORM for 24 hrs and various functional assays (cell
proliferation, colony formation, motility and invasion) were performed.
In a parallel experiment, cells were treated with ORM (10 and 15 M) for
24 hrs protein and RNA samples isolation. Protein lysates were used to
investigate the effect of ORM on PKD1, PKD2, PKD3 and MTA1 protein
levels. qRT-PCR was performed to investigate the effect of ORM on PKD1,
PKD2 and PKD3 expression at mRNA levels. To investigate if ORM treatment
sensitizes the effects of DTX, cells were treated with ORM and DTX alone
or in combination. In-silico docking studies were performed to determine
the putative molecular interaction of ORM with MTA1.Results: ORM
treatment inhibits proliferation and clonogenic potential of C4-2 cells.
We observed that ORM significantly induces PKD1 expression at protein and
mRNA level in C4-2 cells. To determine whether this PKD1 inducing effects
of ORM in PrCa cells is specific, we examined the effects of ORM on PKD2
and PKD3 at mRNA and protein levels. Interestingly, we observed that ORM
treatment inhibits expression of oncogenic PKD3 isoform, however, no
effect PKD2 was observed. MTA1 is involved in DTX resistance and ORM
treatment effectively inhibited the expression of MTA1. However, there
was no effect of DTX treatment on the expression of MTA1. We also
observed that ORM treatment significantly potentiates the effect of DTX
on cell viability and colony formation of C4-2 cells. In-silico docking
studies between ORM and MTA1 showed four potential binding sites with
best score at serine 270.Conclusion: Overall, our study defines ORM as a
novel PKD1 activator/modulator which also inhibits a key metastasis
associated protein, MTA1 and sensitizes the PrCa cells to DTX. Based on
these results, it appears that ORM may be a novel therapeutic modality
for advanced stage metastatic PrCa alone or in combination with DTX.

