Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 and CXCR7 homodimers and heterodimers play differential
roles in breast cancer


The majority of breast cancer deaths are due to the metastasis of tumor
cells to secondary organs. One of the most studied metastatic processes
is the migration of chemokine receptor-expressing cancer cells towards
their ligands in other organs, a mechanism where the receptor CXCR4 and
the chemokine CXCL12 play key roles. This process, however, may be
affected by the expression of the atypical receptor CXCR7, which has
recently been linked to breast cancer progression. Indeed, staining of
CXCR7 in patient samples is strongly positive in both lobular and ductal
breast cancers. Given CXCR7's ability to form heterodimers with CXCR4, we
investigated how dual expression of both receptors differs from their
lone expression in terms of their signaling and internalization
pathways.In this study we created stable single CXCR4 or CXCR7 CHO
transfectants or double CXCR4-CXCR7 transient transfectants to examine
ligand-dependent receptor internalization. The presence of heterodimers
was evaluated using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). We
found that in CHO-CXCR4 the receptor was degraded after a 30 minute
stimulation with 10 nM CXCL12, whilst in CHO-CXCR7 the receptor returned
to the surface in under 2 hours, reaching higher CXCR7 levels than before
treatment. RT-PCR data suggested that this increase was partially due to
induction of further CXCR7 expression. When the receptors were
coexpressed, a similar pattern could be seen, although the CXCR7
recycling levels were not as high. CXCR4 degradation could be partially
inhibited by pretreating cells with 1 M lactacystin, a proteasome
inhibitor. When cells were stimulated for 1 hour with 1 nM VUF11207, a
CXCR7 agonist, no significant effect was seen on CHO-CXCR4 whilst
CHO-CXCR7 cells showed internalization and recycling. Supporting RT-PCR
data showed that the agonist did not trigger CXCR7 expression like seen
with CXCL12. Interestingly, when coexpressed, both CXCR4 and CXCR7 showed
degradation after internalization. Similar results were observed with
MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with CXCR4 or CXCR7.The effects of the
binding were also assessed by measuring ERK phosphorylation by Western
blot and cell-based ELISA. An early but transient (5-15 minutes) ERK
activation was seen in CHO-CXCR4 cells, whilst CHO-CXCR7 cells showed a
sustained activation of up to 2 hours. On the other hand, CHO-CXCR4-CXCR7
cells showed a very strong phosphorylation at 5 minutes that quickly
diminished. The role of the receptors in invasion and migration in the
presence of CXCL12 was also assessed.In summary, this study highlights
how CXCR4/CXCR7 heterodimerization can create a distinct signaling entity
with unique properties and alter receptor pharmacology. This could be
used to create therapeutic compounds to reduce breast cancer cell
migration.

