Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective cross-cohort discovery of transcriptional mechanisms
presiding over high-risk neuroblastoma subtype state maintenance


BACKGROUND: Neuroblastoma (NBL) is the most common extracranial solid
tumor in children. High-risk NBLs progress to metastatic disease and have
5-year survival of only 40%, despite intensive multimodal therapy. This
malignancy is characterized by significant heterogeneity, both clinical
and molecular, which is still poorly understood.Rather than focusing on
its initiating genetic events, which are highly idiosyncratic, we focused
on the core regulatory machinery responsible for implementation and
maintenance of tumor state. This approach led to elucidating three
molecularly distinct subtypes of high-risk NBLs, as well as the core
regulatory machinery responsible for their implementation and stability,
including canalization and integration of mutational events and
regulation of the genetic programs that represent the hallmarks of this
disease.METHODS: We dissected large-scale gene expression profiling data
available from TARGET and NRC Consortium by clustering algorithm and
established three subtypes of high-risk NBL, followed by identification
of master regulators (MR)s of each subtype by Master Regulator Inference
algorithm (Lefebvre, C. et al, 2010). We performed extensive experimental
validation of MRs by both in-vitro and in-vivo RNAi mediated screening,
using cell viability as readout. We then used a variety of experimental
assays to elucidate the modular logic controlling disease state and to
identify novel NBL subtype specific dependencies.RESULTS: We identified
unique MR protein modules for three distinct molecular subtypes of
high-risk NBL, which were conserved across independent cohorts.
Experimental MR validation identified a TEAD4-MYCN positive feedback loop
as the key NBL state maintenance mechanisms in the MYCN amplification
associated subtype. Jointly, MYCN and TEAD4 regulate 90% of inferred MR
proteins and causally implement 70% of the subtype gene expression
signature. Biologically, MYCN repressed differentiation and TEAD4
activated proliferation, two hallmarks of MYCN-amplified NBL.
Specifically, TEAD4 was shown to induce MYCN-independent proliferation by
transactivating key genes implicated in high-risk NBL pathogenesis,
including cyclin-dependent kinases, cyclins, E2Fs, DNA replication
factors, checkpoint kinases and ubiquitin ligases. Consistently, TEAD4
inhibition induced loss of NBL cell viability, thus providing novel
therapeutic targets. TEAD4 activity was an outstanding predictor of
survival, independent of outcome-related variables.CONCLUSION: Our
results show that the inference of transcriptional regulators driving
distinct molecular subgroups when combined with functional analyses is
valuable to uncover the regulatory modules required for sustaining the
tumor subtypes. This approach can be used to successfully identify the
functional bottlenecks of other cancer subtypes.

