Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly sensitive and cost-effective detection of somatic cancer
variants using single-molecule, real-time sequencing


Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies allow for molecular
profiling of cancer samples with high sensitivity and speed at reduced
cost. For efficient profiling of cancer samples, it is important that the
NGS methods used are not only robust but also capable of accurately
detecting low-frequency somatic mutations. Single Molecule, Real-Time
(SMRT) Sequencing offers several advantages, including the ability to
sequence single molecules with very high accuracy (>QV40) using the
circular consensus sequencing (CCS) approach. The availability of
genetically defined, human genomic reference standards provides an
industry standard for the development and quality control of molecular
assays for studying cancer variants. Here we characterize SMRT Sequencing
for the detection of low-frequency somatic variants using the
Quantitative Multiplex DNA Reference Standards from Horizon Diagnostics,
combined with amplification of the variants using the Multiplicom Tumor
Hotspot MASTR Plus assay.First, we sequenced a reference standard
containing precise allelic frequencies from 1% to 24.5% for major
oncology targets verified using digital PCR. This reference material
recapitulates the complexity of tumor composition and serves as a
well-characterized control. The control sample was amplified using the
Multiplicom Tumor Hotspot MASTR Plus assay that targets 252 amplicons
(121-254 bp) from 26 relevant cancer genes, which includes all 11
variants in the control sample. We also sequenced a second sample
containing a series of mixes, each with known mutations, at levels below
10% and down to 0.01%. PCR-amplified targets were sequenced and analyzed
using SMRT Sequencing to identify the variants and determine the observed
frequency. The random error profile and high-accuracy CCS reads make it
possible to accurately detect low-frequency somatic variants.

