Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing therapeutic efficacy of albumin bound paclitaxel in
breast cancer liver metastasis by homing to tumor associated macrophages:
In vitro, in vivo and in silico studies


This study is aimed to evaluate and enhance the albumin-bound paclitaxel
(nab-PTX) in multistage vector (MSV) for liver metastasis treatment using
in silico modeling based on in vitro data, and verified via in vivo
study. The resulting model will help for therapy optimization in the
clinical setting.Clinically, breast cancer liver metastases can be
observed as hypoattenuated in MRI and CT images caused by low penetration
of drugs or contrast agents into the lesions along with a high washout
rate, which correlates to poor chemotherapeutic response. Nab-PTX is
clinically used for treatment of advanced breast tumors, but not for
liver metastasis. We designed MSV-nab-PTX, a new nab-PTX delivery system
for specifically homing to tumor associated macrophages in the liver.
MSV-nab-PTX consists of nab-PTX loaded in porous silicon multistage
nanovectors which were previously shown to be efficient in delivering
siRNA and other therapeutics. MSV-nab-PTX was evaluated in in vitro, in
vivo and in silico models of liver metastasis. Co-culture of breast
cancer tumor cells (3D-spheroids) and macrophages was developed and
utilized to evaluate the drug efficacy and to study the mechanism of
nab-PTX transport. Addition of macrophages in the 3D model significantly
increased the efficacy of MSV-nab-PTX, but not nab-PTX, revealing the
major role of macrophages in the drug transport into the lesion. Primary
mouse and human macrophages were shown to uptake up to 10 ng of PTX/cell
in MSV-nab-PTX with no significant effects on their viability, and later
release the PTX over 24h. Treatment with MSV-nab-PTX increased chemokine
production by tumor cells when compared to nab-PTX, increasing macrophage
migration into the tumor sphere by more than 2-fold. Based on these data,
we implemented a mathematical model linking drug release and retention
from macrophages to project MSV-nAb-PTX efficacy based on the presence of
macrophages in tumor biopsies. Simulation of repeat treatment every 3
days showed a significant reduction of tumor size, and was verified by
the in vivo data. MSV-nab-PTX as compared to nab-PTX enhanced PTX
concentration in the target lesions, increased apoptosis rate and reduced
cancer cells proliferation rate, ultimately reducing the tumor size and
prolonging the survival of treated mice.This showed that MSV association
with macrophages can increase drug efficacy compared to bolus injection,
and that it is feasible to reach sustained lesion regression with the
macromolecule-bound formulation. The in silico simulations also revealed
that the timing interval is crucial for the treatment strategy, and the
effect depends on the size and vascularization stage of the lesion. We
conclude that an integrated in vitro, in vivo, and in silico framework
may be of use to assess response to albumin bound paclitaxel targeted to
breast cancer liver metastasis via tumor associated macrophages.

