Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Betaglycan-mediated regulation of mesenchymal stromal cell
behavior in the prostate tumor-bone microenvironment


Prostate cancer frequently metastasizes to bone, resulting in increased
risk of fractures and severe pain that significantly impacts patient
quality of life. Bone metastatic prostate cancer is currently incurable
with standard of care therapies being mainly palliative. In bone,
prostate cancer generates extensive osteogenic lesions by promoting
osteoblast activity. Osteoblasts are specialized bone forming cells
derived from mesenchymal stem cells. In a bid to find new molecular
targets through which prostate cancer induces osteogenesis, we incubated
nave MSCs with osteogenic bone metastatic prostate cancer cell line C4-2B
conditioned media. Gene expression analysis revealed a 3-fold increase in
expression of the TGF co-receptor, betaglycan. Given the critical role of
TGF in the context of bone metastatic disease, we examined the role of
betaglycan in MSC behavior. To this end, we utilized shRNA to knockdown
betaglycan gene expression in mouse bone marrow-derived primary MSCs.
Reduced betaglycan expression in knockdown (KD) MSCs had little to no
impact on the expression of TGF signaling receptors, TGFRI and TGFRII, or
pan-TGF ligand expression. However, using PAI promoter activity, a
readout for TGF signaling, we observed a 3-fold increase in luminescence
in KD-MSCs compared to controls. Likewise, phosphorylated Smad 2 was
significantly increased in Betaglycan KD-MSCs in response to TGF
treatment, collectively demonstrating increased TGF signaling in MSCs
with reduced betaglycan expression. Using modified Boyden chamber assays,
we found that 50% more Betaglycan-KD MSCs migrated towards recombinant
TGF than controls (100 KD-MSCs cells migrated towards recombinant TGF vs.
50 control cells); this change was reversed with the addition of
recombinant betaglycan. Using osteogenic differentiation assay, we found
that Betaglycan KD-MSC differentiation was reduced by approximately 70%
compared to control MSCs as measured by alizarin red staining. Addition
of recombinant TGF further suppressed differentiation in both KD-MSCs and
Control MSCs. This phenomenon was rescued by the addition of recombinant
betaglycan, suggesting that MSC-derived betaglycan is critical for
driving the osteogenic program. We are currently determining the impact
of betaglycan on MSC behavior in the tumor bone microenvironment using in
vivo models of bone metastatic prostate cancer. Collectively, these
findings suggest that prostate cancer-induced MSC osteogenic programs are
regulated in part via the induction of betaglycan.

