Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EpCAM positive lung cells are involved in organoid formation


A combination of fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) and 3D
culture techniques enable us to isolate specific lung cells and to form
organoids, which recapitulate organ architectures in vitro. To clarify
the cells of origin in the formation of lung organoids and to apply for
oncogene-mediated transformation, we conducted spheroid culture and 3D
culture experiments using mice lung cells.We isolated the CD31-/CD45-
cells from the lungs of wild-type (wt) or Ink4a/Arf-knockout
(Ink4a/Arf-/-) C57BL/6 mice. The single cells were then cultured in
serum-free medium in a low-attachment dish for 7 days to form spheres.
The spheres were dissociated into single cells again, and were then
infected with retroviruses expressing KRASG12V, EML4-ALK, EZR-ROS1 (Arai
et al., PLoS ONE 2013), or KIF5B-RET (Saito et al., Carcinogenesis 2014)
genes, which were identified as oncogenes in human lung adenocarcinomas.
Those oncogene-expressing sphere-derived cells from wt and Ink4a/Arf-/-
lung cells neither expressed EpCAM (the epithelial marker) nor TTF-1 (the
lung lineage marker). We found that those cells formed undifferentiated
invasive lethal tumors in lung lobes when the cells were inoculated into
the lungs of mice via the trachea, after bleomycin treatment.We then
isolated the EpCAM+/CD45-/CD31- lung cells from wt or the Ink4a/Arf-/-
C57BL/6 mice and these cells were subjected to a 3D culture. Those cells
were suspended in a serum-free medium with keratinocyte growth factor,
and the 1104 cells were seeded on a 24 well 0.4m insert pre-coated with
growth factor-reduced Matrigel. After 2 weeks, the cells formed
morphologically distinct phenotypes of colonies, such as cystic colonies,
dense sphere colonies, and branched colonies. A histopathological study
revealed that the EpCAM-positive colonies were composed of TTF-1-positive
cells, and included differentiated lung cell markers, SP-C, Aquaporin 5,
and CC-10. Interestingly, the EpCAM-/CD45-/CD31- cells from the lungs of
the Ink4a/Arf-/- mice did not form organoids under 3D culture
conditions.Our data indicates that the EpCAM-positive normal mice lung
cells, but not the EpCAM-negative cells, formed lung organoids including
TTF-1-positive cells in a 3D culture. Inoculation of EpCAM+/CD45-/CD31-
lung cells expressed oncogenes into the lungs of mice might allow us to
develop a well-differentiated lung adenocarcinoma model.

