Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast and ovarian cancer risks associated with cancer
predisposition gene mutations identified by multigene panel testing


Multigene panel testing (MGPT) for hereditary cancer is increasing in
popularity in the USA. Many panels include genes identified as hereditary
breast and/or ovarian cancer (HBOC) genes despite limited data regarding
the precise cancer risks associated with mutations in these genes. Here
we report on results from BreastNext and OvaNext panel testing of 20
genes (ATM, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CDH1, CHEK2, MLH1, MRE11A, MSH2,
MSH6, NBN, NF1, PALB2, PMS2, PTEN, RAD50, RAD51C, RAD51D, TP53) in a
cohort of 15,083 individuals. The majority of individuals were from
high-risk breast and/or ovarian (Br/Ov) cancer families, with 92.4% of
all probands meeting National Comprehensive Cancer Network HBOC testing
criteria. Pathogenic mutations were identified in 9.4% of the overall
cohort.To estimate gene-specific breast and ovarian cancer risks,
case-control analyses were performed comparing the frequencies of
pathogenic mutations from Caucasian breast or ovarian cancer cases from
BreastNext and OvaNext with frequencies from Caucasian, non-Finnish,
non-TCGA controls from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) database.
Mutations in the well studied ATM and CHEK2 genes were associated with
moderate risks (OR>2) of breast cancer and mutations in PALB2 were
associated with high-risks (OR>5) of breast cancer, consistent with
previous reports. In addition, the study suggested that pathogenic
mutations in MSH6, RAD51D, CDH1, and NF1 are associated with moderate to
high risks of breast cancer. In contrast, RAD51C, RAD51D, and BRIP1
mutations were associated with high risks of ovarian cancer, PALB2
mutations were associated with moderate risks, but ATM and CHEK2
mutations were not associated with increased ovarian cancer risk. In
addition, modeling of missense mutations in the predisposition genes
using in silico prediction algorithms suggested that missense mutations
in CDH1, CHEK2, MSH2, and MSH6 are associated with moderate risks of
breast cancer and missense mutations in RAD51C increase risks of ovarian
cancer. This large breast and ovarian cancer case-control analysis
provides useful data for many predisposition genes previously lacking
risk estimates, and should prove useful for clinical risk management of
patients after clinical panel testing.

