Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent mutations of CDKN2A genes characterize worse prognosis
of HPV positive and negative oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) exhibits unique
clinical and molecular characteristics, depending on its association with
high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) or other carcinogen like smoking1.
Considering significant subset of patients with OSCC still exhibits poor
response to contemporary treatments2, which frequently cause significant
toxicity, a more detailed understanding of these poor responders,
especially adopting current precision genomic technology, could provide a
clue for developing better treatment.Methods: In this study, we gathered
the somatic point mutations and mRNA expression data of 520 OSCC patients
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and then investigated recurrent
somatic point mutations. To genes having the recurrent and same type
point mutations, in addition, we check out the mRNA expression and
analyzed a survival analysis.Results: We found 7 somatic point mutations
of CDKN2A gene, which having recurrent patients and only nonsense SNVs.
Out of these mutation, 6 recurrent point mutations of CDKN2A gene have
highly expressed on PIK3CA, FGFR2 and FGFR3 genes, as well as showed a
significant deterioration on survival outcome.Conclusion: Recurrent
nonsense mutations of CDKN2A mostly (6/7, 85.7%) derived an abnormal
regulation of other genes, such as PI3KA, FGFR2, and FGFR3. Moreover,
this pattern of mutations significantly characterizes ominous prognosis
in HPV positive and negative OSCC. Our result might provide better
insights for characterizing the subgroup of OSCC and eventual development
of precision strategy for this disease subset.References1. Licitra, L. et
al. High-risk human papillomavirus affects prognosis in patients with
surgically treated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
24, 5630-6 (2006).2. Ang, K.K. et al. Human papillomavirus and survival
of patients with oropharyngeal cancer. N Engl J Med 363, 24-35 (2010).

