Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hedgehog Pathway Transcription Factor Gli1 Promotes Glioma
Invasiveness through Up-regulating Aquaporin 1


Gliomas, especially Glioblastoma multiformes (GBMs) express increased
aquaporin1(AQP1) compared to normal brain. AQPs may contribute to brain
edema, cell motility, and tumor angiogenesis. Although the physiology of
AQP1 has been the subject of several publications, much less is known
about the trans-acting factors involved in the control of AQP1 gene
expression and the relationship between the regulation of the AQP1
expression and the major intracellular signaling pathways is also poorly
concerned. Hedgehog signaling pathway activation is required for
sustained glioma growth and survival. playing an important role in the
genesis of glioma and In the present study, we report that Gli1, the
transcriptional activator of the Hedgehog pathway, is co-expressed with
AQP1 in human glioma tissues and can enhance AQP1 gene transcription by
binding to conserved core Gli-binding site in the 5-flanking promoter
region of the AQP1. Transfection of 293T and U251 (human glioblastoma
cell line) with Gli1 can markedly increase the AQP1 promoter reporter
activity and the AQP1 expression level. Moreover, suppressing the Gli1
expression with the specific RNAi can abort this effect. The ChIP and
reporter mutation analysis showed that the -406-398 region of the AQP1
promoter is essential for regulation activity of Gli1. To elucidate the
possible pathophysiological importance of this molecular interaction, we
investigated the migration and invasion ability of cell lines expressing
different levels of Gli1 and AQP1. The results demonstrated that
restoring the AQP1 expression in the Gli1-knockdown cell line can abort
the decrease in the migration ability, which suggested that Gli1 may
contribute to the invasion ability of glioma cells through AQP1. The
up-regulation of Gli1 and its consequences of increased AQP1 in gliomas
may provide a new therapeutic target, either as a cell surface marker or
as a functional intervention.

