Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BNC105 induces tumor micro-environment changes which enhance the
efficacy of checkpoint inhibitor therapy in preclinical models


BNC105 is a Phase II stage drug that specifically targets tubulin causing
rapid depolymerisation. The therapeutic window of BNC105 has been shown
to be superior compared to similar compounds in its class with highly
specific action on tumor vasculature and minimal off target activity.
BNC105 shows evidence of strong anti-cancer efficacy in vitro and in
animal models not only through destruction of tumour microvasculature but
also through strong suppression of cancer cell proliferation.
Complementary studies in models of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia have
shown that BNC105 also activates pro-apoptotic proteins, which mediate
cancer cell death. Recent studies have been conducted to assess changes
in the tumour microenvironment that make BNC105 amenable to combination
with immune checkpoint inhibitors.Strong synergy with BNC105 has been
seen with anti-PD-1 (97%TGI in combination compared to 40% with BNC105
and 74% with anti-PD-1 as monotherapies) and anti-CTLA-4 (70%TGI in
combination compared to 27% with BNC105 and 14% with anti-CTLA-4 as
monotherapies) using syngeneic MC38 and CT26 colorectal murine tumor
models respectively. We hypothesised that the rapid BNC105 induced tumor
microvasculature destruction and onset of tumor hypoxia and necrosis
leads to an efflux of tumor antigens being presented to the immune
system. This has the potential to elicit an immune response against
tumors with a lower mutational load than those that would otherwise
activate the immune system using checkpoint inhibitors alone. An increase
in tumoral IFNgamma can be associated with the presence of
antigen-stimulated lymphocytes within the tumor. IFNgamma levels, CD3+
and CD8+ cells were assessed in tumors treated with BNC105 to elucidate
the changes in the recruitment of T cell populations within the tumor
microenvironment. A more rapid rate of maturation of dendritic cells upon
presentation of antigen is also a potential mechanism associated with
changes in the tubulin content of the dendritic cell.The elucidation of
the mechanism whereby the disruption of micro-vasculature caused by
BNC105 further validates the complementary functional role of BNC105 in
immune activation with checkpoint inhibitors. These findings support the
investigation of combining BNC105 with immune checkpoint inhibitors with
the view of progressing such combinations to clinical evaluation.

