Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of KIT in vivo modifies immune cell populations to
improve the efficacy of checkpoint inhibitors in syngeneic mouse tumor
models


The KIT receptor tyrosine kinase plays critical roles in GIST and a range
of other tumor types, and when activated by somatic mutation serves as a
potent oncogenic driver in these neoplasms. Whereas small molecule
inhibitors of the tyrosine kinase domain of KIT have demonstrated
considerable success in treatment of GIST patients with some KIT
mutations, there remains a need to develop additional KIT-directed
therapies for treatment of GIST patients that fail to respond to these
agents, or that develop resistance during therapy. Furthermore, KIT is
prominently expressed on mast cells, which promote an immune evasive
environment within the tumor microenvironment by influencing the function
of other immune cells, such as myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs).
However, the potential impact of KIT inhibition on anti-tumor immunity
has not been studied extensively to date. KTN0158 is a humanized anti-KIT
IgG1 monoclonal antibody that specifically binds to the extracellular
domain of KIT, and is being developed as a potential therapy for cancer
and other mast cell-related diseases such as neurofibromatosis type 1
(NF1). KTN0158 inhibits KIT signaling and function in vitro and in vivo
and has demonstrated anti-tumor activity in dogs with mast cell tumors
expressing either wild-type or mutant KIT. In order to explore the
potentially broad anti-tumor benefit of KIT inhibition by an antibody, a
series of syngeneic tumor models were evaluated for sensitivity and
immune cell profile changes in response to a surrogate antibody that
recognizes mouse KIT (ACK2), dosed as either a single agent or in
combination with T cell checkpoint inhibitors. Within this panel of tumor
models, ACK2 strongly enhanced the anti-tumor activity provided by an
anti-CTLA4 antibody in the colon26 model, while exhibiting no anti-tumor
activity when dosed as a single agent. The colon26 cell line does not
express detectable levels of KIT, and does not exhibit sensitivity to
ACK2 or SCF treatment in proliferation assays performed in vitro,
suggesting that this effect of ACK2 is not due to a direct effect on the
tumor cells. Strikingly, ACK2 treatment was associated with pronounced
effects on immune cell populations, including a profound decrease in both
intra-tumoral and splenic monocytic MDSC counts. These observations
suggest that KIT inhibition in vivo has the potential to modulate immune
cell populations including MDSC's and mast cells, thereby targeting
immune suppressive innate immune cells in the tumor and sensitizing the
tumor to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Furthermore, the data provide a
rationale to investigate KTN0158 in combination with immune checkpoint
inhibitors across a range of human tumor types.

