Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in the architecture, interactions and chromatin remodeling
of SWI/SNF due to loss of Snf5


The mammalian SWI/SNF complex is a family of an estimated 100 complexes,
each with different combinations of related subunits. Efforts in
sequencing many cancer genomes has revealed that mammalian SWI/SNF
complexes is one of the most frequently mutated epigenetic factors found
in a broad range of cancers. In order to understand more about the
subunit organization of SWI/SNF and because yeast and mammalian SWI/SNF
complexes share many conserved subunits and domains; we have studied the
role of the Snf5 subunit in the yeast SWI/SNF to better understand the
role of the mammalian homolog SNF5 that is a known tumor suppressor gene.
The basis for the loss of mammalian SNF5 being a driver mutation in
pediatric rhabdoid tumors is currently not well understood or how the
loss of SNF5 effects the composition, recruitment and nucleosome
remodeling activity of the SWI/SNF complex. We have assessed the effects
on deletion of Snf5 on the compositional integrity of SWI/SNF and have
evidence for Snf5 forming a sub-complex with two other highly conserved
subunits of SWI/SNF that are lost from the complex when Snf5 is deleted.
In addition we have mapped the inter-subunit and intra-subunit
interactions of the yeast SWI/SNF complex with lysine specific homo
bi-functional crosslinkers and mass spectrometry. These data confirm the
formation of a tri-subunit Snf5 sub-complex and show that this module
uniquely interacts with the ATPase domain of the catalytic subunit of
SWI/SNF (Snf2). These observations lead to a further investigation into
the regulation of the remodeling activity of SWI/SNF by the Snf5 subunit.
We have found that Snf5 is required for the ATPase domain to make stable
interactions with nucleosomal DNA. And the loss of these interactions in
turn also causes a reduction in the remodeling efficiency of the SWI/SNF
complex. We have done additional mapping of the interactions of Snf5 as
part of the SWI/SNF complex and find that the highly conserved region of
yeast Snf5 corresponding to the human SNF5 protein associates with the
surface of the nucleosome near the histone H2A-H2B dimer. We will discuss
the relevance of these findings in highlighting how an aberrant form of
SWI/SNF could be created by loss of Snf5 and provide an example of how it
alters the normal function and structure of SWI/SNF.

