Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of ABI-231 analogs targeting the colchicine site in
tubulin for advanced melanoma


We previously discovered a novel 2-aryl-4-benzoyl-imidazole (ABI)
scaffold exerts its potent anti-proliferative effects through interacting
with the colchicine binding site in tubulin. Extensive structure-activity
relationship (SAR) studies of this novel scaffold showed that the best
analog in this series, ABI-231, has an average IC50 = 5.2 nM against
panels of melanoma and prostate cancer cell lines, is orally
bioavailable, and strongly suppress melanoma tumors in vivo. Analyses of
the potential binding pose of ABI-231 at the colchicine binding pocket
suggested small substitutions to the indole moiety in ABI-231 could
further increase its interactions to tubulin.Based this hypothesis, we
have established an efficient synthetic method for the synthesis of
ABI-231 analogs by either rotating the indole ring or introducing
substituents on the indole of ABI-231. Using this method, we synthesized
and tested 27 analogs of ABI-231. Several of the compounds show excellent
potency against a panel of melanoma cancer cell lines with a diverse
genomic background (mutations in BRAF, TP53, CDKN2A and PTEN) that are
frequently encountered in clinical metastatic melanoma tumors.
Additionally, they are not substrates for the P-glycoprotein (Pgp) efflux
pump and therefore strongly inhibited the multidrug resistant cell lines.
The potency of the compounds was further verified by their potent growth
inhibition of cancer cell colonies. Results from cell cycle analysis,
apoptosis evaluation and tubulin polymerization inhibition are consistent
with their expected mechanisms of action. Potential off-target analyses
performed by Eurofins Cerep-Panlabs SafetyScreen 44 indicated that they
are clean and does not inihibt any of the tested off-targets at 100 fold
of its IC50 value in melanoma cells, suggesting the good safety profile
for this compound and the probably these scaffold in general. We are
currently performing in vivo efficacy studies for the most potent
analogs. These compounds hold great promise as a new generation of orally
available tubulin inhibitors.

