Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of the EWS/ETS transcriptional program by BET
bromodomain and PI3K pathway inhibition blocks tumorigenicity and
increases apoptosis in Ewing sarcoma


Ewing sarcomas (ES) are highly malignant bone or soft tissue tumors.
Genetically, ES are defined by balanced chromosomal EWS/ETS
translocations that give rise to chimeric proteins (EWS-ETS), which
generate an oncogenic transcriptional program associated with altered
epigenetic marks throughout the genome.By use of an inhibitor (JQ1)
blocking BET bromodomain binding proteins (BRDs) we strikingly observed a
strong down-regulation of the predominant EWS-ETS protein EWS-FLI1 in a
dose dependent manner. This was further enhanced by co-treatment with an
inhibitor (BEZ235) of the PI3K pathway. Microarray analysis revealed JQ1
treatment to block a typical ES associated expression program. The effect
on this expression program was mimicked by RNA interference of BRD3 or
BRD4 expression but not by BRD2 blockade, indicating that the EWS-FLI1
mediated expression profile is at least in part mediated via such
epigenetic readers.JQ1 treatment not only suppressed an ES specific
expression profile but also blocked contact dependent and independent
proliferation of different ES lines. But subsequent analysis of
proliferation after transient knockdown of either BRD3 or BRD4 did not
recapitulate inhibition of proliferation as observed after JQ1 treatment,
indicating the necessary simultaneous blockade of both proteins. However,
inhibition of proliferation after JQ1 treatment was due to a partial G1
arrest and S phase elongation of the cell cycle. In addition, induction
of apoptosis as demonstrated by PARP1-, CASP7-cleavage and increased
CASP3 activity significantly contributed to the reduction of the
proliferative ability of ES lines. Single or combination treatment with
the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor BEZ235 increased apoptosis of ES cell lines
although single treatment with BEZ235 was less effective than JQ1
application. Consequently, tumor development was dose dependently
suppressed with increased formation of apoptotic bodies in a
xeno-transplant model in immune deficient mice, overall indicating that
ES may be susceptible to treatment with epigenetic inhibitors blocking
BET bromodomain activity and the associated pathognomonic EWS-ETS
transcriptional program.

