Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a proximity-based immunoassay to measure the
PD1:PD-L1 complex in fixed samples


Introduction: The binding of tumor cells expressing PD-L1 to PD1
receptors on activated T-cells inhibits T-cell activation, thereby
evading an immune response against tumor progression. Currently,
therapeutic monoclonal antibodies directed against either PD1 or PD-L1
block this interaction and restore T-cell function, leading to tumor
lysis. PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) is the most common biomarker
assay for these therapies, but disagreement exists on the antibodies used
for IHC, which cell types to score, and the criteria for positivity.
Quantitative immunofluorescence identified a significant correlation
between the proximity of PD1 and PD-L1 protein expression and response to
anti-PD1 therapy (Tumeh et al., Nature. 2014; 515:568-71). We have
developed a direct quantitative measurement of the PD1:PD-L1 complex for
the stratification of patients for anti-PD1 or anti-PD-L1 therapy. The
VeraTag PD1:PD-L1 complex immunoassay utilizes two antibody pairs for the
proximity-dependent release of a fluorescent reporter (VeraTag), which is
measured with high sensitivity via capillary electrophoresis to
accurately quantify the amount of complex in fixed samples.Methods:
Anti-PD-L1 rabbit mAb E1L3N was selected from our previously established
PD-L1 VeraTag immunoassay. Mouse anti-PD1 mAbs were screened against FFPE
human tonsil and PBMCs for development of a PD1 VeraTag assay. The
VeraTag assay for PD1:PD-L1 complex combined the anti-PD-L1 rabbit mAb
E1L3N and the anti-PD1 mouse mAb NAT105 together with a goat anti-rabbit
secondary Ab conjugated to the VeraTag reporter and a goat anti-mouse
secondary Ab conjugated to biotin. Fixed cell preparations used in the
VeraTag PD1:PDL1 complex assay were prepared by co-culturing MB453, MB231
or RKO cancer cell lines expressing varying amounts of PD-L1 with Jurkat
T cells. After 48-hours, non-adherent cells were removed by washing and
remaining cells were fixed overnight in formalin.Results: Following
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) stimulation of human PMBCs and Jurkat cells,
VeraTag measurements of PD1 protein expression increased 8- to 10-fold,
whereas PD-L1 protein expression varied Introduction: The binding of
tumor cells expressing PD-L1 to PD1 receptors on activated T-cells
inhibits T-cell activation, thereby evading an immune response against
tumor progression. Currently, therapeutic monoclonal antibodies directed
against either PD1 or PD-L1 block this interaction and restore T-cell
function, leading to tumor lysis. PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) is the
most common biomarker assay for these therapies, but disagreement exists
on the antibodies used for IHC, which cell types to score, and the
criteria for positivity. Quantitative immunofluorescence identified a
significant correlation between the proximity of PD1 and PD-L1 protein
expression and response to anti-PD1 therapy (Tumeh et al., Nature. 2014;
515:568-71). We have developed a direct quantitative measurement of the
PD1:PD-L1 complex for the stratification of patients for anti-PD1 or
anti-PD-L1 therapy. The VeraTag PD1:PD-L1 complex immunoassay utilizes
two antibody pairs for the proximity-dependent release of a fluorescent
reporter (VeraTag), which is measured with high sensitivity via capillary
electrophoresis to accurately quantify the amount of complex in fixed
samples.Methods: Anti-PD-L1 rabbit mAb E1L3N was selected from our
previously established PD-L1 VeraTag immunoassay. Mouse anti-PD1 mAbs
were screened against FFPE human tonsil and PBMCs for development of a
PD1 VeraTag assay. The VeraTag assay for PD1:PD-L1 complex combined the
anti-PD-L1 rabbit mAb E1L3N and the anti-PD1 mouse mAb NAT105 together
with a goat anti-rabbit secondary Ab conjugated to the VeraTag reporter
and a goat anti-mouse secondary Ab conjugated to biotin. Fixed cell
preparations used in the VeraTag PD1:PDL1 complex assay were prepared by
co-culturing MB453, MB231 or RKO cancer cell lines expressing varying
amounts of PD-L1 with Jurkat T cells. After 48-hours, non-adherent cells
were removed by washing and remaining cells were fixed overnight in
formalin.Results: Following phytohemagglutinin (PHA) stimulation of human
PMBCs and Jurkat cells, VeraTag measurements of PD1 protein expression
increased 8- to 10-fold, whereas PD-L1 protein expression varied <2-fold
under the same conditions. VeraTag measurements for the PD1:PD-L1 complex
increased approximately 4-fold with the addition of PHA to co-cultures of
PD-L1+ cancer cell line and Jurkat T cells. The level of PD1:PD-L1
complex varied proportionally with the number of Jurkat T cells added to
the co-culture. We are currently utilizing VeraTag assays to quantify the
amounts of PD1, PD-L1 protein and the PD1:PD-L1 complex with the VeraTag
assays across a panel of formalin fixed samples of breast, lung and
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) cancer
samples.Conclusions: We have developed sensitive and quantitative assays
for PD1, PD-L1 and the PD1:PD-L1 complex, which may provide a more direct
measurement of PD1/PD-L1 pathway interaction.

