Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic changes in T cells in response to immune checkpoint
blockade


Immune checkpoint blockade therapy has led to clinical success and have
established immunotherapy as one of the primary modality of cancer
treatment. It leads to a durable response in around 20% of the patients
(responders). Success of immune checkpoint blockade therapy relies on the
increase of effector T cells and decrease of regulatory T cells in the
tumor microenvironment. However, the underlying mechanism that govern the
ratio of effector and regulatory T cells between responder and
non-responder to checkpoint blockade is not understood. Understanding the
process could reveal novel mechanisms to boost efficacy of immune
checkpoint blockade. Differentiation of nave T cells into effector and
regulatory phenotype requires lineage-specifying transcription factors
and epigenetic modifications that allow appropriate repression or
activation of gene transcription. One key epigenetic modification for T
cell differentiation is trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3
(H3K27me3). Loss of H3K27me3 results in increased Th-1 plasticity whereas
presence of H3K27me3 on Foxp3 locus is required to maintain the function
of T-regulatory cells. We hypothesize that immune checkpoint blockade
changes the epigenetic landscape in tumor infiltrating T cells that
results in an effector phenotype and epigenetic modification of H3K27me3
could promote an anti-tumor immune microenvironment in tumor bearing
mice.We showed that in-vivo inhibition of H3K27me3 in combination with
anti-CTLA4 results in reduction of tumor size and also reduction in
regulatory T cells in a B16-F10 melanoma mice model compared to
anti-CTLA4 treatment alone, suggesting H3K27me3 inhibition could increase
the efficacy of checkpoint blockade therapy. Future studies will aim to
elucidate epigenetic changes in H3K27me3 and define an epigenetic
signature as a result of immune checkpoint therapy by ChIP-sequencing.
Data generated in this project will greatly enhance our understanding of
epigenetic regulation of T cell differentiation is response to immune
checkpoint blockade and aid identifying key changes that could be further
modified to overcome resistance to immune checkpoint blockade in
non-responders.

