Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a humanized mouse model for direct evaluation of
anti-human PD-L1 antibodies


Therapies that perturb the binding of programmed death-1 receptor ligand
(PD-L1) to its receptor PD-1 achieved unprecedented rates of sustained
clinical responses in patients with various types of cancer. Mouse
surrogate antibodies were initially evaluated in syngeneic mouse models
as the proof of concept for anti-PD-L1 therapy.However, there's an urgent
need to develop appropriate animal model to directly evaluate anti-human
PD-L1 antibodies before clinical trial. Here we describe our ongoing
efforts in developing a chimeric mouse/human cell line to test human anti
PD-L1 antibody. We profiled PD-L1 expression by FACS using anti-mouse
PD-L1 antibody and confirmed expression of PD-L1 in a series of murine
cancer cell lines. H22, a liver cancer line with moderate expression
level of PD-L1 was selected due to its in vivo sensitivity towards
anti-PD1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies. Crispr/cas9 system was employed to
knockout murine PD-L1 and replace it with the human counterpart. The
targeted knockout had been confirmed by sequencing, the expression of
human PD-L1 is illustrated by FACS using antibody that specifically
recognize human form and no cross reaction to mouse form. The engineered
H22-hPD-L1 cell line was then inoculated subcutaneously to
immune-competent BALB/c mice to establish the in vivo model that
maintains complete murine immune system and harbor humanized PD-L1. The
tumor growth curve of H22-hPD-L1 model and its sensitivity to anti-human
PD-L1 antibody have been established.In summary, our H22-hPD-L1 model may
be a valuable tool to evaluate the in vivo activity of anti-human PD-L1
antibody therapies either as a single agent or combinational strategies.
The similar engineering may be applied to more murine cell lines (e.g.
EMT-6, B16F10 and MBT-2, etc) to provide a spectrum of cell lines with
different diseases and genetic makeup for immunotherapies involving
anti-hPD-L1 antibodies.

