Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of triple negative breast cancer cell invasion by the
targeted interference of Sin3A function affecting Wnt and TGF signaling


Cancer cell invasion is an obligatory step for metastatic dissemination
that contributes to rapid relapse and a poor survival in TNBC patients.
Development of novel therapeutic strategies to block tumor invasion is an
unmet need for TNBC treatment and for other tumor types. We reported that
decoys with the SID sequence designed to bind and inhibit the function of
PAH-2 domain of Sin3A protein markedly prolong survival in the adjuvant
setting due to inhibition of metastatic dissemination to the lungs and
bone marrow in TNBC mouse models. Here, we show that TNBC cell lines
treated with SID decoys (peptides) display a strong in vitro inhibition
of migration and invasion. This is accompanied by actin cytoskeleton
reorganization with increased cortical actin, and inhibition of
proteolytic enzymes (MMP9; MT-MMP1 and uPA) involved in extracellular
matrix degradation. DNA microarray and Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA)
showed that the SID decoys inhibit Wnt and TGF signaling that is
associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Treatment
with SID decoy peptide downregulated WNT/-catenin-driven transactivation
as measured by decreased promoter H3K4me3 and decreased expression of Wnt
target genes like LEF1 and TCF7L2. We also show that SID decoys induce
translocation of nuclear -catenin to the cytoplasm in TNBC at 24 hours.
Wnt/-catenin is critical for EMT, cancer stem cell self-renewal, and
early invasion in TNBC. TGIF1, a transcription factor that modulates TGF
and Wnt signaling pathways and known to to interact with the PAH2 domain
of Sin3A, can be dissociated from Sin3A complex by SID decoy treatment as
measured by co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and proximity linked assay.
DNA microarray of SID peptide treated TNBC cells shows inhibition of TGF
signaling evidenced by downregulation of MMP9, MT1-MMP and PLAU, known
target genes of this pathway. This is in line with inhibition of the EMT
program predicted by the IPA analysis in SID peptide treated TNBC. Taken
together, the results indicate that SID decoys have potential value as
therapeutic agents to revert the EMT program in TNBC that should
translate into the inhibition of metastasis dissemination and eradication
of residual disease in TNBC. To test this in clinic future investigations
will involve the use of our previously identified small molecule mimetic
of SID peptide, selamectin that is also a FDA approved drug. Use of a
recently constructed cyclic stapled peptide that inhibits PAH-2 binding
and invasion at Cancer cell invasion is an obligatory step for metastatic
dissemination that contributes to rapid relapse and a poor survival in
TNBC patients. Development of novel therapeutic strategies to block tumor
invasion is an unmet need for TNBC treatment and for other tumor types.
We reported that decoys with the SID sequence designed to bind and
inhibit the function of PAH-2 domain of Sin3A protein markedly prolong
survival in the adjuvant setting due to inhibition of metastatic
dissemination to the lungs and bone marrow in TNBC mouse models. Here, we
show that TNBC cell lines treated with SID decoys (peptides) display a
strong in vitro inhibition of migration and invasion. This is accompanied
by actin cytoskeleton reorganization with increased cortical actin, and
inhibition of proteolytic enzymes (MMP9; MT-MMP1 and uPA) involved in
extracellular matrix degradation. DNA microarray and Ingenuity pathway
analysis (IPA) showed that the SID decoys inhibit Wnt and TGF signaling
that is associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Treatment with SID decoy peptide downregulated WNT/-catenin-driven
transactivation as measured by decreased promoter H3K4me3 and decreased
expression of Wnt target genes like LEF1 and TCF7L2. We also show that
SID decoys induce translocation of nuclear -catenin to the cytoplasm in
TNBC at 24 hours. Wnt/-catenin is critical for EMT, cancer stem cell
self-renewal, and early invasion in TNBC. TGIF1, a transcription factor
that modulates TGF and Wnt signaling pathways and known to to interact
with the PAH2 domain of Sin3A, can be dissociated from Sin3A complex by
SID decoy treatment as measured by co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and
proximity linked assay. DNA microarray of SID peptide treated TNBC cells
shows inhibition of TGF signaling evidenced by downregulation of MMP9,
MT1-MMP and PLAU, known target genes of this pathway. This is in line
with inhibition of the EMT program predicted by the IPA analysis in SID
peptide treated TNBC. Taken together, the results indicate that SID
decoys have potential value as therapeutic agents to revert the EMT
program in TNBC that should translate into the inhibition of metastasis
dissemination and eradication of residual disease in TNBC. To test this
in clinic future investigations will involve the use of our previously
identified small molecule mimetic of SID peptide, selamectin that is also
a FDA approved drug. Use of a recently constructed cyclic stapled peptide
that inhibits PAH-2 binding and invasion at <10nM is also anticipated.

