Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reconstructing intratumor heterogeneity: lessons from therapeutic
intervention in patient-specific models


Precision medicine approaches seeking to predict individual
susceptibility to single or combinatorial drugs for advanced and/or
metastasized solid cancers heavily depend on biological model systems
that maintain key morphological, phenotypic and genomic features of the
original tumor.Here, we present a case study of a female patient with
metastasized colorectal cancer. Using tissue from five distinct areas of
the primary tumor and its metastasis of the synchronously removed primary
tumor and liver metastasis, we generated cell cultures. To address cell
morphology and phenotypic features we performed immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and immunofluorescence imaging showing that these cell cultures
express colon-specific marker proteins/combinations CDX2 and CK20+/CK7-.
Ultra-deep panel sequencing of original tumor tissue samples revealed
damaging mutations in KRAS (G12D), PIK3CA (H1047R) and TP53 (C242F). Two
cell cultures showed an additional SNP in the tumor suppressor SMAD4
(R361H), which was not detected in the original tissue, thus hinting at
the existence of a small sub-population of cancer cells with a divergent
mutation pattern.In parallel we established patient-derived xenografts
(PDX) models from each region and investigated the response to targeted
therapeutics, aiming at key molecules of the MAPK, PI3K/AKT and mTOR
pathways in these genetically heterogeneous populations. drug response in
single and mixed cell populations to address differential growth
characteristics and response to mono- and combinatorial drug treatment.
To distinguish the cells-of-origin and to calculate
distributions/contribution of each population to the in vivo tumor growth
in this model, sub-populations were color-coded using lentiviral
constructs, expressing either a green or red tag. FACS analyses after
treatment were performed and ratios of SMAD4mut(green) vs. SMAD4wt(red)
were determined for each PDX tumor. These analyses, together with
confirmatory IHC staining for the respective tag, showed significant
effects on both tumor growth and population distributions in a
treatment-dependent manner, advocating for systematic evaluation of
combinatorial treatment in patients.

