Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flavokawain A and B from kava extract exhibits low toxicity and
up-regulates tumor suppressor miRNAs in human osteosarcoma cells


Objective: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone malignancy
with a high propensity for local invasion and distant metastasis.
Flavokawain A and B (FKA and FKB) from kava extract have been reported to
have significant anti-tumoral effects on human cancer cells. The
consumption of kava-containing beverage has been associated with a low
cancer incidence. The objective of this study is to investigate the
anti-tumoral effects of flavokawains in OS. In a previous report, mice
treated with high-dose FKA did not demonstrate any significant major
organ toxicity. MicroRNAs (miRNA), endogenous, non-coding RNA, are
associated with cell-cycle regulation, differentiation, proliferation,
apoptosis, and migration. There remains a paucity of literature on the
effects of flavokawains on the expression of miRNA in OS. As such, we
hypothesize that flavokawains will up-regulate tumor-suppressive miRNA in
OS cell lines.Methods: Human OS cell lines from American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC), patient-derived OS cell lines, human mesenchymal stem
cells, human intestinal epithelial cells, and mouse bone marrow cells
were cultured. Cell lines were divided into control and treatment groups
with increasing doses of FKA or FKB. Cell viability was determined by MTT
proliferation assays and cytotoxicity to bone marrow cells was examined
by colony formation. Effects of flavokawain on intestinal cells were
examined by fluorescent cytotoxicity and flow cytometry. Apoptotic assays
were performed following flavokawain treatments. The expression of miRNA
after FKA and FKB treatment was examined by qRT-PCR. SCID mice were
injected with OS 143B cells in the tibia and treated with either vehicle
control or FKA (200 mg/kg) by oral gavage.Results: By flow cytometry, FKB
increases apoptosis of OS 143B cells while sparing intestinal FHs 74
intestinal cells. Mouse bone marrow cells treated with FKB showed no
significant difference in colony forming units compared to control cells.
Exposure of OS cell lines to FKA or FKB resulted in a loss of cell
viability in a dose-dependent manner. In all cell lines tested a
dose-dependent expression of miRNA was observed after exposure to FKA or
FKB. Flavokawain B induced miR-26a while FKA induced miR-26a, miR-34, and
miR-203 expression in OS cell lines. Mice bearing 143B xenograft tumors
treated with FKA did not exhibit weight loss compared to control animals.
Animals treated with FKA sustained less lung metastasis than animals
treated with vehicle control.Conclusions: Taken together, the evidence
suggests flavokawains up-regulate tumor suppressive miRNAs in OS cells.
In vivo experiments suggest that FKA exerts anti-metastatic effects in
OS. Given their low toxicity profile, flavokawains may be useful as a
chemopreventive strategy for OS and thus warrant further investigations.

