Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of autophagy modulation on synergistic interactions of
lapatinib and mTOR targeted agents in HER2-amplified lapatinib resistant
breast cancer models in vitro and in vivo


Background: Resistance against HER2 targeted agents ultimately limits the
therapeutic success in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer. It was
shown that PIK3CA mutations contribute to lapatinib resistance and
achieving control of a downstream PI3K/mTOR signaling is necessary for
optimal effectiveness of HER2 blockade. We and others have shown that
catalytic mTORC1/2 inhibitors reverse lapatinib resistance and inhibit
growth of HER2-overexpressing breast cancer models in vitro and in vivo.
However, activity of these targeted agents is hindered by the
compensatory and adaptive mechanisms that arise to assure cell survival.
One of the pro-survival responses is cytoprotective autophagy induced by
lapatinib and mTORC1/2 inhibitors. Thus, we examined whether impairing
autophagy could augment activity of lapatinib/mTORC1/2 inhibitors
combinations in lapatinib-resistant breast cancer models. Methods: The
combination of lapatinib with catalytic mTORC1/2 inhibitors KU-0063794
(KU) or AZD2014 (AZD) was evaluated in vitro and in vivo in lapatinib
resistant PIK3CA mutated HER2-overexpressing/amplified MDA-MB-361, JIMT-1
and MDA-MB-453 breast cancer models in the presence of siRNA-based (Atg7,
Beclin-1) and pharmacological (hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)) inhibitors of
autophagy. Results: In vitro lapatinib/mTORC1/2 combinations elevated
autophagy to a greater extent that either compound alone. Genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of treatment-induced autophagy further
decreased cell viability, suggesting that autophagy was playing a
cytoprotective role in this context. In vivo, lapatinib and AZD
combinations achieved effective tumor growth inhibition of 98%, 111% and
152% in MDA-MB-361, JIMT-1 and MDA-MB-453 models respectively, however
addition of HCQ did not significantly enhance this therapeutic response
(p>0.05). Conclusion: Negligible effects of HCQ in vivo in tumors treated
with lapatinib/AZD combinations may be attributed to ineffective
inhibition of autophagy-mediated survival signals that, if significantly
blocked, could increase efficacy of the treatment. Utilizing carrier
nanotechnology to optimize delivery of HCQ to the tumor site and
molecular analysis of HCQ-engendered off target effects on survival and
proliferation pathways in tumor tissue are being pursued.

