Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arenobufagin induces apoptosis, autophagy and cell cycle arrest in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells


Backgrounds: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a deadly form of cancer
without effective chemotherapy so far. Thus, there is an urgent need for
novel chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of HCC. Toad venom is
frequently used in the treatment of liver cancer in traditional Chinese
medicine. However, the exact component and the precise underlying
mechanisms against tumor cells remain unclear. In the present research,
we sought to study the antitumor mechanism of arenobufagin, a major
active ingredient isolated from toad venom, in HCC cells.Methods and
Results: The in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity was measured by
colonic formation and HepG2/ADM tumor xenograft, respectively.
Arenobufagin-induced HepG2 and HepG2/ADM cell apoptosis was detected by
Annexin V-FITC staining and transmission electron microscope. The
mitochondrial membrane potential measured by JC-1 staining combined with
the changes of expression of Caspase9, Caspase3, PARP, Bax and Bcl-2 in
HepG2 and HepG2/ADM cells suggested arenobufagin induced apoptosis via
the mitochondrial pathways. Increasing autophagosomes that identified by
Cyto-ID staining and transmission electron microscope were observed in
HepG2/ADM cells after arenobufagin treatment. Autophagy-specific
inhibitors (e.g. 3-methyladenine, chloroquine and bafilomycin A1), small
interfering RNAs target Beclin1 and Atg5 enhance arenobufagin-induced
apoptosis, indicated that arenobufagin-mediated autophagy may protects
HepG2/ADM cells from undergoing apoptotic cell death. We also
demonstrated that inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway promotes the
development of both autophagy and apoptosis caused by arenobufagin
treatment. In addition, arenobufagin arrested HCC cells in G2 phase was
determined by flow cytometry and p-Histone H3 (Ser10) staining.
Arenobufagin caused double-strand DNA breaks and triggered the DNA damage
response was evaluated by comet assay andH2AX staining, and these effects
were partly via the ATM/ATR-Chk1/Chk2-Cdc25C signaling pathway. We used a
synthetic biotinylated arenobufagin-conjugated chemical probe in live
cells to show that arenobufagin accumulated mainly in the nucleus. The
microscopic thermodynamic parameters measured using isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) also demonstrated that arenobufagin directly bound to
DNA in vitro. The spectral characteristics of DNA (e.g. UV-visible
absorption spectrum, circular dichroism spectrum and fluorescence
intensity of the ethidium bromide-DNA system) indicated that arenobufagin
bound to DNA by intercalation. Molecular modeling suggested arenobufagin
intercalated with DNA via hydrogen bonds between arenobufagin and GT base
pairs.Conclusion: This study provides novel insights into
arenobufagin-induced HCC cells apoptosis, autophagy and cell cycle
arrest. It is valuable for the further investigation of the use of
arenobufagin in clinical anticancer chemotherapy.

