Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AGS62P1, a novel site-specific antibody drug conjugate targeting
FLT3 exhibits potent anti-tumor activity regardless of FLT3 kinase
activation status


FLT3 is a member of the class III receptor tyrosine kinase family that
includes C-KIT, C-FMS and platelet derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR). FLT3 is primarily expressed in early myeloid and lymphoid
progenitors and plays an important role in their proliferation and
differentiation. In human leukemia, FLT3 is expressed on 70-90% acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and most B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL).
FLT3 genetic aberrations are commonly detected in patients with AML. The
most common aberration is internal tandem duplication (ITD), which occurs
in 25-30% of AML patients and causes constitutive activation of FLT3.
Point mutation in codon D835 of the FLT3 tyrosine kinase domain is
reported in 7-10% of AML patients and also causes constitutive activation
of the receptor. FLT3 small molecule inhibitors targeting the kinase
domain are predominantly active against FLT3 activated AML. The
restricted normal tissue expression profile and higher differential in
leukemic specimens makes FLT3 amenable to antibody-based therapeutics,
requiring only target expression independent of kinase activation status.
Therefore, development of an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) may provide a
therapeutic alternative for AML patients.Here, we report the development
of the first FLT3specific ADC, AGS62P1, employing site-specific
conjugation using the non-natural amino acid, p-acetyl phenylalanine
(pAF). AGS62P1 comprises a human gamma one antibody including an inserted
pAF residue in each of the heavy chains. The antibody was conjugated to a
potent cytotoxic payload via an oxime bond at the pAF sites, thus
creating a nearly homogeneous drug distribution, with approximately 2
drug molecules per antibody. Strong binding affinity (0.1-0.9 nM) and
potent in vitro cytotoxic activity (IC50 = 0.2-12 nM) was achieved in AML
cell lines. The anti-FLT3 ADC was highly efficacious in AML tumor
xenografts, leading to statistically significant tumor growth inhibition
of both FLT3 ITD and non-ITD models. Additional characterization of both
the antibody and ADC was performed, including ligand receptor
interaction, degradation, internalization, and apoptosis.In summary, we
have developed a site-specific ADC targeting FLT3 that exhibits potent
anti-tumor activity in xenograft models regardless of FLT3 activation
status. This drug can potentially offer a new and more versatile approach
in targeting FLT3-expressing leukemia through a mechanism independent of
FLT3 genetic aberration.

