Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting pancreatic cancer stem cells by afatinib in organoid
culture


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the third leading cause of cancer
related deaths in United States and has a 5 year survival rate of 7.2%.
Current front line therapy for PC includes Gemcitabine, 5FU and Abraxane.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs), a small subpopulation in cancer comprising of
less than 5% of total cancer cells, are responsible for therapy
resistance and aggressive metastasis resulting in poor prognosis of
cancer including PC. It has already been established that EGFR family
members (EGFR and HER2) are involved in CSC maintenance. Therefore, CSCs
are important target to reduce the drug resistance and aggressiveness.
Afatinib is an FDA approved pan-EGFR inhibitor. Our major goal is to use
afatinib to target pancreatic CSC and understand the mechanism of its
action.Methods: After identifying the IC50 by MTT assay, PC cell lines
(Capan1 and SW1990) were treated with afatinib and gemcitabine and cell
lysates were analyzed by western blotting (WB) for EGFR family members
and CSC markers like Shh, SOX2, Aldh1 and CD133.CSCs or Side Population
(SP) were analyzed in afatinib and gemcitabine treated Capan1 cells by
Hoechst based FACS analysis. Hoechst based FACS was used to isolate
SP/CSC and NSP (non-side population) from parental PC cell lines and
their IC50 for gemcitabine and afatinib were determined. SP and NSP cells
were subjected to drug treatments to determine alterations in EGFR family
proteins and stem cell markers by WB. Tumor sphere assay (TSA) was
performed to determine tumorigenic potential of SP/CSC and NSP fractions
with and without drug treatments. We developed Tumor-Organoids from
Kras;PdxCre (KC) mice and used them to test effect of afatinib in 3D
culture system.Results: Our results showed significant decrease in SP/CSC
fraction upon afatinib treatment and an enrichment of SP/CSC fraction on
gemcitabine treatment. The SP/CSC cells showed higher sensitivity to
afatinib and resistance towards gemcitabine when compared to parental
cells suggesting specific targeting on SP/CSCs. Upon afatinib
administration, we observed a reduction in phospho forms of EGFR family
members and CSC markers like Sox2, Aldh1 and CD133 confirming
functionality of the drug and its effect on pancreatic CSCs. A
significant decrease was also observed in number and size of tumor
spheres formed in vitro with both SP/CSC and NSP. We also confirmed a
drastic reduction in the size and number of tumor-organoids following
nine days of afatinib treatment compared to untreated
controls.Conclusion: Our results demonstrate a novel role of afatinib in
targeting pancreatic CSCs and provide a scope to generate targeted
therapy towards PC.

