Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCK2R marks a gastrin-responsive stem cell that gives rise to
Barrett's esophagus


The incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) has markedly increased
in the United States over the last few decades. Barrett's esophagus (BE)
is the most significant known risk factor for this malignancy. Barrett's
metaplasia, a condition of esophagus characterized by a columnar-cell
metaplasia that replaces the native squamous-cell epithelium is
considered to be a complication of gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD), another risk factor for EAC. The paradigm is that BE arises from
an adaptation to the harsh intra-esophageal environment of chronic GERD,
and predisposes to EAC. Other established risk factors for EAC include
obesity, smoking, poor diet. Moreover, while BE patients often undergo
periodic endoscopic examinations, screening for dysplasia has not been
shown to decrease mortality and remains controversial.Thus, a better
understanding of the risk factors for BE progression is needed. The
precise role of CCK2R in the gastric cardia and Barrett's esophagus has
not been defined. CCK2R is upregulated in the esophagus in human BE and
EAC, and real-time PCR of BE tissues indicated that the level of
expression was 2x higher than that in esophageal tissues from normal
control patients. CCK2R is upregulated in the gastric cardia of mice with
Barrett's metaplasia, and this effect is enhanced with administration of
bile acids, a key component of the refluxate.In this study we used the
L2-IL-1 model to determine whether CCK2R-expressing cells can give rise
to BE, and whether inhibition of CCK2R could ameliorate the BE phenotype
in our mouse model.In order to understand the role of CCK2R-expressing
cells in normal cardia, we performed lineage tracing studies in
CCK2R-CreERT mice. We generated CCK2R-CreERT/TdTomato mice and induced
them with tamoxifen at 6 weeks of age. Single Tomato-red positive cells
became visible at the base of the cardia at 24 hours after induction. By
days 2, 3, and 5 these Tomato-red cells expanded and moved upward in the
cardia gland in contiguous fashion until almost all the cells in the
gland were labeled. Tomato-red cells persisted for as long as one year in
the cardia. Thus, CCK2R labels a progenitor cell in the normal gastric
cardia whose progeny populate the gland and persist for at least one
year, suggesting the ability to self-renew and consistent with a cardia
stem cell.Since CCK2R marks a proliferating progenitor cell in the
cardia, we verified whether CCK2R also has functional importance in BE
progression. We hypothesized that overexpression of gastrin, the ligand
for CCK2R, could accelerate BE in L2-IL-1 mice. INS-GAS mice, which
overexpress amidated gastrin under the transcriptional control of the
insulin promoter, were crossed with L2-IL-1 mice. L2-IL-1/INS-GAS mice
treated with bile acids had significantly increased areas of BE
involvement compared to L2-IL-1 or INS-GAS controls. No areas of BE were
seen in wild type or INS-GAS mice treated with bile acids until the age
of 12 months.

