Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic induction of MHC-II pathway expression in murine
ovarian cancer cell line


INTRODUCTIONThis study evaluated the potential of epigenetic treatments
to induce the expression of the MHC-II antigen presentation pathway in
ovarian cancer. Ovarian cancer escapes immune response allowing it to
spread in the peritoneal cavity; however, patients with greater immune
response to their tumors at baseline have improved survival. Typically,
exogenous antigens from tumors are processed and presented via MHC-II to
CD4 T cells by antigen-presenting cells. However, if ovarian cancer cells
could be induced to express the MHC-II pathway, they could be converted
into antigen presenting cells and stimulate an anti-tumor
response.METHODSMurine epithelial ovarian cancer cells (ID8) were treated
for 72 h with the histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi): entinostat
(MS-275) (1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 M) and quisinostat (20, 40, 80, 160 nM). Cells
were treated with 5-azacytidine (5-aza), a DNA methytransferase
inhibitor, alone and in combination with MS-275 (5 M) at 17.25, 37.5, 75,
and 150 nM. After treatment, the expression of CD74 (an MCH-II pathway
protein) and MHC-II was evaluated by flow cytometry. Reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis was performed
to measure CD74 and CIITA, a transcriptional coactivator that controls
MHC-II gene expression. RNA was extracted using RNEasy Mini Kit (Qiagen),
cDNA was created with SuperScript VILO Master Mix (ThermoFischer), and a
109bp amplicon was created using JumpStart REDTaq ReadyMix
(Sigma-Aldrich). For statistical analysis, a Welch ANOVA was performed
using JMP Pro 12. Tukey-Kramer analysis evaluated individual differences.
The mean fluorescence intensities (MFI) for the combination treatments
were compared using an unequal variance F-test.RESULTSIncreased protein
expression of CD74 and MHC-II was seen after treatment with MS-275,
quisinostat, and 5-aza compared to untreated control. Increased
expression of CD74 and MHC-II was seen with the combination treatment of
5-aza (17, 37.5, 75, 150 nM) and MS-275 (5 M) compared to individual
treatments (p INTRODUCTIONThis study evaluated the potential of
epigenetic treatments to induce the expression of the MHC-II antigen
presentation pathway in ovarian cancer. Ovarian cancer escapes immune
response allowing it to spread in the peritoneal cavity; however,
patients with greater immune response to their tumors at baseline have
improved survival. Typically, exogenous antigens from tumors are
processed and presented via MHC-II to CD4 T cells by antigen-presenting
cells. However, if ovarian cancer cells could be induced to express the
MHC-II pathway, they could be converted into antigen presenting cells and
stimulate an anti-tumor response.METHODSMurine epithelial ovarian cancer
cells (ID8) were treated for 72 h with the histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi): entinostat (MS-275) (1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 M) and quisinostat (20,
40, 80, 160 nM). Cells were treated with 5-azacytidine (5-aza), a DNA
methytransferase inhibitor, alone and in combination with MS-275 (5 M) at
17.25, 37.5, 75, and 150 nM. After treatment, the expression of CD74 (an
MCH-II pathway protein) and MHC-II was evaluated by flow cytometry.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis was
performed to measure CD74 and CIITA, a transcriptional coactivator that
controls MHC-II gene expression. RNA was extracted using RNEasy Mini Kit
(Qiagen), cDNA was created with SuperScript VILO Master Mix
(ThermoFischer), and a 109bp amplicon was created using JumpStart REDTaq
ReadyMix (Sigma-Aldrich). For statistical analysis, a Welch ANOVA was
performed using JMP Pro 12. Tukey-Kramer analysis evaluated individual
differences. The mean fluorescence intensities (MFI) for the combination
treatments were compared using an unequal variance
F-test.RESULTSIncreased protein expression of CD74 and MHC-II was seen
after treatment with MS-275, quisinostat, and 5-aza compared to untreated
control. Increased expression of CD74 and MHC-II was seen with the
combination treatment of 5-aza (17, 37.5, 75, 150 nM) and MS-275 (5 M)
compared to individual treatments (p < .0001). A dose dependent increased
expression of CIITA was demonstrated by RT-PCR with 5-aza treatment alone
and in combination with MS-275. Increased mRNA expression of CD74 was
also seen for all treatments compared to a negative
control.CONCLUSIONTreatment with HDAC inhibitors and a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor induces expression of MHC-II in murine
epithelial ovarian cancer cells. The conversion of ovarian cancer cells
into antigen presenting cells provides a potential therapeutic model to
augment the immune response against epithelial ovarian cancer, a disease
known to suppress anti-tumor immunity.

