Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis-associated tumor cell phenotypes in TNBC is regulated
by Wnt-beta-catenin pathway signals


Introduction: Acquisitions of metastasis-associated phenotypes (MA) by
Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) cells are imparted by genetic
alterations which cause deregulation of different signaling pathways
associated to those phenotypes. We have recently reported that an
upregulation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway (WP) is one of the salient
genetic features of TNBC and demonstrated that the WP signaling in TNBC
is associated with poor prognosis and metastasis (Dey et al., 2013). We
have also identified that the functional upregulation of secreted-MMP7, a
transcriptional target of WP in TNBC is associated to the functional
loss/absence of PTEN gene (Dey et al., 2013), the most common first event
associated with basal-like subtype (Martins et al., 2012). Aim: In order
to understand the relevance of WP pathway in the biology of metastasizing
TNBC tumor cells, here we have undertaken a study in which the
involvement of WP is tested in the context of MA phenotypes including (1)
integrin-directed migration, (2) matrigel-invasion and (3) clonogenic
growth and proliferation in 15 TNBC cell lines. Methods: CHIR9902,
Wnt-C59, XAV939, sulindac sulfide, beta-catenin SiRNA as well as
physiological stimulation of the WP (LWnt3A CM) were used for the study.
Podia-parameters were studied using confocal microscopy for architecture
of filamentous actin while matrigel invasion was studied by MMP7 specific
caesin-zymography. Results: The collective% of alterations in CTNNB1, APC
and DVL1 genes among total breast invasive carcinomas (TCGA 2012) were
17% in contrast to 46% breast invasive carcinomas, PAM50 Basal. A similar
trend was observed among subtypes of BC from brca/tcga/pub2015
(cBioPortal). Wnt-C59, XAV939, sulindac sulfide and beta-catenin SiRNA
(1) inhibited fibronectin-directed migration (2) decreased maximum
relative distance from the origin and average velocity of the movement by
real-time video microscopy, (3) altered cytoskeletal organization of the
filamentous-actin and decreased the podia parameters, (4) decreased
matrigel-invasion, and (6) inhibited cell proliferation and 3D colony
formation. Mechanistically the treatment with sulindac sulfide and
beta-catenin SiRNA decreased cellular levels of beta-catenin, active
beta-catenin and MMP7 in the same TNBC cell lines wherein
fibronectin-directed migration, invasion, and colony formation were found
inhibited. LWnt3ACM stimulated cell proliferation, clonogenicity,
migration and invasion was perturbed by WP modulators, sulindac sulfide
and PI3K pathway inhibitor in brain-metastasis specific TNBC cells.
Conclusion: Here we present the first conclusive evidence to demonstrate
that the WP activation is functionally responsible for MA phenotypes in
TNBC. Our data explains the why different components of the WP is
upregulated in TNBC and how WP activation is associated with poor
prognosis and metastasis in this subtype.

