Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rutin enhances the antiproliferative effect of 5-FU and
oxaliplatin in colon cancer cells


Background: Rutin is a strong antioxidant molecule and it has
advantageous over other flavonoids due to it is a nontoxic and
nonoxidizable molecule. The concept of dual therapy of anti-cancer drugs
with natural compounds has become a very promising approach in new
strategy to treatment. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
antiproliferative and apoptotic effects of rutin flavonoids and its
efficacy in enhancing the anticancer effects of 5-FU (5-fluorouracil) and
oxaliplatin against colon cancer cells.Material and Methods: Caco-2 human
colon cancer cells were treated with rutin and/or anticancer drugs (5-FU
and oxaliplatin), cell viability and apoptotic parameters were examined.
Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. Apoptotic markers (cleaved
caspase 3, cleaved PARP and phosphor-Bad) were determined using specific
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits. Caspase-8 and caspase-9 were
analyzed by colorimetric activity assay kit. DNA fragmentation was
analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis.Results: The exposure Caco-2
human colon cancer cells to rutin, 5-FU and oxaliplatin resulted growth
inhibition in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Cell viability assay
shows that rutin inhibiting growth of Caco-2 cells at high concentrations
(over 1000 M). Combination with rutin markedly enhanced 5-FU and
oxaliplatin growth inhibiting effects on Caco-2 cells. Results suggested
that rutin had significant anticancer abilities; such rutin were capable
of causing multifold decreases in the half maximal inhibitory
concentration IC50 value of 5-FU and oxaliplatin. This flavonoid
increased the levels of proteins associated with apoptotic cell death
(phospho-Bad, cleaved caspase 3 and cleaved PARP) alone and combination.
The activities of caspase 8 and caspase 9 were stimulated by the
combination treatment of rutin and oxaliplatin then alone. DNA
fragmentation was observed only on combination treatment.Conclusions:
Combined treatment with rutin and anticancer drugs (5-FU and/or
oxaliplatin) is more effective than the individual treatments of drugs at
inhibiting growth of Caco-2 cells. The use of lower 5-FU and oxaliplatin
doses, with similar effects, could be also useful to reduce possible
adverse effects of these drugs. However, further studies at molecular
level are required to elucidate chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic
effects of rutin on colon cancer.

