Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of interferon regulatory factor 5 in anti-tumor immunity:
Orchestration of a functional tertiary lymphoid structure


The ability of breast cancer cells to metastasize is due to intrinsic
intratumoral and extrinsic microenvironment changes. Many breast cancers
are heavily infiltrated by immune cells and these infiltrating leukocytes
are commonly observed around tumors in patients with invasive ductal
carcinoma. Several recent studies show that the presence of tumor
infiltrating leukocytes in human breast cancer tissue is associated with
improved outcome, suggesting that the immune system is participating in
the control and elimination of tumor cells. One way in which
epithelial-derived cancers evade immunity is through dysregulation of
cytokines and chemokines that call in specific immune cells to form a
functional ectopic lymphoid-like structure termed a tertiary lymphoid
structure (TLS) near the tumor. TLS are important for cell-mediated and
humoral immunity and are extremely efficient immunological tools as the
presentation of antigen occurs to both B and T cells. Although very
little is known about the processes that drive TLS formation, data
indicate that the presence of a TLS next to a solid cancer, including
breast cancer, is a strong positive prognostic indicator. Recent data
from our lab and others show that expression of the transcription factor
interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) in a human breast cancer molecular
signature predicts increased survival and lower incidence of metastasis.
We recently identified IRF5 as an important intrinsic regulator of
mammary epithelial cell migration and metastasis. We also found that IRF5
within a breast tumor regulates the expression of cytokines/chemokines,
such as CXCL13, that mediate immune cell trafficking. We previously
reported that tumor-conditioned media (TCM) from IRF5-positive breast
tumor cells contains CXCL13 and induces trafficking of CD19+CXCR5+ B
cells and CD3+CD4+CXCR5+ T follicular helper-like (Tfh) cells to the TCM.
CXCL13 is a key player in the formation of a TLS as it recruits in the
specific cells and activates the B cells to produce immunoglobulins.
Further analysis of immune cell trafficking to TCM from IRF5+ and IRF5-
breast tumor cells reveals specificity for the trafficking of
anti-tumorigenic B and T cell subsets to IRF5-positive TCM, such as
transitional, memory, and plasmablast/plasma B cells, along with Th1 and
Tfh cells, rather than pro-tumorigenic, immunosuppressive Bregs, Th2, and
Tregs that were found to specifically migrate to IRF5-negative TCM.
Analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast tumors by
immunofluorescence microscopy revealed a significant correlation between
IRF5 intratumoral expression and the presence of a TLS. Furthermore,
preliminary data from a murine model of invasive mammary tumorigenesis
supports a critical role for IRF5 in anti-tumor immunity. Together, these
data implicate IRF5 in the generation of a functional TLS and as a
critical mediator of anti-tumor immunity.

