Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood-based exosomal miRNAs as biomarkers for diagnosis and
prognosis of clear cell renal cell cancer


Introduction & objectives: In previous studies we identified specific
miRNA alterations in tumor tissues of clear cell renal cell cancer
(ccRCC) with diagnostic and prognostic value relating to the presence of
metastasis. For few years it has been known, that miRNAs are actively
packed in exosomes which can be released into body fluids. Therefore, we
hypothesize that in a simple blood based test we are able to use specific
miRNA signatures as minimal invasive biomarkers for confirmation of the
diagnosis and evaluation of the metastatic risk in ccRCC.Materials &
methods: Initially, exosomes were isolated from 1 ml serum of 10 ccRCC
patients (metastatic and non metastatic tumors) and 10 healthy volunteers
using appropriated exosome isolation kit protocol (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Quality of exosomes was proven using exosomal markers (CD63,
CD81, Alix, Synthenin) and Nano Particle Tracking Analysis. Exosomal
totalRNA was isolated using miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). For miRNA
analyses total RNA was reverse transcribed using TaqMan Reverse
Transcription Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), cDNA was preamplified using
TaqMan PreAmp Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and real time PCR was
performed using Gene Expression master mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Expression differences were calculated using REST Software and
SPSS.Results: We have shown that 1 ml serum is sufficient to analyze
miRNA expression in exosomes. Exosomes isolated from serum exhibit high
amount of exosomal markers and possess the typical exosomal size (30-120
nm). CcRCC serum samples are characterized by downregulation of several
miRNAs (including miR-10b and miR451). Furthermore, specific miRNAs
(including miR-30c) differentiate patients with or without metastases as
well as healthy volunteers.Conclusion: These initial data confirm our
hypothesis that the tissue based miRNA signature could be used as
biomarkers for detection of aggressive ccRCC analyzing exosomes from
liquid biopsy. This minimal invasive blood based test is easy to handle
in clinical practice and could be a powerful tool for early detection and
monitoring of metastatic disease. To validate these results the expansion
of the sample set is ongoing.

