Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical relationship between cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1)
polymorphism and cell proliferation and invasiveness in head-and-neck
carcinoma


We have previously shown a close association between a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) of cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) (V432L, rs1056836) and
in vitro sensitivity to several anticancer agents. From squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines not expressing this cytochrome, CAL27 and
CAL33, we generated by lentiviral infection isogenic derivatives
expressing to similar levels the two variant forms of CYP1B1.Cell lines
re-expressing CYP1B1 had higher proliferation and invasiveness than the
original ones, and this was further increased when they expressed the
variant form, which were significantly resistant to cisplatin and
camptothecin. This was confirmed by in vivo studies in SCID mice: tumors
re-expressing CYP1B1 had growth acceleration, especially those expressing
the variant form. Treatment by cisplatin, irinotecan and doxorubicin
induced regression of tumors obtained from vector-only infected cells,
while those obtained from cells re-expressing CYP1B1, especially the
variant form, were markedly resistant to all three drugs.Four proteins
representative of epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes were determined
by western blots. In the CAL33 cell line, the expression of E-cadherin
and claudin-1 (epithelial markers) was decreased upon re-expression of
CYP1B1, whereas the expression of N-cadherin and vimentin (mesenchymal
markers) was increased. In the CAL27 cell line, this was the same only
for mesenchymal markers. Using the Aldefluor assay kit, a stem cell
phenotype was exhibited by the CAL27 line re-expressing the CYP1B1
variant genotype.In silico studies on the collections of cancer cell
lines (NCI-60 and CCLE) confirmed the significant association between
CYP1B1 polymorphic status and resistance to DNA-damaging drugs. In
addition, the variant genotype was associated to a mesenchymal phenotype
defined by significant overexpression of series of 8-12 genes including
vimentin and moesin, whereas the common and heterozygous genotypes were
associated to an epithelial phenotype defined by significant
overexpression of a series of 20-30 genes, including claudins 3, 4 and 7,
E-cadherin and EPCAM.The clinical consequences of the CYP1B1 L432V gene
polymorphism were studied in a prospective population of 125
head-and-neck cancer patients (pts) treated in the palliative setting: 48
pts with common homozygous genotype (CH), 40 heterozygotes (HT) and 35
variant homozygous pts (VH). No differences in response rates as a
function of the polymorphism were noticed. Overall median survival was
significantly worse in VH pts (6.6 months) than in CH (13.2 months), HT
falling in between (9.8 months) (p = 0.017).As a conclusion, CYP1B1
appears to be involved in cell proliferation and invasiveness, these
properties being magnified when expressed under its homozygous variant
form, which is suggested to be associated to the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

