Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARID1A is a novel HuR target: Implications in breast cancer
radiotherapy


ARID1A is part of the chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF, which can
modulate transcription positively or negatively. The role of ARID1A in
cancer is controversial. It is described as a tumor suppressor since its
expression is found lost in several types of cancer. However, recent
investigations suggest that ARID1A could also be an important target to
sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapy and radiation. HuR, an important
RNA binding protein, post-transcriptionally regulates specific mRNAs by
binding to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of its target mRNAs. Through
this action, HuR regulates the expression of its target genes by
facilitating either RNA stability or protein translation, thereby
affecting several signaling pathways including cell-cycle, DNA damage
response and apoptosis.In order to identify novel mRNAs regulated by HuR
that could be targeted for breast cancer therapy, we performed a
ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation (RNP-IP) microarray using an HuR
antibody on irradiated and non-irradiated samples from triple negative
breast cancer cell lines. This assay showed ARID1A to be potentially
regulated by HuR. Accordingly, analysis of the AU-rich elements (ARE)
database of the University of Vienna identifies three potential HuR
binding sites on ARID1A 3UTR, two of which are highly conserved in 100
vertebrate species. To demonstrate that HuR post-transcriptionally
regulates ARID1A, we first evaluated the effect of HuR expression on
ARID1A mRNA and protein levels in breast cancer cell lines. Genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of HuR led to a decrease in ARID1A mRNA and
protein levels. Conversely, HuR forced expression led to an increase in
ARID1A levels both at the mRNA and protein levels. We also evaluated the
effect of HuR on the stability of ARID1A mRNA. In cells where HuR is
genetically inhibited, ARID1A mRNA half-life is dramatically reduced
compared to the control. These results demonstrate that HuR positively
regulates ARID1A by promoting the stability of ARID1A mRNA. To test
whether this regulation is exerted by direct interaction of HuR on ARID1A
mRNA, we performed an RNP-IP assay, where we pulldown HuR and analyzed
the presence of ARID1A mRNA by RT-PCR. Consistent with our previous
results, HuR was found to physically interact with ARID1A, thereby
promoting its stabilization. Most importantly, through clonogenic assays,
we found that genetic inhibition of either HuR or ARID1A results in
radiation sensitivity of TNBC cell lines. Conversely, forced expression
of ARID1A promotes radiation resistance.Our results show that (i) ARID1A
is a novel HuR target and that (ii) it can dictate radio resistance in
HuR overexpressing cancer cells. ARID1A is known to regulate cell cycle
and to promote DNA damage repair, which can contribute to resistance to
therapy. Altogether, our findings further support an oncogenic role for
ARID1A making it an important target for breast cancer treatment.

