Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colon cancer molecular subtypes: Concordance, effect on survival
and selection of most representative preclinical models


Introduction: Colon cancer is a genetically heterogeneous disease and
there is an increasing need for more detailed classification of stage II
and III patients. The NCCN guideline currently lists three FDA approved
gene-expression based multi-gene prognostic tests for stage II-III
colorectal cancer. However, it is undecided how many molecular subtype
would most accurately describe these tumours. Here, we cross-validated
known molecular subtypes for their concordance and capability to predict
prognosis free survival. We utilized gene expression signatures to
identify the most representative cell line model for each
subtype.Materials and methods: Using publicly available datasets from the
GEO repository we established a database containing clinical and
microarray data for 2,166 colon cancer patients. Gene expression measured
on Affymetrix HG-U133A and HG-U133 Plus2.0 arrays was processed according
to authors description for each classifier in R. We conducted a
systematic review of the literature in order to identify gene-expression
based classifiers. We assigned each sample for these classificators and
then compared their potential to predict recurrence free
survival.Results: All together 22 different molecular subtypes were
re-classified including the CCHS, CIN25, CMS, ColoGuideEx, ColoGuidePro,
CRCassigner, MDA114, Meta163, ODXcolon, Oncodefender, TCA19, V7RHS
classifiers as well as subtypes established by Budinska, Chang, DeSousa,
Marisa, Merlos, Popovici, Schetter, Yuen, and Watanabe (first authors).
When comparing the methods the most concordant classifiers were MDA114
and DeSousa (Cramer's V = 0.711). The highest efficacy to predict
progression free survival in stage II-III patients was achieved by Yuen
(p = 3.9e-05, HR = 2.9), Marisa (p = 2.6e-05, HR = 2.6) and Chang (p =
9e-09, HR = 2.35). We also assigned 61 colon cancer cell lines from four
independent studies to the closest molecular subtype.Conclusion: In
summary, here we present a comprehensive analysis of human colon cancer
molecular subtypes by cross-validation using independent transcriptomic
datasets.

