Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efferocytosis of prostate cancer cells induces a tumor-promoting
inflammatory response in myeloid macrophages


Tumor progression is characterized by persistent death of cancer cells,
which are cleared by the innate immune system phagocytes. This process
termed efferocytosis is enhanced with targeted therapies that induce
apoptosis in tumor cells. Recent findings suggest that efferocytosis
polarizes macrophages into M2-type and may induce tumor acceleration;
however, this mechanism and its consequences in prostate cancer tumor
fate remains largely unknown. Here the changes in cytokine expression
(mRNA and protein) in primary bone marrow derived mouse macrophages (M)
interacting with two apoptotic prostate cancer cells (human PC3 and mouse
RM1) were analyzed. In response to efferocytosis, M produced known
tumor-promoting inflammatory cytokines including IL-6, CXCL1 and CXCL5
that are chemoattractants of monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils. In
vitro efferocytosis induced the activation of NF-b signaling in M as
analyzed by Western blot and functional luciferase reporter assays
(TRACER). Inhibition of NF-b with the chemical compound emetine (0.3 M)
blocked the efferocytosis of fluorescence-labeled apoptotic cancer cells
and the expression of the inflammatory marker Ly-6B by M, suggesting a
crucial role of NF-b in the efferocytic function of M. An in vivo
syngeneic tumor model was used in which apoptosis-inducible prostate
cancer cells (RM1-iCasp9) were injected in vertebral bodies and implanted
subcutaneously in immune competent mice. Seven days post-surgery mice
were treated with vehicle (VEH) or the dimerizer drug AP20187 (AP) to
induce apoptosis in RM1-iCasp9 cancer cells. Continuous analysis of tumor
volume and the endpoint tumor weight (13d) revealed accelerated tumor
growth in mice where apoptosis was induced (AP) as compared with controls
(VEH) (pTumor progression is characterized by persistent death of cancer
cells, which are cleared by the innate immune system phagocytes. This
process termed efferocytosis is enhanced with targeted therapies that
induce apoptosis in tumor cells. Recent findings suggest that
efferocytosis polarizes macrophages into M2-type and may induce tumor
acceleration; however, this mechanism and its consequences in prostate
cancer tumor fate remains largely unknown. Here the changes in cytokine
expression (mRNA and protein) in primary bone marrow derived mouse
macrophages (M) interacting with two apoptotic prostate cancer cells
(human PC3 and mouse RM1) were analyzed. In response to efferocytosis, M
produced known tumor-promoting inflammatory cytokines including IL-6,
CXCL1 and CXCL5 that are chemoattractants of monocytes/macrophages and
neutrophils. In vitro efferocytosis induced the activation of NF-b
signaling in M as analyzed by Western blot and functional luciferase
reporter assays (TRACER). Inhibition of NF-b with the chemical compound
emetine (0.3 M) blocked the efferocytosis of fluorescence-labeled
apoptotic cancer cells and the expression of the inflammatory marker
Ly-6B by M, suggesting a crucial role of NF-b in the efferocytic function
of M. An in vivo syngeneic tumor model was used in which
apoptosis-inducible prostate cancer cells (RM1-iCasp9) were injected in
vertebral bodies and implanted subcutaneously in immune competent mice.
Seven days post-surgery mice were treated with vehicle (VEH) or the
dimerizer drug AP20187 (AP) to induce apoptosis in RM1-iCasp9 cancer
cells. Continuous analysis of tumor volume and the endpoint tumor weight
(13d) revealed accelerated tumor growth in mice where apoptosis was
induced (AP) as compared with controls (VEH) (p<0.01). Furthermore, the
analysis of tumors by flow cytometry demonstrated a significant increase
of tumor accelerating myeloid inflammatory cells in the AP-treated mice
induced to undergo efferocytosis when compared to VEH-treated mice. These
populations included total CD206+F4/80+ (M2 macrophages),
Gr-1+CD11b(high)+ (myeloid granulocytes/monocytes associated with
anti-tumor immunity), total Gr-1+ cells and CD68+ cells (phagocytes) that
express high CD11b (pTumor progression is characterized by persistent
death of cancer cells, which are cleared by the innate immune system
phagocytes. This process termed efferocytosis is enhanced with targeted
therapies that induce apoptosis in tumor cells. Recent findings suggest
that efferocytosis polarizes macrophages into M2-type and may induce
tumor acceleration; however, this mechanism and its consequences in
prostate cancer tumor fate remains largely unknown. Here the changes in
cytokine expression (mRNA and protein) in primary bone marrow derived
mouse macrophages (M) interacting with two apoptotic prostate cancer
cells (human PC3 and mouse RM1) were analyzed. In response to
efferocytosis, M produced known tumor-promoting inflammatory cytokines
including IL-6, CXCL1 and CXCL5 that are chemoattractants of
monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils. In vitro efferocytosis induced the
activation of NF-b signaling in M as analyzed by Western blot and
functional luciferase reporter assays (TRACER). Inhibition of NF-b with
the chemical compound emetine (0.3 M) blocked the efferocytosis of
fluorescence-labeled apoptotic cancer cells and the expression of the
inflammatory marker Ly-6B by M, suggesting a crucial role of NF-b in the
efferocytic function of M. An in vivo syngeneic tumor model was used in
which apoptosis-inducible prostate cancer cells (RM1-iCasp9) were
injected in vertebral bodies and implanted subcutaneously in immune
competent mice. Seven days post-surgery mice were treated with vehicle
(VEH) or the dimerizer drug AP20187 (AP) to induce apoptosis in
RM1-iCasp9 cancer cells. Continuous analysis of tumor volume and the
endpoint tumor weight (13d) revealed accelerated tumor growth in mice
where apoptosis was induced (AP) as compared with controls (VEH)
(p<0.01). Furthermore, the analysis of tumors by flow cytometry
demonstrated a significant increase of tumor accelerating myeloid
inflammatory cells in the AP-treated mice induced to undergo
efferocytosis when compared to VEH-treated mice. These populations
included total CD206+F4/80+ (M2 macrophages), Gr-1+CD11b(high)+ (myeloid
granulocytes/monocytes associated with anti-tumor immunity), total Gr-1+
cells and CD68+ cells (phagocytes) that express high CD11b (p<0.05). In
addition, Ly-6B, a marker associated with the activation of inflammatory
myeloid (CD11b+) cells was significantly increased in the AP-treated
tumors. In a similar experiment, the tumor protein analysis by ELISA
showed a significant increase in CXCL5 in the AP-treated tumors relative
to controls. Altogether these findings suggest that cancer cell apoptosis
triggers an inflammatory response in myeloid efferocytic macrophages via
activation of NF-b and expression of cytokines that recruit and activate
myeloid cells to accelerate tumor growth. This mechanism may be critical
for metastatic bone colonization.

