Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EWS/FLI1 activates GLI1 indirectly through GLI2 in Ewing Sarcoma


GLI1 expression in Ewing tumors has been shown to be enhanced by EWS/FLI1
expression in both model transformation systems and in Ewing cell lines.
In Ewing cells, GLI1 has been shown to produce significant phenotypic
effects consistent with a role in Ewing tumor formation and propagation.
Also consistent with an important role is the demonstrated correspondence
between the transcriptional target sets of EWS/FLI1 and of GLI1 in Ewing
tumor cells. The principal physiologic developmental regulator of GLI1 is
the diffusible Sonic Hedgehog ligand which binds the cell surface tumor
suppressor Patched with consequent activation of the transmembrane
protein Smoothened. In Ewing tumors, the enhancement of GLI1 expression
has been shown to be Hedgehog independent and to occur downstream of
Smoothened. Indeed, evidence has been published that EWS/FLI1 directly
activates the GLI1 promoter. While there is experimental evidence that
GLI1 inhibition may be clinically useful in Ewing tumors, preclinical
evidence for one inhibitory approach has been disappointing.
Interestingly, direct transcriptional activation of GLI1 has not been
demonstrated to be of significance in other most other physiologic or
pathologic contexts. We speculated that direct transcriptional activation
of GLI1 by EWS/FLI1 might be only part of the story in Ewing tumors.Since
GLI2 is the most potent physiologic transcriptional activator of GLI1, we
undertook to investigate the role of GLI2 in Hedgehog/GLI (HH-GLI)
signaling in Ewing Tumors. We found that GLI2 is broadly expressed in
Ewing tumors. Based on GLI2 overexpression and on shRNA knockdown of
GLI2, we found that GLI2 expression increases GLI1 expression in Ewing
cell lines. Via GLI2 knockdown, we have found that GLI2 has biologic
effects similar to or greater than GLI1 in Ewing cells. Finally, we
demonstrate that EWS/FLI1 enhances nuclear localization of GLI2,
suggesting an additional indirect mechanism by which EWS/FLI1 activates
HH-GLI signaling and GLI1 expression in Ewing tumors.These data indicate
that GLI2 is an active player in HH-GLI pathway activation in Ewing
tumors. They also suggest that measures which target GLI2 may have equal
or greater efficacy to those aimed at GLI1.

