Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin mediates the anti-breast cancer effects of environmental
enrichment


Obesity affects 35% of U.S. adults and is a leading risk factor for
breast cancer in postmenopausal women, but worsens prognosis regardless
of menopausal status. Importantly, progression to obesity can largely be
slowed or reversed with aggressive lifestyle changes, thus also having
the potential to mitigate cancer onset. A mouse model of environmental
enrichment (EE) to improve motosensory, cognitive, and social stimulation
by increasing physical engagement and social interaction triggers vast
improvements in overall health. These include reducing adiposity,
promoting the white to brown fat transition, mitigating diet-induced
obesity (DIO), and decreasing progression of multiple cancer types
including colon cancer and melanoma. We have elucidated the primary
mechanism of the EE-induced phenotype to be the activation of the
hypothalamic-sympathoneural-adipocyte (HSA) axis, a specific
neuroendocrine route in which the brain communicates with adipose tissue.
These benefits may also be partially attributable to the sharp drop in
serum leptin levels following EE which has been implicated in diminishing
tumorigenesis, invasiveness, and metastasis. Here we investigated the
effects of EE on breast tumorigenesis in all body mass states and
menopause-associated hormone conditions. Our preliminary studies showed
that EE delayed the cancer onset in the MMTV-PyMT spontaneous mouse model
of breast cancer. In addition the role of leptin signaling in the
EE-induced effects on breast tumorigenesis was investigated by utilizing
obese models with varied leptin signaling including leptin
receptor-defective db/db mice that express extremely high levels of
leptin, leptin-defective ob/ob mice that do not express leptin but are
leptin-sensitive, and a diet-induced obesity (DIO) model with elevated
leptin but intact leptin signaling. These obese mice were housed in EE or
control housing until significantly attenuated weight gain was observed
followed by implantation of primary PyMT-derived mammary tumor cells. EE
was highly effective at reducing adiposity in each of these obesity
models, regardless of leptin signaling. However, the effects of EE on
mammary tumor progression were dependent on leptin signaling. EE
decreased leptin level and inhibited mammary tumor growth in DIO mice. In
contrast EE failed to attenuate tumor progression in ob/ob mice in the
absence of leptin, suggesting that leptin is a key mediator of the EE
anti-cancer effects on breast cancer. The elucidation of mechanisms of EE
and the HSA axis-induced improvement in overall health will provide
effective prevention as well as therapeutic strategies for metabolic
syndromes and associated cancer types.

