Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual action glycotherapy for triple negative breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC; ER-/PR-/HER2-) accounts for 15% of
all breast cancer with a disproportionate share of mortality. The
patients are younger and pre-menopausal. The cancers are poorly
differentiated, and most fall into the basal subgroup of breast cancers.
The long-term survival is extremely low because of lack of specific
treatment guidelines. Thus, the patients are managed with standard
treatment. This causes a high rate of local and systemic relapse, and
make patients resistant to existing targeted therapies
(endocrine/biologics/adjuvant/neo-adjuvant). Anthracycline/taxane
combination therapy and PARP inhibitor are currently being explored but
not known what would be the outcome or if the patients would achieve a
pathological complete response (pCR). Protein glycosylation has been
claimed as an important feature helping cancer cells escaping immune
surveillance, facilitate tumor invasion, and increased malignancy with
increased tumor burden and poor prognosis as well as enhanced
angiogenesis. Based on the glycomics profile of human breast cancer cells
and tumor specimen, we have hypothesized that targeting asparagine-linked
(N-linked) protein glycosylation would evolve a new generation
therapeutic preventing breast tumor progression and eliminating the
disease. Consequently, when treated with a homolog of protein
N-glycosylation inhibitor tunicamycin the progression of a double
negative breast cancer was inhibited significantly (J. Biol. Chem. 286,
29127-29138, 2011). We have now tested a triple negative breast tumor
xenograft in athymic nude mice Balb/c (nu/nu) and the result is reduction
of tumor progression (65% in one week) at tunicamycin concentration of
0.25 mg/Kg given orally twice a week. Human triple negative breast cancer
cells (MDA-MB-231/MDA-MB-468) are equally susceptible to tunicamycin
action. The cells are arrested in G1 and exhibit ER stress followed by
induction of apoptosis mediated by unfolded protein response (upr)
signaling. Western blotting and qRT-PCR support increased expression of
the ER stress master regulator GRP78. But, the immunofluorescence
microscopy could not detect GRP78 on the surface of control or
tunicamycin treated cells. The result is identical in cells cultured in
the absence of serum. GRP78 fluorescence however, is detectable in cells
either fixed with ice-cold methanol or permeabilized with digitonin. We,
therefore, conclude that GRP78 is not expressed on the outer-leaflet of
the cell surface of the triple negative human breast cancer cells
MDA-MB-231. But, its intracellular expression is anti-tumorigenic.
Supported in part by grants from NSF-EPSCoR RII Track 1 Grant #
EPS-1002410 (DKB) and NIH/NIMHD 2G12MD007583 (KB)

