Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of infiltrating immune cell profiling in lung
adenocarcinoma


Neoplastic cancer cells and cancer stroma (including infiltrating immune
cells) determine the biology and prognosis of cancer. Various types of
adaptive and innate immune cells are known to infiltrate the cancer
stroma. However, the patterns and spatial distribution of immune cell
infiltration as well as their association with tumor histology remain
poorly understood. To address these issues, we comprehensively analyzed
the infiltrating immune cells present in lung adenocarcinoma. The
principal types of both adaptive and innate infiltrating immune cells
were immunohistochemically evaluated in the predominant histological
components of 111 lung adenocarcinomas. The same analysis was also
carried out on 143 samples of histological subtypes making up more than
20% of tumors. As a result, plasma cells and B cells with interfollicular
distribution were almost exclusively observed in invasive histological
subtypes, while increased number of mast cells were observed in
noninvasive histological subtypes. Cluster analysis revealed four
distinct immunosubtypes: those characterized by high CD8/CD3 ratios with
low stromal cellularity (CD8 subtype), those with increased mast cell
numbers (mast cell subtype), those with increased macrophage/DC
infiltration with variable amounts of T cell infiltration (m/DC subtype),
and those with increased plasma cell infiltration in addition to
increased macrophage/DC infiltration and variable increases in other
infiltrating immune cells (T cells, Tregs, pDCs, and neutrophils) (plasma
cell subtype). These immunosubtypes correlated with histological
subtypes. Univariate and multivariate analyses identified the plasma cell
subtype as an independent negative prognostic factor. Furthermore, we
found that these plasma cells may be one of the major producers of
immunosuppressive cytokine IL-35 in cancer stroma. Consequently,
comprehensive immunohistochemistry-based profiling of infiltrating immune
cells has potential as a powerful method for analyzing the cancer stroma
of various cancer tissues.

