Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical studies characterize tumor type sensitivity to FASN
inhibition and the mechanism and efficacy of novel drug combinations with
TVB-2640


Tumor cells have an increased dependence on FASN-synthesized palmitate
compared to non-tumor cells, which obtain many of their required lipids
from the extracellular milieu. Palmitate and palmitate-derived lipids
comprise diverse cellular components and function in processes required
for tumor cell proliferation and survival. Previously we showed that FASN
inhibition results in tumor cell apoptosis in vitro and xenograft tumor
growth inhibition in vivo. Our studies demonstrated that diverse tumor
types exhibit sensitivity to FASN inhibition and characterized mechanisms
of action that associate with the antitumor activity of highly selective
small molecule FASN inhibitors. In vitro studies with diverse tumor cell
types elucidated a mechanism of action that includes plasma membrane
remodeling, signal transduction pathway inhibition, and gene expression
reprogramming.TVB-2640, TVB-3166, and TVB-3664 belong to a series of
orally available, reversible, potent, and selective FASN inhibitors
discovered and developed by 3-V Biosciences. Analysis of gene expression
data from tumor cell lines and human tumors, both primary and
patient-derived xenografts, has allowed for the classification of FASN
sensitivity by tumor type, histology, and molecular genetic markers.
Discoveries from these analyses are being characterized further using in
vitro and in vivo studies.Combined inhibition of FASN and microtubule
function with taxane treatment, e.g. paclitaxel, results in synergistic
inhibition of tumor growth. Indeed, in Phase I clinical investigation,
TVB-2640 combined with paclitaxel has shown promising early signs of
clinical activity. Previous in vitro studies revealed that FASN
inhibition causes changes in beta-tubulin expression and disrupts the
organization of cellular microtubule structures in varied tumor cell
types such as CALU-6 non-small-cell lung and 22Rv1 prostate tumor cell
lines. Extending our investigation of the mechanism of FASN/taxane
synergy, we now show that FASN inhibition prevents beta-tubulin
palmitoylation. This likely plays a significant role in the observed
effects on beta-tubulin expression and microtubule architecture. As
disruption of protein palmitoylation is believed to contribute
significantly to the anti-tumor activity of FASN inhibition in general,
we expanded the analysis of protein palmitoylation following inhibition
of FASN with TVB-3166 and TVB-3664 to include key oncogenic drivers of
cell growth, proliferation, and survival such as K-Ras and EGFR.
Additionally, the efficacy of FASN inhibition in combination with
additional, non-taxane approved cancer therapies, including
immunomodulatory agents and bevacizumab, is being investigated.

