Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpressing human endogenous retroviral elements (HERVs) in
chemorefractory colorectal adenocarcinoma cells are repressed by
antiviral drugs


Background: HERVs account for ca. 8% of all transposable elements found
in the genome of humans and other animals. They represent a genetic
footprint of ancestral germ-cell infections of exoviruses that is
transmittable to the progeny by Mendelian segregation. Traces of human
endogenous retroviruses are physiologically expressed in ovarial,
testicular and placental tissues as well as in stem cells. In addition, a
number of these fossil viral elements have also been related to
carcinogenesis. However, a relation between endoretroviruses expression
and chemoresistance has not been reported yet. Methods: Twenty colorectal
carcinoma patient samples were analyzed for HERV-WE1 and HERV-FRD1
endoretroviruses using immunohistochemical approaches. In addition, to
examine for differential expression of HERVs in chemotherapy refractory
cells, a resistant HCT8 colon carcinoma subline was developed by serial
etoposide exposure. Endoretroviral elements were detected by
immunocytochemical staining, qPCR and ELISA. IC50-values of antiviral and
cytostatic drugs in HCT8 cells were determined by MTT proliferation
assay. The antivirals-cytostatics interaction was evaluated by the
isobologram method. Results: In this work, we show for the first time
that HERV-WE1, HERV-FRD1, HERV-31, and HERV-V1 are a) simultaneously
expressed in treatment-nave colon carcinoma cells from patients and b)
upregulated after cytostatic exposure in colon-cancer cell lines,
suggesting that these retroviral elements are intimately related to
chemotherapy resistance. A number of antiviral drugs showed not only
cytotoxic activity but also downregulation of HERV proteins in vitro. We
also demonstrate that the use of different antiviral compounds alone or
in combination with anticancer agents present synergistic
antiproliferative activity and downregulation of different endoretroviral
elements in highly chemotherapy-resistant colorectal tumor cells.
Conclusions: Enhanced HERV-expression is associated with chemo-resistance
in colon carcinoma cells which can be repressed by antiviral drugs alone
or in combination with anticancer drugs. Therefore, the introduction of
antiviral compounds to antiproliferative chemotherapy regimens
potentially improves patient outcomes.

