Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of biomarkers that predict response of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma to mitotic inhibitors


Objectives: It is urgent to explore novel biomarkers and therapeutic
targets for that are relevant to head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC), which is the 6th most common cancer worldwide. Based on a prior
drug screen, we identified 3 mitotic inhibitors (AZD7762, AZD1775,
volasertib) as effective therapies for HNSCC. Our objective with this
study is to identify mechanisms of response and potential biomarkers of
response andMethods: Cell viability assays were performed by the
CellTiter-Glo Luminescent method in a panel of 68 fingerprinted HNSCC
cell lines using the 3 drugs at concentrations of 0.018 to 9.613 M. Cell
cycle, apoptosis and altered pathway protein expression after cells
treated by the polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) inhibitor volasertib were
investigated by FACS, TUNEL and western blots respectively. An orthotopic
mouse model of HNSCC was used to confirm the antitumor effects of PLK1
inhibition in vivo. To determine the mechanisms of drug sensitivity, we
analyzed the correlation between gene expression, protein expression,
gene mutation and drug sensitivity using modified two-sample t-tests were
performed. The beta-uniform mixture (BUM) model was used to control false
discovery rate (FDR). For correlations between drug sensitivity and gene
mutations, we performed Fisher's exact test.Results: Using the IC80
values with the peak plasma concentration of each drug as the cut-off to
determine sensitivity, 34, 44 and 20 HNSCC cell lines were sensitive
AZD1775 (Wee inhibitor), AZD7762 (CHK1/2 inhibitor) and volasertib (PLK1
inhibitor) respectively. HNSCC harboring AJUBA mutations were more
sensitive to these 3 inhibitors and those with RAS mutations more
resistant. PLK1 inhibition led to G2/M arrest, but only sensitive cell
lines underwent substantial apoptosis following PLK1 inhibition.
Decreases of the levels of phosphorylated TCTP were observed following
treatment with volasertib confirming PLK1 inhibition. There was a
significant decrease of tumor volumes and prolongation of survival in the
mice bearing orthotopic HNSCC tumors treated with volasertib in
vivo.Conclusions: PLK1 inhibition was an effective therapy in vitro and
in vivo models of HNSCC. We identified the AJUBA and RAS mutations as
potential candidate biomarkers of response to these mitotic inhibitors in
HNSCC. This study identified the therapeutic potential of PLK1 as a novel
therapeutic target for HNSCC.

