Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitors of the anti-inflammatory TAM receptor
MerTK


Introduction: MerTK, a TAM (Tyro3, Axl, MerTK) family RTK, is expressed
on phagocytic myeloid and epithelial cells. Its normal function is to
dampen innate immune responses to self-antigens. MerTK is an indirect
phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) receptor: PtdSer-binding TAM ligands, Gas6 or
Protein S, bridge interactions between MerTK and PtdSer externalized on
apoptotic cells (ACs), resulting in AC internalization (efferocytosis).
Ensuing MerTK signaling leads to anti-inflammatory M2 macrophage
polarization, suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokine production, and a
tolerogenic outcome.Tumors are rich in ACs and TAM ligands. Syngeneic
tumors implanted in MerTK -/- mice exhibit impaired growth and metastasis
compared with those implanted in WT mice, correlating with enhanced
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, splenocyte proliferation, and
decreased IL-10. Moreover, MerTK aberrantly expressed on hematological
and epithelial malignancies promotes survival and chemoresistance. Thus,
pharmacological inhibition of MerTK may have clinical benefit by
increasing availability of dead tumor cell antigens, blocking tumor
induced immunosuppression, or directly promoting tumor cell survival. We
have therefore developed small molecule inhibitors of MerTK.Methods:
MerTK kinase activity was assayed using ADP-Glo. Cellular MerTK activity
was stimulated in HUVEC or H1299 cells using anti-MerTK crosslinking and
measured by immunoprecipitation followed by anti-phospho-MerTK blot, or
by downstream phospho-Akt Ser 473 using HTRF. A high content assay was
used to measure cell proliferation, DNA content and apoptosis. Immune
effector assays were LPS-induced IL-23 production in human primary
dendritic cells and anti-CD3/CD28-induced IL-2 production or IL-2 induced
phospho-STAT5 in human primary T cells. Efferocytosis of CFSE-labeled
apoptotic Jurkat cells by anti-CD14-labeled human primary macrophages was
detected by flow cytometry.Results: Here we describe novel
MerTK-selective and Mer-Axl small molecule inhibitors that potently block
MerTK in biochemical assays. These compounds exhibit selectivity for TAM
family members in an in vitro kinase panel. In cells, antibody-induced
MerTK phosphorylation as well as downstream phosphorylation of Akt was
inhibited by both compounds with EC50 Introduction: MerTK, a TAM (Tyro3,
Axl, MerTK) family RTK, is expressed on phagocytic myeloid and epithelial
cells. Its normal function is to dampen innate immune responses to
self-antigens. MerTK is an indirect phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) receptor:
PtdSer-binding TAM ligands, Gas6 or Protein S, bridge interactions
between MerTK and PtdSer externalized on apoptotic cells (ACs), resulting
in AC internalization (efferocytosis). Ensuing MerTK signaling leads to
anti-inflammatory M2 macrophage polarization, suppression of
pro-inflammatory cytokine production, and a tolerogenic outcome.Tumors
are rich in ACs and TAM ligands. Syngeneic tumors implanted in MerTK -/-
mice exhibit impaired growth and metastasis compared with those implanted
in WT mice, correlating with enhanced production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, splenocyte proliferation, and decreased IL-10. Moreover, MerTK
aberrantly expressed on hematological and epithelial malignancies
promotes survival and chemoresistance. Thus, pharmacological inhibition
of MerTK may have clinical benefit by increasing availability of dead
tumor cell antigens, blocking tumor induced immunosuppression, or
directly promoting tumor cell survival. We have therefore developed small
molecule inhibitors of MerTK.Methods: MerTK kinase activity was assayed
using ADP-Glo. Cellular MerTK activity was stimulated in HUVEC or H1299
cells using anti-MerTK crosslinking and measured by immunoprecipitation
followed by anti-phospho-MerTK blot, or by downstream phospho-Akt Ser 473
using HTRF. A high content assay was used to measure cell proliferation,
DNA content and apoptosis. Immune effector assays were LPS-induced IL-23
production in human primary dendritic cells and anti-CD3/CD28-induced
IL-2 production or IL-2 induced phospho-STAT5 in human primary T cells.
Efferocytosis of CFSE-labeled apoptotic Jurkat cells by anti-CD14-labeled
human primary macrophages was detected by flow cytometry.Results: Here we
describe novel MerTK-selective and Mer-Axl small molecule inhibitors that
potently block MerTK in biochemical assays. These compounds exhibit
selectivity for TAM family members in an in vitro kinase panel. In cells,
antibody-induced MerTK phosphorylation as well as downstream
phosphorylation of Akt was inhibited by both compounds with EC50 <100nM.
Compounds were not overtly cytotoxic or antiproliferative and,
importantly, do not block the activity of TLR and T cell immune effector
pathways. Compounds also phenocopied the inhibition of efferocytosis
observed using a MerTK blocking antibody. In vivo activity of these novel
MerTK inhibitors is under investigation in PD and tumor
models.Conclusions: We have discovered potent and novel small molecule
inhibitors of MerTK that may have clinical benefit by both direct
anti-tumor effects and by enhancing the anti-tumor immune response.

