Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High content screening in MCF7 and MCF10A cells show differential
responses depending on oxygen levels and mechanistic readout for viability


Oxygen levels in typical cell culture conditions do not accurately
reflect the oxygen levels cells are exposed to within the body.
Furthermore, oxygen levels can vary within the tumor microenvironment.
These variances can affect how cells respond to a variety of drugs and
small molecules often used during cancer treatment. Previous studies have
shown altered drug sensitivities in MCF7 cells depending on the oxygen
levels the cells are grown in. To further understand how oxygen levels
affect drug sensitivity, the response of tumorigenic MCF7 cells were
compared to non-malignant MCF10A cells, cultured under low and high
oxygen.The goal of this study was to examine the differences in the
sensitivity of MCF7 and MCF10A cells to drugs from the Tocriscreen Total
compound library when cultured under low and high oxygen levels and for
different drug exposure time periods. Cells were grown using standard
cell culture conditions (19% oxygen) or low oxygen (5%). Using
high-content imaging and high-throughput analysis methods, viability was
assessed using two different mechanistic readouts; cellular metabolic
activity and membrane permeability. Post-screening analysis was performed
to confirm positive hits by performing dose-responses and determining
IC50 concentrations using the same reagents as in the screen, and
reagents to assess oxidative stress and cellular proliferation.Results
showed that viability differed depending on mechanistic readout and
platform method used to determine hits as well as duration of exposure to
compound. In addition, the response of MCF10A cells was not always
identical to that of the MCF7 cells. Post-screening analysis of hits
indicated different potencies of compounds tested depending on oxygen
level and cell type. These data suggest that some drugs may affect MCF7
and MCF10A cells differently depending on environmental oxygen levels and
mechanistic readout used to determine cellular health.

