Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WHSC1L1 is a driving oncogene in ER positive breast cancer


The 8p11-p12 genomic region is amplified in 15% of breast cancers and is
associated with poorer prognosis. This genomic region harbors several
oncogenes, including three epigenetic chromatin modifiers: ASH2L, KAT6A,
and WHSC1L1. WHSC1L1 is a histone methyltransferase expressed in two
isoforms and we have previously demonstrated that this oncogene is
involved in overexpression of ER as well as its activation independent of
estrogen signaling in amplicon-bearing SUM44 breast cancer cells. This
cell line serves as a model for the subset of breast cancer patients who
demonstrate resistance to hormonal therapies in the context of the 8p11
amplicon and WHSC1L1 overexpression. To validate the connection between
overexpression of WHSC1L1 and ESR1, we specifically overexpressed the
short, non-catalytic isoform of WHSC1L1 in amplicon-bearing cell lines
without WHSC1L1 overexpression. Overexpression of WHSC1L1-short resulted
in increased expression of ER in CAMA1 and SUM52 cells, but not in the
amplicon null MCF7 cells. To analyze further the oncogenic role of
WHSC1L1 in breast cancer, we generated a transgenic mouse model with
targeted overexpression of WHSC1L1 in the mammary gland of FVB/N mice.
WHSC1L1 transgenic females had normal sized litters, however the pups
were profoundly underdeveloped compared to pups born to wild-type
females. Pups born to transgenic females displayed delayed hair growth
and eye opening and were half the weight of healthy pups nursed by
wild-type females. This suggested a lactation deficiency in
WHSC1L1-transgenic females. To further investigate this phenotype,
mammary glands were harvested for histologic analysis from transgenic and
wild-type females at various stages of the reproductive cycle. Mammary
glands from virgin WHSC1L1 transgenic females displayed increased
branching and terminal bud formation compared to wild-type virgin
females. Similarly, alveolar buds of mid-pregnant females were more
numerous and densely packed than in wild-type mice. Consistent with a
lactation defect, mammary glands from lactating transgenic females showed
evidence of decreased alveolar development compared to wild-type females,
resulting in mammary glands where half of the gland failed to
functionally differentiate. Finally, post-lactation mammary glands from
wild-type females underwent involution, whereas glands from transgenic
females failed to involute and were hyperplastic. Significantly, we have
observed mammary tumor formation in two transgenic female mice thus far.
Ongoing studies include further characterization of this novel mouse
model, investigation of the effects of WHSC1L1 overexpression on mammary
gland development as pertaining to breast cancer tumorigenesis, and the
oncogenic role of WHSC1L1 and its effects on ER. These and other studies
are essential for understanding WHSC1L1 and the 8p11 amplicon in ER+
breast cancer, and how this genomic alteration can be exploited to
improve patient outcomes.

