Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Focused ultrasound-mediated transport of poly(alkyl) cyanoacrylate
nanoparticles across the blood-brain barrier in a melanoma brain
metastasis model


Drug delivery into the brain is impeded by the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
- a dynamic interface that protects brain homeostasis, but also screens
the brain from the vast majority of large and/or hydrophilic drug
molecules. Focused ultrasound (FUS) has emerged as one of the promising
methods to open the BBB safely and reversibly. We have previously
reported FUS-mediated BBB opening using a novel platform consisting of
microbubbles surrounded by poly(alkyl cyanoacrylate) nanoparticles that
could prospectively be used for FUS- and nanoparticle-mediated drug
delivery into the brain (1,2).Here, we have been investigating
FUS-mediated BBB opening using a novel ultrasound system capable of
generating FUS at two frequencies, 1.1 MHz and 7.8 MHz during the same
experiment. This system allows a very precise selection of the exposure
area. We used FUS exposure at 1 MHz to open the BBB by cavitation, while
exposure at 7.8 MHz was employed to enable the action of acoustic
radiation force. This force is caused by a transfer of momentum from
acoustic waves to the tissues in which they propagate, and can facilitate
nanoparticle transport in the extracellular matrix. FUS-mediated BBB
opening was performed in NOD/SCID mice with melanoma brain metastases
developed after intracardiac injection of human melanoma brain metastasis
cells (3). The cells were fluorescently labeled, which enabled their
detection in the brain. Poly(isohexyl) cyanoacrylate (PIHCA)
nanoparticle-microbubbles similar to those reported in our earlier works
(1,2) were injected immediately before the FUS exposure.Successful
opening of the BBB was verified by MRI using a gadolinium-based contrast
agent. An optimal window of exposure intensities that allow BBB
disruption was found to be close a mechanical index of 0.3. Location of
fluorescently labeled nanoparticles relative to blood vessels and tumor
cells was determined in frozen sections using confocal microscopy. Tissue
damage and FUS-induced changes at the cellular and molecular level were
studied using histological and molecular techniques.In conclusion, the
dual-frequency ultrasound transducer setup and our novel
nanoparticle-microbubble platform showed promising results which will be
used to develop a novel treatment of brain metastasis combining
dual-frequency FUS with drug delivery using
microbubbles.1.Nanoparticle-stabilized microbubbles for multimodal
imaging and drug delivery. Mrch et al. Contrast Media Mol Imaging. 2015
Sep;10(5):356-662.Nanoparticle delivery to the brain - By focused
ultrasound and self-assembled nanoparticle-stabilized microbubbles. slund
AK et al. J Control Release. 2015 Oct 28;220(Pt A):287-2943.Automated
tracking of nanoparticle-labeled melanoma cells improves the predicted
power of a brain metastasis model. Sundstrm T et al. Cancer Res. 2013
Feb;73(8):2445-2456.

