Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemical multiplex staining strategies with CD8, CD103,
PD-1, FOXP3 and pan melanoma cocktail in tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
in melanoma


IntroductionTumor-associated immune suppression can lead to defective
T-cell mediated antitumor immunity. CD8 T-cells play a critical role in
the host defense against cancers and infectious diseases. However, the
presence of antigen-specific CD8 T-cells does not always imply that
cancers and/or pathogens are efficiently eliminated in the body. In tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILS), other markers including CD103, PD-1 and
FOXP3 are broadly expressed and have shown a wider range of
immunoregulatory and important roles in T-cell activation, T- cell
regulatory and programmed cell-death checkpoints. Existing methods can
either deliver phenotypic information on homogenous samples such as flow
cell cytometry or give immunohistochemical information on single
biomarker. However, it would be of advantage to be able to visualize the
distributions of multiple biomarkers in TILs that would discriminate
stromal cells versus solid tumor. Therefore, a multiplex IHC stain
utilizing a melanoma marker as a staining mask that separates the
malignant tumor cells from stromal cells maybe a good strategy to
facilitate better interpretation.Materials and MethodsMonoclonal mouse
antibodies to CD8, FOXP3 and PD-1 and rabbit monoclonal antibodies CD8,
CD103 and PD-1 were optimally tittered for single, double and triple
stains and visualized with HRP DAB/Black chromogens and/or alkaline
phosphatase fast red/blue chromogens. A mouse monoclonal pan melanoma
cocktail was visualized with a fast red chromogen and was used as a
staining mask for melanoma tumors cells, but not stromal
cells.ResultsSingle, double and triple stains that included pan melanoma
cocktail (mask) and CD8, CD103 FOXP3 and PD-1 were successfully
established. All double and triple stains gave comparable results to
single stains. The co-expression of TILs including CD8 and CD103 or CD8
or FOXP3 and PD-1 was easily identified with contrasting chromogens. TILs
in stroma tissues and in malignant tumors cells were easily discriminated
with the pan melanoma (mask) that stained only tumor cells with fast red
chromogen, but did not stain TILS or stromal tissues.ConclusionThe
evaluation of TILS in malignant melanoma was enhanced with multiplex
stains. TILs in stromal tissues and melanoma tumors cells were easily
distinguished with the Pan Melanoma staining mask. These finding may help
facilitate important prognostic information and thus may support the
rationale for using immunotherapy strategies.

