Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Mouse-Human co-clinical trial with patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) models demonstrates a predictive signature for dovitinib (TKI258),
an FGFR and VEGFR inhibitor,in lung squamous cell carcinomalung cancer
(LSCC)


Background: We conducted a co-clinical trial with PDX models in
conjunction with a phase II clinical trial with dovitinib in patients
with fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) amplified LSCC in order
to identify a predictive biomarker for dovitinib, a FGFR
inhibitor.Methods: PDX models were established using tumor samples
obtained from LSCC patients enrolled in the trial. We conducted an in
vivo efficacy test with dovitinib in PDX models and comprehensive
molecular profiling by whole exome sequencing (WES), array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH), and microarray-based gene
expression.Results: The histological and genomic characteristics of
xenograft tumors (F2) resembled case-matched original tumors (F0).
Dovitinib treatment resulted in tumor shrinkage in PDXL01, but not in
PDXL02-04, which corresponded to responses in LSCC patients enrolled in
the clinical trial. The patient, from whom PDXL01 was derived, showed a
partial response to dovitinib with progression-free survival of 6 months,
whereas the patient, from whom PDXL04 was derived had rapid disease
progression within 2 months of treatment. Mutation profiles of F0 and F2
were largely concordant with each other in at least 70% of somatic
mutations. The genome-wide copy number alterations were also largely
concordant between F0 and F2, suggesting that PDX tumors can successfully
represent the genomic features of the tumors from LSCC patients. Notably,
mutation in FGFR 1-3 genes was not observed. FGFR1 amplification largely
due to arm-level 8p gain was consistently observed, regardless of
sensitivity to dovitinib. This finding suggests that FGFR1 amplification
may not be a predictor for dovitinib sensitivity. Finally, we compared
gene expression between a responder and non-responders. In a Heatmap
analysis of the top 50 significantly up- and down-regulated genes, FGFR
gene signature including FGF3 and FGF19 was significantly up-regulated in
the responder. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) identified that gene
sets, such as FGFR ligand binding and activation and SHC-mediated cascade
pathway, were significantly enriched in the responder, highlighting FGFR
pathway activation as a key molecular determinant for sensitivity to
dovitinib. To identify predictive gene signatures from independent
datasets, we further performed GSEA in dovitinib-sensitive lung cancer
cell lines compared to resistant ones as available in the CCLE (Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia) database. Among the four functional modules (FGFR
signaling, Immune, Cell cycle, and RNA) that we identified, the FGFR
signaling module performed well in the prediction of dovitinib
sensitivity of PDXL01-04Conclusions: FGFR gene expression signatures are
predictors for response to dovitinib in LSCC.

