Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The critical role of lymph node stromal cell-derived microvesicles
in colorectal cancer metastasis


Introduction: Metastatic disease is responsible for 90% of colorectal
cancer (CRC) deaths. Studies suggest that metastasis is closely
associated with the presence of CRC tumor-initiating cells (Co-TIC) and
their interaction with the lymph node (LN) stromal microenvironment.
Prior to developing extra-nodal metastasis, these cells acquire a
chemotherapy-resistant phenotype developing genetic alterations making
them resistant to conventional treatments. In addition to cell-cell
contact and secreted molecules, a recently discovered means of
intercellular signaling is the exchange of extra-cellular vesicles. These
microvesicles (MVs) carry complex biological information, including mRNA,
miRNA, as well as soluble and transmembrane proteins that can affect the
behavior of target cells. MVs have been detected in patient specimens
with diverse malignancies and may play a role in communication between
the LN stromal microenvironment and Co-TIC. We hypothesize that MVs are
involved in intracellular trafficking between LN stromal cells and CRC
cells promoting tumor formation and distant organ metastasis.Methods: MVs
released by human mesenteric LN stromal cells (LNSC) derived from
surgical specimens and the established LN stromal cell line (HK cell)
were isolated using differential centrifugation and gradient
purification. The MVs were visualized using GFP-HK cell and RFP-HT-29
cell (CRC cell line) and florescence microscopy. The functional
properties of LN stromal MVs and their effect on CRC proliferation and
metastasis was analyzed using established in vitro co-culture models and
a humanized orthotopic intra-rectal (IR) injection mouse model, tracked
by bioluminescent imaging (BLI).Results: A 100,000 g pellet containing
MVs derived from LNSC and HK cells have a similar size profile when
analyzed by NanoSight. Budding CD63-RFP tagged MVs were released by LNSC
and HK cells and uptake by GFP tagged CRC cells was confirmed through
time-lapse experiments using deconvoluting microscopy. When HK cell or LN
stromal cell-derived MVs were co-cultured with HT-29 cells in vitro, they
supported HT-29 cell growth at a similar level as that of HK cell or LN
stromal cell conditioned media, respectively. By adding LNSC- or
HK-derived MVs to HT-29-Luc cells or patient derived CRC cells
(CRC-Pt-Luc cells) in our IR model, we demonstrated that MVs enhanced CRC
tumor growth as well as distant organ metastasis in vivo.Conclusion: MVs
isolated from LNSCs traffic between the stromal cells and CRC cells.
These MVs promote tumor formation and distant organ metastasis in vivo
suggesting that they play a crucial role in the communication between the
LN stromal microenvironment and CRC cells. Further analyzing the
functional properties of effector MV RNAs may help identify novel
targetable candidates for therapeutic strategies that target CRC
metastasis using our unique patient derived orthotopic mouse model.

