Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhance both precision and sensitivity of fusion gene detection by
hybrid sequencing


Background: New Third Generation Sequencing (TGS) techniques, such as
PacBio, can provide very informative insights into the transcriptome,
such as expression of fusion genes/fusion transcripts from cancer
samples. However, the currently available fusion genes analysis tools are
for Second Generation Sequencing (SGS) data, where the short read length
and unreliable alignments can lead to uncertain accuracy of fusion gene
detections. Hybrid-Seq, which integrates SGS short read data into the
analysis of TGS long read data, can complement the strengths of both and
thus improve the overall performance and resolution of the output data.
It also reduces the required amount of TGS data and thus the sequencing
cost. Recently, we developed and reported on a Hybrid-Seq approach,
IDP-fusion and the results of the proof-of-concept application to MCF-7
data. We demonstrated that IDP-fusion can identify fusions genes with
much higher precision than SGS-based approaches. Although the sensitivity
is comparable to the most sensitive SGS-only method, a significant
proportion of experimentally verified gold standard fusion genes had yet
to be identified by IDP-fusion. It indicated an opportunity to enhance
the sensitivity of IDP-fusion while retaining the unparalleled precision
of the results.Method: Here we present an innovative Hybrid-Seq approach
which extends IDP-fusion, to filtered fusion gene candidates predicted by
SGS short read alignments. The fusion gene candidates are verified by the
presence of a TGS long read better aligned to an artificial chromosome
created from the fusion candidate than any single genome locus. We
applied IDP-fusion to a Hybrid-Seq data from the MCF-7 breast cancer cell
line, including Illumina SGS data and a lately TGS data generated by
PacBio P5-C3 sequencing chemistry. The new IDP-fusion considered fusion
candidates reported by several popular SGS tools (TopHat-Fusion,
SOAPfuse, TRUP, FusionMap, and deFuse). We compared performance of our
new tool to the original IDP-fusion, and the SGS-only approaches.Results:
The new algorithm of IDP-fusion improved the sensitivity from 33.8% to
54.9%. This is higher than the most sensitive SGS-only tool (deFuse,
38.0%), which is achieved at the cost of a low precision of 13.8%. The
improved IDP-fusion retains a precision of 60.9%, which is only down
slightly from the original IDP-fusion at 68.6%. This tradeoff is
acceptable when considering the overall accuracy described by F-score for
IDP-fusion. The F-score has increased from 45.3% to 57.8%, which is also
considerably better than the best F-score achieved by SGS-only methods
(32.8%).Conclusions: Fusion candidates identified directly from SGS reads
can be screened using alignments of TGS long reads, and supplement fusion
candidates detected from long reads. Comparing to SGS-only methods, this
Hybrid-Seq approach provides much more sensitive and more accurate
reports on the fusion genes.

