Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of a next-generation, EGFR targeting ADC
that promotes regression in KRAS or BRAF mutant tumors


Cancers with downstream activating KRAS or BRAF mutations in the EGFR
pathway are resistant to EGFR targeting agents such as cetuximab and
correspond to a significant unmet need. We hypothesized that an anti-EGFR
ADC could be effective against KRAS or BRAF mutated tumors due to the
cytotoxic mechanism of the ADC warhead. In an effort to eliminate the
known dermal toxicity associated with anti-EGFR therapy, and to mitigate
potential toxicities associated with treatment by an anti-EGFR ADC, a mAb
was engineered with increased tumor microenvironment (TME) specificity
for EGFR. The lead mAb demonstrated undetectable in vivo binding to human
donor foreskins grafted onto nude mice, while binding to human A431 tumor
xenografts with similar intensity to cetuximab (P 99.7%). Approximately
70% of this compound was rapidly internalized by human tumor cells grown
in vitro over 4 hours, overlapping the internalization kinetics of the
unconjugated mAb. HTI-1511 was evaluated for efficacy against two human
EGFR overexpressing tumor models, MDA-MB-231M (triple-negative breast
cancer, KRAS-G13D) and HT-29 (colorectal cancer, BRAF-V600E), and dosed
at 5, 10, and 15 mg/kg, (qw, IV). A clear dose dependent anti-tumor
response was observed with complete tumor regressions observed at the 15
mg/kg dose in both models, which were resistant to treatment by
cetuximab. In addition, HTI-1511 was well-tolerated at 2 and 8 mg/kg in a
cynomolgus monkey toxicity study (n = 3 per group), with limited dermal
findings that were comparable with the vehicle control group. No adverse
findings were observed at either dose. HTI-1511 showed a high degree of
circulating stability in cynomolgus monkeys, and lacked in vivo
degradation and instability that was observed in a control ADC conjugated
using maleimide chemistry. HTI-1511 demonstrated significantly attenuated
binding to FcRIIa, FcIIb, FcIIIa 158V, and FcIIIa 158F receptors, but not
attenuated binding to FcR1, in a FACS based assay format specific for
each receptor, suggesting that HTI-1511 might have improved tolerability
due to lack of binding by FcRII-III receptors, possibly due steric
hindrance from the PEG side chain. Thus, HTI-1511 holds promise as a
potentially safe and effective treatment of EGFR overexpressing tumors
with KRAS or BRAF mutations.

