Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of INCB052793, a selective JAK1 inhibitor, in combination
with standard of care agents in human multiple myeloma (MM) cell lines
and xenograft models


Several studies have demonstrated constitutive activation of the JAK-STAT
pathway in MM through dysregulated signaling of cytokines such as IL-6.
In addition to its crucial role in promoting the growth, proliferation
and survival of myeloma cells, IL-6 is also a potent stimulator of
osteoclastogenesis and influences the tumor microenvironment in the bone
marrow of myeloma patients by promoting an immunosuppressive milieu.
Since JAK1 has been shown to be important for IL-6 signaling, studies to
assess the effect of JAK1 inhibition alone and in combination with other
anti-MM agents were undertaken. The human MM cell lines, RPMI8226 or
U266, were cultured in the presence of the JAK1 selective inhibitor
INCB052793 plus a panel of anti-MM agents including the alkylating
agents, cyclophosphamide (CY), melphalan (MEL), and bendamustine, the
proteasome inhibitor, carfilzomib, the corticosteroid, dexamethasone
(DEX) or the immunomodulatory agents lenalidomide (LEN) and pomalidomide
(POM). After 48 hours, cell viability was assessed. Combinations of
INCB052793 plus the three alkylating agents or carfilzomib
synergistically inhibited the viability of both cell lines in vitro.
INCB052793 plus CY or MEL also significantly decreased the viability of
the MM1S MM cell line. In vivo, mice bearing the human patient derived MM
tumor LAG-1A had significantly smaller tumors when treated with
INCB052793 alone when compared to vehicle control at Day 35 post
implantation. This was in contrast to mice treated with single agent DEX,
LEN or POM. Although the combination of INCB052793 with DEX, LEN or POM
did not synergistically inhibit MM cell line growth in vitro, mice
receiving the doublets of INCB052793 and DEX, LEN or POM demonstrated an
effect on tumor growth that was superior to the doublets of DEX with LEN
or POM. Mice receiving the triple combination of INCB052793 + DEX with
LEN or POM demonstrated the most significant effect on tumor growth
compared to all other combinations tested. The inhibition of tumor growth
with these combinations was observed throughout the study (through Day
70) and all combinations were well tolerated. Concomitant with effects on
tumor growth, a significant reduction in serum human IgG levels was also
observed. Studies to further understand the mechanistic effects of these
combinations on myeloma signaling and the tumor microenvironment are
ongoing. In conclusion, these in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate
that the combination of INCB052793 with a broad spectrum of anti-MM
agents is effective, and provide further support for the clinical
evaluation of these drug combinations in MM patients.

