Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of exosomes-associated onco-microRNAs in
African Americans with prostate cancer


Background: The mortality rate of prostate cancer (PCa) is two times
higher in African American (AA) than Caucasian American (CA) men. The
molecular mechanisms underlying these health disparities among AA men
have yet to be fully elucidated. Our study aimed to evaluate the role of
exosomes-associated onco-microRNAs (miRs) as biological determinant for
the racial disparity of PCa patients.Methods: Exosomes were isolated from
the conditioned medium of MDA-PCa-2b (AA-origin), PC-3 (CA origin), C4-2B
and RWPE-1 (non-tumorigenic) cell lines to study the endogenous
expression of a number of onco-miRs and their anticipated target genes
using Real-Time PCR and Western blot analyses. The potential candidates
were validated in exosomes procured from plasma of human AA PCa patients
and their counterparts. Onco-miRs target genes such as Lats-2, PDCD4, and
SMEK1 were validated on cellular and exosomes derived from cells and
human specimens. Onco-miRs and their targets were correlated with age and
Gleason score of the disease.Results: Not only onco-miR-125b, miR-155,
and miR-3613 were upregulated in PCa versus normal RWPE1 cells but also
in AA versus CA PCa cells. Onc-miR-3613 and miR-3680 were 3-4 times
upregulated in cells and in C4-2B-derived exosomes compared to
RWPE-1-derived vesicles. Also, these miRs were upregulated (2.5 fold) in
MDA-PCa-2b versus PC-3 cells. The expression of tumor suppressor genes,
such as Lats2, PDCD4, and SMEK1, were downregulated in PCa cells compared
to normal cells. Differential expression of PCa exosomes-associated
onco-miRs was also demonstrated in AA PCa patients compared to CA PCa and
their age-matched normal subjects. A positive correlation was found
between onco-miR-125b and high Gleason score (r = 0.763, pBackground: The
mortality rate of prostate cancer (PCa) is two times higher in African
American (AA) than Caucasian American (CA) men. The molecular mechanisms
underlying these health disparities among AA men have yet to be fully
elucidated. Our study aimed to evaluate the role of exosomes-associated
onco-microRNAs (miRs) as biological determinant for the racial disparity
of PCa patients.Methods: Exosomes were isolated from the conditioned
medium of MDA-PCa-2b (AA-origin), PC-3 (CA origin), C4-2B and RWPE-1
(non-tumorigenic) cell lines to study the endogenous expression of a
number of onco-miRs and their anticipated target genes using Real-Time
PCR and Western blot analyses. The potential candidates were validated in
exosomes procured from plasma of human AA PCa patients and their
counterparts. Onco-miRs target genes such as Lats-2, PDCD4, and SMEK1
were validated on cellular and exosomes derived from cells and human
specimens. Onco-miRs and their targets were correlated with age and
Gleason score of the disease.Results: Not only onco-miR-125b, miR-155,
and miR-3613 were upregulated in PCa versus normal RWPE1 cells but also
in AA versus CA PCa cells. Onc-miR-3613 and miR-3680 were 3-4 times
upregulated in cells and in C4-2B-derived exosomes compared to
RWPE-1-derived vesicles. Also, these miRs were upregulated (2.5 fold) in
MDA-PCa-2b versus PC-3 cells. The expression of tumor suppressor genes,
such as Lats2, PDCD4, and SMEK1, were downregulated in PCa cells compared
to normal cells. Differential expression of PCa exosomes-associated
onco-miRs was also demonstrated in AA PCa patients compared to CA PCa and
their age-matched normal subjects. A positive correlation was found
between onco-miR-125b and high Gleason score (r = 0.763,
p<0.01).Conclusion: Our findings underline the role of
exosomes-associated onco-miRs in health disparity of PCa. The
differential expression of onco-miRs and their tumor suppressor genes in
AA men projects their potential role as prognostic markers and/or future
therapeutic targets in the context of racial disparity.

