Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor stability in prostate cancer is regulated by the
cochaperone Bag-1L


The androgen receptor (AR) is an important determinant of normal and
malignant prostate growth and its function is usually regulated by
circulating levels of androgens, which act by binding to the
ligand-binding domain (LBD) of the receptor. Currently available
therapeutic intervention in prostate cancer concentrates on reducing the
androgen-mediated activation of the receptor by either blocking the
production of androgens or by competing with endogenous androgens for the
ligand-binding pocket. However, these treatments are often palliative as
almost all patients eventually develop castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). Therefore a great need exists to discover alternative
modes of AR inhibition, outside of targeting the LBD. Factors that
control AR stability and receptor turnover may constitute new regulatory
targets for inhibiting AR action.Bag-1L is a nuclear-resident cochaperone
with the ability to control AR transactivation function by directly
interacting with the receptor. Here we show that a conserved domain (BAG)
within the C-terminus of Bag-1L induces significant structural changes
within the intrinsically disordered N-terminal domain of the AR upon
binding the receptor. A consequence of this may be increased
accessibility of either domain for additional protein interactions. Using
a mass spectrometry approach involving the combination of tandem affinity
purification (TAP) and rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of
endogenous proteins (RIME) we could show that Bag-1L, besides its ability
to interact with AR, forms a complex involving the E3 ubiquitin-protein
ligase CHIP and its known interaction partner Hsp70/Hsc70. Both proteins
are involved in the folding and proteolytic turnover of AR, implying a
role of Bag-1L in both processes. To further test this, we investigated
the function of Bag-1L in human patient samples and in prostate cancer
cell lines. We observed that nuclear Bag-1 protein levels are increased
from hormone nave to CRPC status in prostate cancer patients and this
correlates with an increase in AR protein level. TALEN-mediated loss of
Bag-1L in a CRPC cell line model leads to a stabilization of the AR
protein, yet a drastic reduction in genome-wide AR binding and about a
50% decrease in AR-regulated target genes critical for cell proliferation
and migration. Correspondingly, we observed a significant reduction in
prostate cancer growth, which could be rescued when Bag-1L was
re-expressed. Combined these results demonstrate the importance of Bag-1L
for AR stability and function, and the potential of this protein for the
therapeutic intervention in prostate cancer.

