Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of gastric cancer: a
prospective nested case-control study in China, Japan and Korea


Introduction: Epidemiological findings on the association between fruit
and vegetable consumption and gastric cancer risk remain inconsistent,
resulting in the designation of fruits and vegetables as probable and
possible respectively, but not convincing, protective factors. However,
intervention studies provide support for the effect of micronutrient
supplementation in the prevention of gastric cancer and its precursor
lesions, though the effects remain less substantial than for Helicobacter
pylori (H. pylori) eradication. Objective: To ascertain the association
between fruit and vegetable intake and non-cardia gastric cancer
incidence with adjustment for H. pylori within East Asian cohort studies.
Methods: The present analysis includes 1970 participants (810
prospectively ascertained non-cardia gastric cancer cases with 1160
matched controls) from 5 cohort studies in the Helicobacter pylori
Biomarker Cohort Consortium. These cohorts collected blood samples as
well as demographic, lifestyle, and dietary data at baseline.
Pre-diagnostic antibody levels to 15 H. pylori proteins were assessed
using multiplex serology. Conditional logistic regression, adjusting for
total energy intake, smoking, and H. pylori status, was applied to
calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for
gastric cancer risk across cohort- and sex-specific quartiles of fruit
and vegetable intake. Results: Increasing fruit intake was significantly
associated with decreasing risk of non-cardia gastric cancer, so that
individuals in the highest quartile of fruit consumption had a 29%
reduced odds of gastric cancer, compared to individuals in the lowest
quartile (OR = 0.71, 95% CI, 0.52-0.95, P for trend = 0.02). Compared to
CagA-positive H. pylori low fruit consumers, the strongest inverse
association of gastric cancer risk was amongst those high fruit consumers
without evidence of H. pylori antibodies (OR = 0.12, 95% CI: 0.06-0.25),
whereby the inverse association by increasing fruit consumption was
attenuated among individuals infected with CagA-positive H. pylori (OR =
0.82, 95% CI: 0.66-1.03). We observed a weaker, non-dose-response
suggestion of an inverse association of vegetable intake with non-cardia
gastric cancer risk. Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the largest
prospective study in the high-risk region of East Asia to examine the
association of fruit and vegetable consumption with non-cardia gastric
cancer risk adjusted for H. pylori. We have found that high fruit intake
may play a role in decreasing risk of non-cardia gastric cancer, even
after adjustment for H. pylori subtype-specific infection. Funding: R01
CA174853

