Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Seq2C: from sequence to copy number for cancer samples


Targeted sequencing is used increasingly in clinics to guide therapeutic
decisions by measuring mutations, small indels and/or rearrangements in
cancer genes. An ability to use the same platform to detect additional
oncogene activation (or tumor suppressor loss) through copy number
changes could significantly expand the number of patients able to benefit
from targeted therapies. Many currently available tools either requires a
matched normal, works only for whole genome or exome sequencing, or don't
work for PCR-based targeted sequencing. In addition, no tools available
to detect breakpoints within a gene from targeted sequencing. A versatile
copy number analysis tool from sequencing is needed to maximize the value
of the sequencing routinely applied in clinics.Here we presented a novel
computational tool, Seq2C (Sequencing To Copy Number), which is versatile
to handle various situations and reports aberrations at gene level ready
for interpretation. Seq2C works at cohort level and does not require a
matched normal, though it can optionally use one or more normal samples
for small (Targeted sequencing is used increasingly in clinics to guide
therapeutic decisions by measuring mutations, small indels and/or
rearrangements in cancer genes. An ability to use the same platform to
detect additional oncogene activation (or tumor suppressor loss) through
copy number changes could significantly expand the number of patients
able to benefit from targeted therapies. Many currently available tools
either requires a matched normal, works only for whole genome or exome
sequencing, or don't work for PCR-based targeted sequencing. In addition,
no tools available to detect breakpoints within a gene from targeted
sequencing. A versatile copy number analysis tool from sequencing is
needed to maximize the value of the sequencing routinely applied in
clinics.Here we presented a novel computational tool, Seq2C (Sequencing
To Copy Number), which is versatile to handle various situations and
reports aberrations at gene level ready for interpretation. Seq2C works
at cohort level and does not require a matched normal, though it can
optionally use one or more normal samples for small (<20) or homogeneous
cohorts. Seq2C applies a robust three-step cohort-based normalization to
identify and quantify sequencing coverage variability in given regions,
which can be sequence or platform dependant. Seq2C works for hybrid or
PCR based targeted sequencing, exome and even whole genome sequencing. In
targeted sequencing, Seq2C automatically identify and exclude regions
that fail to be captured by the assay to prevent false positive calls of
deletions, and can accommodate several magnitude differences in PCR
efficiency.Another distinct feature differentiating Seq2C from other
currently available tools is that Seq2C identifies breakpoints and
detects one or more exon deletion or duplication rearrangements within a
gene, which is common in tumor suppressors as a mechanism to lose
function. In addition, it can also detect potential fusions in genes such
as ALK and ERG, where a copy number change is often accompanied with the
fusion and a breakpoint can thus be called by Seq2C. Furthermore, it can
predict gender from exome or whole genome sequencing.We applied Seq2C to
exome sequencing of CCLE cell lines, and showed that it produced gene
level copy number data highly correlated to those derived from
microarrays, the current gold standard. Interestingly, Seq2C identified
one or more exon deletions in several common tumor suppressors, such as
TP53, PTEN, CDKN2A, NF1, STK11 and RB1, in cell lines with no known
aberrations. They were supported by RNA-Seq data. It also correctly
called known ERG fusion in prostate cell line NCI-H660 and identified a
previously un-reported EML4-ALK fusion in a pancreatic cancer cell line
SNU-324, which is confirmed by RNA-Seq data, suggesting EML4-ALK is not
limited to lung cancer.In conclusion, Seq2C is a versatile copy number
analysis tool for sequencing and will be useful for cancer research.
Seq2C is freely available in GitHub.

