Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design of effective combination therapies for high-grade serous
ovarian cancer using patient-derived xenograft models


Despite advances in understanding the genetics and molecular biology of
high grade serous ovarian cancer, there have not been any significant
improvements in the outcome of patients treated with approved therapies
to date. The overall aim of our studies is to identify synergistic drug
combinations for the treatment of high-grade serous ovarian (HGS-Ov)
cancer and the biomarkers that predict sensitivity for future translation
in clinical trials. In particular, this study focuses on the
vulnerabilities of patient-derived ovarian cancer cells to inhibition of
anti-apoptotic proteins and the design of novel combination therapies to
overcome drug resistance and improve the response of selected patients to
a particular set of targeted therapies.Previous studies from our lab
provided evidence that inhibition of BCL-2/XL can significantly enhance
the sensitivity of tumor cells to targeted therapies in ovarian and
breast cancer cell line models (Muranen T et al., Cancer Cell 2012). In
this study, we evaluated the efficacy of this combination treatment in
ascites cells derived from 15 high-grade serous patient-derived ovarian
cancer xenografts (PDXs). We found that inhibitors of PI3K/mTOR (GNE-493)
and BCL-2/XL (ABT-737) act synergistically ex vivo, with an 15 fold
variability among the 15 patient-derived samples. A large scale in vivo
experiment is ongoing to evaluate the efficacy of this combined treatment
in six PDX models.To identify biomarkers that predict drug sensitivity we
performed proteomic Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) and immunoblot
analyses. We found that baseline levels of the pro-apoptotic protein BIM
correlate with sensitivity to BCL-2/XL inhibition. This motivated us to
examine the basis for low BIM expression. In three of the least sensitive
PDX models, we found that low levels of BIM correlated with ERK
activation based on increased ERK phosphorylation and that inhibition of
MEK by PD-0325901 in these models caused upregulation of BIM, as
predicted from previous published reports which demonstrated that
phosphorylation of BIM by ERK causes its degradation (Ley R, et al. J
Biol Chem. 2003). We then examined the sensitivity of these PDX models to
ABT-737 and PD-0325901, MEK162, or CI-1040 ex vivo and observed strong
synergy resulting in reduction of cell viability and increased cell
death. These results suggest that low BIM/high phosphoERK is a potential
biomarker for sensitivity of ovarian tumors to combined MEK and BCL-2/XL
inhibition. We now plan to examine the efficacy of drug combinations that
target MEK and BCL-2/XL in these PDX models in vivo.Our studies promise
to lead to the identification of new drug combination therapies for
HGS-Ov cancer treatment and predictive biomarkers to stratify patients
that can benefit from these targeted therapies

