Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Importance of the REM (Ras exchange) motif for membrane
interactions by RasGRP3


RasGRP comprises a family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors that
activate small GTPases, regulating the dissociation of GDP from Ras
GTPases to enhance the formation of the active GTP-bound form. RasGRP3 is
a complex protein with REM (Ras exchange motif), GEF (catalytic domain),
EF-hand, C1, SuPT, and PT (plasma membrane-targeting) domains, each of
which can affect the cellular membranes to which RasGRP1/3 localizes. The
C1 domain was the first membrane localizing domain identified in
RasGRP1/3. It binds to the lipid second messenger diacylglycerol (DAG)
and has the potential to mediate translocation of RasGRP1/3. The
catalytic GEF domain and REM domain are both required for membrane
localization of RasGRP1, affecting both endomembrane and plasma membrane
targeting of RasGRP1. The objective of this study was to explore the
importance of these two domains in translocation of RasGRP3. For these
studies, we prepared full length RasGRP1/3, RasGRP1/3 C1 domains, and
truncated RasGRP1/3 green fluorescent protein labeled constructs to
transfect human prostate adenocarcinoma (LNCaP) cells. In the LNCaP
cells, which are a PTEN mutant cell line with markedly elevated
phosphoinositide levels, RasGRP1 translocates to the plasma membrane in
response to PMA. In contrast, the full length RasGRP3 does not
translocate to the plasma membrane even though it has a PT (plasma
membrane-targeting) domain. In parallel, we examined the translocation of
the C1 domain of RasGRP1/3 and of the truncated RasGRP1/3 constructs. The
C1 domain of RasGRP3 was insufficient for targeting RasGRP3 to the plasma
membrane. However, truncated RasGRP3s, which contain the PT domain and
are missing the REM motif, showed stronger translocation. To better
understand differences in the translocation pattern of these two proteins
we compared RasGRP1 (template) and RasGRP3 (target) domains using
Swiss-Model (homology or comparative modelling methods) and amino acid
sequence alignment (NCBI/ BLAST). The percentage of identities showed
remarkable differences in the structure of the REM and SuPT-PT domains.
Based on these findings we prepared chimeras where we exchanged either
the N or C terminus of RasGRP1/3. Exchange of the REM motif between
RasGRP1 and RasGRP3 enhanced the translocation of RasGRP3, while it does
not affect the translocation of RasGRP1. Exchange of C termini (SuPT-PT
domain) of both proteins did not cause any changes in plasma membrane
translocation. Our results clearly show that the N terminus (REM motif)
of RasGRP3 is a critical element contributing to the difference between
RasGRP1 and RasGRP3 in their ability to translocate to the plasma
membrane. This difference in membrane translocation, in turn, should
imply important differences in their regulation and, potentially, in
their ligand selectivity in the living cell.

