Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tailoring approaches for global epigenome analysis from archival
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples


Novel DNA extraction methodologies allow the use of archival material
from formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples in genomic
studies. A major limitation of this source of DNA is the fragmented
nature and low overall yield generally obtained from clinical materials,
making downstream applications such as epigenetic analysis challenging.
Previous published attempts have focussed on smaller regions of CpG
islands, such as the use of Illumina's 450k arrays (which measure
methylation at approximately 485,000 sites). The objective of this study
was to optimize experimental and analytical workflows that allow
effective interrogation of global DNA methylation profiles from FFPE
samples.Methylation capture was conducted on DNA from matched FFPE and
fresh frozen samples from the same metastatic colorectal cancer patient
as well as two colorectal cancer cell lines, using the SeqCap Epi (Roche)
methyl capture system. The custom capture designed includes 5.5 million
CpG sites across the genome, a greater than 10-fold increase compared to
previously published studies. The wet-lab protocol was robustly optimized
for several parameters, such as overall yield and bisulphite conversion
efficiency (measured by shallow-read next generation sequencing). A data
analysis pipeline composed of the bisulfite-converted DNA aligner
BWA-meth, as well as in-house Perl and R scripts, was used to generate
detailed methylation maps for individual sample types in order to
identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs), which were further
validated using targeted bisulphite sequencing for selected
loci.Preliminary analysis of the data revealed 98% bisulphite conversion
efficiency and low PCR duplicate rate (4-5%) across both sample types.
Intriguingly, we observe an 80% concordance between the overall DNA
methylation profiles between FFPE and fresh frozen samples, with a 60%
overlap between the FFPE and fresh frozen samples in terms of direction
of methylation i.e. hyper or hypomethylation. Mapping overall methylation
levels to CpG resorts (+/- 4kb of CpG islands) indicated 10% of
methylation occurred in these regions totalling 245MB. Known genomic
features, including exons, promoters of coding/non-coding genes and
enhancers, contained 30% (1.5 million) of the methylated positions. In
addition, this methodology also allowed us to identify C to T transitions
across all samples, a common artefact of formalin fixed samples. The
analysis revealed that a significantly low proportion of C to T
transitions were detected across all samples, the levels of the
transitions being consistent between the two sample types. Taken
together, these results demonstrate a robust and novel approach to
generate DNA methylation profiles from difficult-to-handle, but
frequently available material, thus establishing a suitable platform for
a whole methylome profiling from archival samples.

