Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of PI3K targeting with cetuximab and irradiation: a
preclinical study on an orthotopic xenograft model of head and neck cancer


The PI3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway is of particular
interest in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Its activation
has been identified as an important mechanism implicated in tumor
progression and resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
inhibitors. The anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody cetuximab (Cet),
radiotherapy (RT) and their combination are widely used in the
therapeutic management of patients with HNSCC. Inhibition of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway has been shown to potentialize the
effects of anti-EGFR agents and RT. We conducted a preliminary in vitro
study demonstrating synergistic effects of Cet followed by the PI3K
inhibitor BKM120 (Buparlisib) in both PI3KCA wild-type and mutated cells.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of combining
BKM120 with Cet and RT on an orthotopic xenograft model of HNSCC.In the
present study we have used an orthotopic (floor of the mouth) model of
human HNSCC to measure the effects of a treatment including BKM120 (40
mg/kg, 5 days/week, p.o.), Cet (2,5 mg/kg/day, 1 day/week, i.p.) and RT
(6 Gy/dose, 3 days/week), administered alone or in combination.
Investigations were performed using the human PI3KCA-mutated (H1047R)
HNSCC cell line, CAL33, injected into the mouth floor of nude mice. The
tumor growth was followed by IVIS imagery on days 3, 7 and 12 and tumor
size was checked with a caliper ruler on day 13 after animal
euthanasia.As compared with the control, the BKM120-Cet and the
BKM120-Cet-RT combinations led to the highest tumor inhibition and
induced almost complete tumor growth arrest (p The PI3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway is of particular interest in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Its activation has been identified
as an important mechanism implicated in tumor progression and resistance
to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. The anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody cetuximab (Cet), radiotherapy (RT) and their
combination are widely used in the therapeutic management of patients
with HNSCC. Inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway has been
shown to potentialize the effects of anti-EGFR agents and RT. We
conducted a preliminary in vitro study demonstrating synergistic effects
of Cet followed by the PI3K inhibitor BKM120 (Buparlisib) in both PI3KCA
wild-type and mutated cells. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the effects of combining BKM120 with Cet and RT on an
orthotopic xenograft model of HNSCC.In the present study we have used an
orthotopic (floor of the mouth) model of human HNSCC to measure the
effects of a treatment including BKM120 (40 mg/kg, 5 days/week, p.o.),
Cet (2,5 mg/kg/day, 1 day/week, i.p.) and RT (6 Gy/dose, 3 days/week),
administered alone or in combination. Investigations were performed using
the human PI3KCA-mutated (H1047R) HNSCC cell line, CAL33, injected into
the mouth floor of nude mice. The tumor growth was followed by IVIS
imagery on days 3, 7 and 12 and tumor size was checked with a caliper
ruler on day 13 after animal euthanasia.As compared with the control, the
BKM120-Cet and the BKM120-Cet-RT combinations led to the highest tumor
inhibition and induced almost complete tumor growth arrest (p < 0.001).
The addition of BKM120 and Cet to RT significantly enhanced the impact of
RT alone on tumor growth (p The PI3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mTOR signaling
pathway is of particular interest in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). Its activation has been identified as an important
mechanism implicated in tumor progression and resistance to epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. The anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibody cetuximab (Cet), radiotherapy (RT) and their combination are
widely used in the therapeutic management of patients with HNSCC.
Inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway has been shown to
potentialize the effects of anti-EGFR agents and RT. We conducted a
preliminary in vitro study demonstrating synergistic effects of Cet
followed by the PI3K inhibitor BKM120 (Buparlisib) in both PI3KCA
wild-type and mutated cells. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the effects of combining BKM120 with Cet and RT on an
orthotopic xenograft model of HNSCC.In the present study we have used an
orthotopic (floor of the mouth) model of human HNSCC to measure the
effects of a treatment including BKM120 (40 mg/kg, 5 days/week, p.o.),
Cet (2,5 mg/kg/day, 1 day/week, i.p.) and RT (6 Gy/dose, 3 days/week),
administered alone or in combination. Investigations were performed using
the human PI3KCA-mutated (H1047R) HNSCC cell line, CAL33, injected into
the mouth floor of nude mice. The tumor growth was followed by IVIS
imagery on days 3, 7 and 12 and tumor size was checked with a caliper
ruler on day 13 after animal euthanasia.As compared with the control, the
BKM120-Cet and the BKM120-Cet-RT combinations led to the highest tumor
inhibition and induced almost complete tumor growth arrest (p < 0.001).
The addition of BKM120 and Cet to RT significantly enhanced the impact of
RT alone on tumor growth (p < 0.001). The highest inhibitory effects of
treatments on cell proliferation (Ki67 labelling), MAPK (pERK labelling)
and PI3K/AKT/mTOR (pS6R labelling) signaling pathways were found with the
BKM120-Cet association. RT alone (p = 0.10) tended to activate the MAPK
pathway but the association of BKM120 and Cet to RT inhibited the
RT-induced activation of the MAPK pathway (p = 0.03).In conclusion, in
this orthotopic HNSCC model, the combination of BKM120 with Cet and RT
produced synergistic effects on tumor growth. These results could serve
as a strong preclinical basis for innovative treatments combining PI3K
inhibition with anti-EGFR therapies and RT in patients with HNSCC.

