Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of enhancement of the antitumor effect of CDDP by PXR
antagonists


We have already found that a nuclear receptor PXR can modulate the
cytotoxicity of CDDP for cancer cells, and ketoconazole, a PXT
antagonist, can be an agent enhancing the antitumor activity of CDDP due
to increase of the intracellular platinum content as the mechanism.
However, nuclear receptor ligands have a variety of functions, and there
is a possibility that PXR antagonist may enhance the cytotoxicity of CDDP
through the mechanism other than the inhibition of transporter-mediated
efflux of CDDP. The goal of this study was to compare the enhancing
ability of three PXR antagonists, ketoconazole (KTZ), phenethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC) and metformin (MFM), for the antitumor effect of
CDDP and clarify the contribution of inhibition of the efflux transporter
as the mechanism of PXR antagonist. Cell lines used in this study were
human hepatoma cell line HepG2. Changes in mRNA expression were assessed
by real-time RT-PCR, and the ability of apoptosis induction was assessed
as caspase-3 activity. Total intracellular platinum contents were
determined by ICP-AES. When HepG2 cells were treated for 24 hr with 10 M
of CDDP, no change of caspase-3 activity was observed when compared to
control cells. Also, 30 M of KTZ, 30 M of PEITC or 5 mM of MFM had no
affect on the caspase-3 activity in treated cells compared with control
cells. When KTZ, PEITC or MFM was exposed to HepG2 cells from 24 hr
before treatment and during 24-hr treatment with 10 M of CDDP, the
caspase-3 activity was significantly increased to 461%, 355% and 326% of
the control, respectively, in comparison with that in CDDP alone. When
HepG2 cells were treated for 8 hr with 25 M of CDDP, the intracellular
platinum content was 110 ng/mg protein. On the other hand when KTZ, PEITC
or MFM was exposed to HepG2 cells from 24 hr before treatment and during
8-hr treatment with 25 M of CDDP, the intracellular platinum content was
apparently increased to 227%, 491% and 161% of CDDP alone, respectively.
Three PXR antagonists resulted in an increase in the intracellular
platinum content that seems to be due to inhibition of the platinum
efflux transporter, but there is no correlation between increase in
intracellular platinum content and enhancement of antitumor activity by
PXR antagonists. These results concluded that PXR antagonist can be an
agent enhancing the antitumor activity of CDDP, but the ability of PXR
antagonist for enhancing antitumor activity of CDDP can not be determined
from only the increase in the intracellular platinum content.

