Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detecting cancer mutations at the resolution of individual DNA
molecules for longitudinal monitoring


We have developed a new molecular assay that utilizes digital PCR to
detect and quantify cancer mutations within poor quality and limited
quantity samples such as archival tissue DNA and circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA). This digital PCR assay is highly sensitive and is capable of
detecting the targeted mutant fraction at an individual DNA molecule
resolution. Thus, this assay is ideal for applications where DNA is in
low abundance. An example is where DNA is shed from tumors that can be
extracted from the plasma fraction of routine blood draws. The resulting
circulating DNA (ctDNA) is extremely low in concentration, which makes it
a prime candidate for our highly sensitive molecular assay.Our assay
incorporates small amplicon PCR primers and can be configured for nearly
any coding mutation; practically, this means that any cancer or DNA
sample can be tested efficiently. Mutation quantitation relies on two DNA
primer sets that are identical with the exception of the mutant or wild
type specific base at the 3 end of the detecting primer sets, to amplify
the genomic region of interest. Through the addition of artificial 5
non-complementary tails to our mutant and wild type specific detection
primers, we are able to consistently differentiate between droplets that
contain the mutant or wild type alleles based upon their differential
amplicon lengths. The synthetic amplicon extension tails minimize bias
within the PCR reaction by allowing our primers to target an identical
region of genomic DNA, with the exception of the single nucleotide
variant specific base at the 3 end of the detecting primer. The dPCR
technology allows the standard PCR reaction to be partitioned into 20,000
independent wells; we can then assay each individual droplet to assess
whether the individual DNA molecule partitioned into the droplet is
wild-type or the target mutant. The resulting data provides an absolute
count of mutant and wild-type templates in a given patient sample.We have
optimized this new molecular assay technology for quantitatively
measuring clinically actionable mutations including BRAF V600E, KRAS G12D
among others. We have successfully validated the sensitivity, specificity
and reproducibility of our assays through controlled cell line DNA mixed
dilution samples ranging from 66% mutant to 0.1% mutant in each of our
optimized primer sets. Our assay improves the limit of detection to seven
DNA molecules containing a mutation among a total number of 7,000 genome
equivalents. Because our assay is sensitive down to the single DNA
molecule resolution, we have also been able to reduce the amount of
clinical sample DNA required to determine the presence of clinically
actionable mutations such as those occurring in KRAS or BRAF. We are
testing this extremely low cost, highly sensitive diagnostic technology
for detecting nearly any cancer mutation from longitudinal samples of
ctDNA.

