Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effective immunotherapy with cytokine-induced killer cells against
autologous melanoma cancer stem cells


Purpose of the study was to explore the activity of cytokine-induced
killer (CIK) cells against autologous chemo-surviving melanoma cancer
stem cells (mCSCs) in vivo.Elimination of mCSCs is an ambitious goal as
considered responsible for chemo-resistance and relapses.CIK cells are ex
vivo expanded T-NK lymphocytes with MHC-independent antitumor activity.
We provided proof of concept that CIK cells can kill mCSCs in vitro
(Gammaitoni et al. Clin Cancer Res 2013) and demonstration of their
activity in vivo, within an autologous model, would be relevant in
clinical perspective.Experimental procedures and results.In vivo activity
of CIK cells against autologous mCSCs was explored in NOD/SCID mice
bearing tumors generated by subcutaneous implantation of primary melanoma
cells or alternatively surgically resected tumor samples (patient-derived
xenografts, PDX).mCSCs were visualized by a lentiviral CSC-detector
encoding eGFP under control of stem-gene promoter OCT4 (Gammaitoni et al.
Clin Cancer Res 2013). Melanoma cells were engineered with the
CSC-detector before implantation or alternatively, in PDX, after removal
of residual tumors at the end of experimental treatments.In vivo
chemotherapy (CHT) consisted of intravenous (i.v.) Fotemustine (600g days
1;15). Immunotherapy consisted of i.v. CIK cells (1107) every 5 days.
Antitumor activity was evaluated assessing tumor proliferative index by
Ki67 expression in residual tumors. Activity against mCSCs was evaluated
assessing the rate of residual GFP+-mCSCs in residual tumors after
treatments.In vivo infusion of CIK cells for 2 weeks determined
significant tumor response (n = 6, p Purpose of the study was to explore
the activity of cytokine-induced killer (CIK) cells against autologous
chemo-surviving melanoma cancer stem cells (mCSCs) in vivo.Elimination of
mCSCs is an ambitious goal as considered responsible for chemo-resistance
and relapses.CIK cells are ex vivo expanded T-NK lymphocytes with
MHC-independent antitumor activity. We provided proof of concept that CIK
cells can kill mCSCs in vitro (Gammaitoni et al. Clin Cancer Res 2013)
and demonstration of their activity in vivo, within an autologous model,
would be relevant in clinical perspective.Experimental procedures and
results.In vivo activity of CIK cells against autologous mCSCs was
explored in NOD/SCID mice bearing tumors generated by subcutaneous
implantation of primary melanoma cells or alternatively surgically
resected tumor samples (patient-derived xenografts, PDX).mCSCs were
visualized by a lentiviral CSC-detector encoding eGFP under control of
stem-gene promoter OCT4 (Gammaitoni et al. Clin Cancer Res 2013).
Melanoma cells were engineered with the CSC-detector before implantation
or alternatively, in PDX, after removal of residual tumors at the end of
experimental treatments.In vivo chemotherapy (CHT) consisted of
intravenous (i.v.) Fotemustine (600g days 1;15). Immunotherapy consisted
of i.v. CIK cells (1107) every 5 days. Antitumor activity was evaluated
assessing tumor proliferative index by Ki67 expression in residual
tumors. Activity against mCSCs was evaluated assessing the rate of
residual GFP+-mCSCs in residual tumors after treatments.In vivo infusion
of CIK cells for 2 weeks determined significant tumor response (n = 6, p
< 0.0001) that fully involved autologous eGFP+-mCSCs. On the contrary,
CHT spared mCSCs that resulted significantly increased in residual tumors
compared with mice treated with CIK cells (p = 0.001) or untreated
controls (p = 0.001). CIK cells infused after a previous CHT treatment (n
= 6) retained significant antitumor activity (p = 0.001) and were capable
to revert the CHT-induced enrichment of eGFP+-mCSCs, compared to mice
treated with CHT alone (p = 0.01).Similarly, in the PDX model, the
infusion (n = 4) of autologous CIK cells exerted significant antitumor
activity that involved eGFP+mCSCs (p = 0.009), confirmed by the absence
of their increment in residual tumors (p = 0.3).In vitro CHT treatment of
melanoma from 8 different patients significantly enriched eGFP+ mCSCs
(2.2 0.2 fold, p = 0.0018) compared to untreated controls. Melanoma
treated with CHT, enriched in eGFP+mCSCs, were efficiently killed by
autologous CIK cells with mean killing values ranging from 942% (40:1
E/T) to 21%4 (1:3 E/T).Conclusions.Our findings provide first
demonstration that immunotherapy with CIK cells is active against
autologous mCSCs, surviving chemotherapy, in vitro and in vivo. We
provide an experimental platform to study mCSCs and rationale to design
clinical studies with CIK cells against melanoma.

