Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Positive correlation between the gamma-H2AX and PD-L1 expressions
in lung squamous cell carcinoma


Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Recently,
molecular targeting therapy has been developed and it has shown promising
results against advanced lung cancer. Among them, lung squamous cell
carcinoma has fewer treatment options because it is not driven by
oncogenic mutations, but by alterations in tumor suppressor genes and
subsequent chromosomal instability. Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is
one of the immune checkpoint molecules that is expressed on the surface
of tumor cells, where it inhibits activities of cytotoxic T cells. Recent
studies revealed that the PD-1/PD-L1 blockade could improve the overall
survival in lung squamous cell carcinoma, potentially because it carries
high mutation burdens and neoantigens which could be targeted by
cytotoxic T cells. We hypothesized that DNA damage could accumulate in
tumors with high mutation burdens, thereby inducing the PD-L1 expression
on tumor cells, sensitizing them to anti-PD-1 therapy. An
immunohistochemical analysis of 41 consecutive lung squamous cell
carcinoma cases, which received surgery at our institution between April
2013 and March 2014, revealed that a high PD-L1 expression was observed
in 15 patients (37%) that was associated related with a poor
recurrence-free survival (p = 0.028). The PD-L1 expression level was also
positively associated with the H2AX expression (a direct marker for DNA
damage) (p = 0.02). The H2AX expression in tumor cell nuclei was
confirmed by immunofluorescent staining. It forms foci in tumor cell
nuclei, indicating the incidence of DNA double strand breaks. Our
findings demonstrate for the first time that the nuclear H2AX expression
in lung squamous cell carcinoma is positively associated with the PD-L1
expression. Further studies are warranted to investigate whether H2AX
could be a biomarker for PD-1 targeting therapy and whether combination
therapy with PD-1 targeting therapy and a DNA-damaging agent has
synergistic effects.

