Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subtype-specific cancer driver gene detection improves sensitivity
to detect drivers


Identifying cancer driver mutations is a crucial step toward
understanding the underlying mechanisms of oncogenesis. However, driver
gene detection is complicated, considering the inherent complexity and
heterogeneity of cancer.The past decade has seen the large-scale
application of next-generation sequencing technologies (NGS) in cancer
genomics, and many methods have been published utilizing NGS to detect
novel oncogenic drivers. However, the low concordance across methods
raises the concern about false positives and negatives in those findings.
In particular, proper modeling of the background mutation profile (known
to be affected by multiple factors) is critical to improving precision
and recall in driver detection. Though intra-sample heterogeneity in the
background mutation profile is considered to some extent in multiple
methods, most computational driver detection methods assume a homogeneous
mutational landscape across cancer samples. With more and more subtypes
being discovered in various cancers, the assumption is largely
untenable.In this study, we present a driver gene detection framework
taking into account the heterogeneous mutational context in a cancer
cohort. Our approach improves sensitivity to detect drivers by first
pre-selecting a more uniform sample subset to apply driver detection
algorithms. We combine this method with enhancements to an existing
ensemble approach that combines methods with different assumptions about
the characteristics of driver mutations (recurrence across samples,
functional impact bias and positional clustering). We apply this combined
approach to 750 breast invasive carcinoma samples from The Cancer Genome
Atlas. In this dataset, genes identified by our approach show higher
enrichment in known cancer driver genes compared to other methods, and
the subtype-driven method identifies additional potential drivers that
are missing in overall analysis.

