Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of high-dose irradiation and local interleukin-12
treatment enhance tumor killing and have less toxicities than either
treatment alone


Immunotherapy such as anti-PD-1/PD-L1 is effective in several types of
tumors, but in general the response rate is less than 30%. Systemic
administration of cytokine such as IL-12 could create anti-tumor immunity
but has unacceptable side effects. This study is to test our hypothesis
that combination of high-dose local radiotherapy (RT) and local
production of IL-12 inside tumors within short period could have potent
anti-tumor effects but low systemic toxicity. TRAMP-C1 tumors derived
from a murine prostate cancer were either no treatment, or irradiated
with 25 Gy, or intra-tumorally injected with Ad-sc-IL12 virus (110sup8
pfu), or treated with both modalities at the tumor size of 4mm. RT alone
and Ad-sc-IL12 alone could not shrink tumors and only caused tumor growth
delay around 7 and 12 days, respectively. The combination of RT with
Ad-sc-IL12 virus could shrink the tumors to the sizes of Immunotherapy
such as anti-PD-1/PD-L1 is effective in several types of tumors, but in
general the response rate is less than 30%. Systemic administration of
cytokine such as IL-12 could create anti-tumor immunity but has
unacceptable side effects. This study is to test our hypothesis that
combination of high-dose local radiotherapy (RT) and local production of
IL-12 inside tumors within short period could have potent anti-tumor
effects but low systemic toxicity. TRAMP-C1 tumors derived from a murine
prostate cancer were either no treatment, or irradiated with 25 Gy, or
intra-tumorally injected with Ad-sc-IL12 virus (110sup8 pfu), or treated
with both modalities at the tumor size of 4mm. RT alone and Ad-sc-IL12
alone could not shrink tumors and only caused tumor growth delay around 7
and 12 days, respectively. The combination of RT with Ad-sc-IL12 virus
could shrink the tumors to the sizes of < 2mm and further extended the
tumor growth delay more than 20 days. The percentage of lymphocytes and
IFN-production were evaluated by flow cytometry and ELISA. The
percentages of CD4 cells in tumors were too low to be reliably measured
in all groups, but the percentages of CD8 cells were increased in
Ad-sc-IL12 virus-treated groups and even much higher in those combined
with RT. For mice treated with Ad-sc-IL12 virus injection, the serum
IL-12 levels were around 4.5 times increase at day7, but those combined
with with RT had significantly lower levels than those treated with virus
alone. The serum IFN-(Th1 response) levels were around 12 times higher in
Ad-sc-IL12 groups at day7 as compared to control or RT only group, but
had no significant differences between those treated with combined
modality and with Ad-sc-IL12 virus alone. Liver damage is an index for
IL-12 toxicity and the levels of GOT and GTP were also lower in those
treated IL-12 combined with RT than those treated with IL-12 alone. This
study supported our hypothesis and showed that combination of local IL-12
production and local RT are effective in increasing CD8 cells, exerting
Th1 response, and enhancing tumor growth delay. The most important is
that this combination has less systemic toxicity than local IL-12
production alone. This study provides evidence to develop new strategy
for producing a strong anti-tumor and low toxicity for radioresistant
tumors by combining RT and IL-12 immunotherapy.

