Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial inhibitors and statins: a lethal combination for
metabolically stressed cancer cells


Inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) has
recently emerged as a promising strategy for treatment of
therapy-resistant cancer cells. These cells often reside within hypoxic
tumor regions, where nutrient concentrations are low. Recently, OXPHOS
inhibitors have been demonstrated to be toxic to quiescent,
nutrient-deprived cells in multicellular tumor spheroids. Such spheroids,
formed without medium exchange over the culture period, can serve as an
appropriate model to mimic quiescent in vivo tumor regions. These
spheroids exhibit low cell proliferation and comprise necrotic cores,
contrary to commonly used spheroids cultured with frequent medium
change.We here aimed to characterize how quiescent cells respond to
OXPHOS inhibition and thereby identify processes that could be
co-targeted for enhanced toxicity. We treated HCT116 colon cancer cell
line, grown as monolayer cultures and spheroids, with a range of OXPHOS
inhibitors (n = 10, including FDA-approved drugs, e.g. nitazoxanide) and
other compounds (n = 14) at escalating doses and in 4 biological
replicates. Then, we obtained global gene expression profiles (n = 1149,
including 144 vehicle controls) of all treatment conditions using L1000
Gene Expression Profiling method.We found that upon exposure to OXPHOS
inhibitors cells grown as nutrient-deprived spheroids significantly and
in dose-dependent manner upregulate expression of genes involved in
biosynthesis of cholesterol. This response was not observed for spheroids
cultured with medium change or monolayer cell cultures. Thus, we were
interested if simultaneous exposure to OXPHOS inhibitors and statins,
inhibitors of mevalonate (cholesterol precursor) synthesis, would result
in enhanced cytotoxic effects in quiescent, metabolically stressed
cells.We here demonstrate that combination of OXPHOS inhibitors and
statins results in pronounced synergistic cytotoxicity in metabolically
stressed spheroids. This effect was observed for various classes of
OXPHOS inhibitors and different types of statins, indicating that the
observed synergy was not a result of off-target effects. This notion was
further strengthened by the finding that mevalonate largely abrogated the
synergistic effects.In conclusion, we here report that statins enhance
the toxic effects of OXPHOS inhibitors in quiescent, metabolically
stressed cells. Our results can serve as a foundation for further studies
on targeting therapy-resistant and nutrient-deprived cancer cells by
inhibition of OXPHOS. We also demonstrate, for the first time, that the
L1000 Gene Expression Profiling can be used to study 3D cell cultures.
Importantly, our findings underscore the importance of using a relevant
cellular model for target discovery endeavors.

