Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mitochondrial protein MTP18 enhances chemosensitivity by
promoting mitochondrial fission


Background: Chemotherapy plays a major role in cancer therapy. Yet, one
of its greatest obstacles is the development of chemotherapy resistance.
Hence, understanding the molecular basis of chemoresistance is crucial to
improve its therapeutic outcome. A close relationship between
mitochondrial dynamic and cellular apoptosis has recently been
identified. Mitochondrial fission is necessary for initiation of cellular
apoptosis, whereas mitochondrial fusion is able to inhibit apoptosis.
However, the association of mitochondrial fission and chemo-sensitivity
has not been widely explored. Recently, mitochondrial protein MTP18 has
been shown to promote mitochondrial fragmentation in various cancer cell
lines. However, its role in apoptosis and chemotherapeutic resistance
remains elusive. Here, we aimed to detect 1) whether MTP18 is able to
regulate mitochondrial fission and apoptosis in gastric cancer cells, and
2) by which mechanism it regulates these events.Methods and Results:
Doxorubicin is one of the most widely used chemotherapeutic agents in
variety of cancers. Mitochondrial staining with MitoTracker Red CMXRos
revealed doxorubicin was able to induce mitochondrial fission both in
vitro and in vivo gastric cancer models. We observed doxorubicin led to a
decreasing level of MTP18 expression in gastric cancer cell lines, and
this effect was concentration- and time-dependent. To understand the role
of MTP18 in doxorubicin-induced mitochondrial fission and apoptosis,
endogenous MTP18 expression was knockdown using MTP18-shRNA. Strikingly,
doxorubicin could not induce mitochondrial fission in gastric cancer
cells transfected with MTP18-shRNA. On the other hand, upon enforced
expression of MTP18, the same concentration of doxorubicin sensitized a
significantly higher number of gastric cancer cells to undergo
mitochondrial fission and apoptosis. These findings suggest that MTP18 is
required for doxorubicin-induced mitochondrial fission and apoptosis. In
exploring the molecular mechanism of MTP18, we found that MTP18 enriched
dynamin-related protein Drp1 accumulation in mitochondria and mediated
the signal of doxorubicin to induce mitochondrial fission. Drp1
accumulation in mitochondria caused the release of cytochrome-c to
cytosol and subsequently promoted apoptosis.Conclusion: Taken together,
our findings suggest that MTP18 induces mitochondrial fission and
enhances apoptosis in gastric cancer cells, by promoting Drp1
accumulation in mitochondria. Thus, it is compelling us to conclude that
MTP18 enhances doxorubicin sensitivity of gastric cancer cells by
targeting mitochondrial fission machinery.

