Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-based tools for in vitro and live cell analysis of
endogenous PARP1, an essential human DNA repair enzyme


DNA damage caused by normal cell activity or exogenous genotoxic agents
is a constant threat to the genome. The nuclear enzyme Poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase 1 (PARP1) is rapidly activated by DNA lesions such as
single-strand breaks and signals their presence by attaching ADP-ribose
units to chromatin-associated proteins. To improve our understanding of
PARP1 within a disease context, there is an ongoing need to develop novel
PARP1 detection systems.Here we describe the development of a VHH
directed against human PARP1. The variable domain of single chain
antibodies (VHH or nanobody) is a versatile research tool for a variety
of applications. The high binding affinity of VHHs, their small size (15
kDa) and their robust expression in various cellular systems make them
preferable to conventional antibodies. Moreover, VHH domains can be
selected to recognize and bind their target structures within living
cells.This highly specific PARP1 VHH was selected by phage display using
a VHH library from an immunized alpaca. We characterized its affinity,
selectivity and activity both in vitro and in live cells.To validate the
in vitro interactions of this PARP1-specific VHH, we developed a PARP1
immunoprecipitation reagent by conjugating the PARP1-specific VHH to an
immobilizing matrix (termed PARP1-Trap). This PARP1-Trap was shown to
bind with high specificity to human PARP1 and not to other members of the
PARP family. Importantly, the binding of the PARP1-Trap to PARP1 leaves
the enzymatic activity of PARP1 unaffected. The epitope of the PARP1-Trap
was localized to the N-terminal domain of PARP1 and consists of the
three-dimensional motif of zinc fingers 2 and 3 together.To determine
whether the PARP1 VHH recognizes its target structure also in a cellular
environment, the VHH was genetically fused to a fluorescent protein and
expressed in living cells (termed Chromobody). The interaction of the
PARP1 Chromobody with PARP1 was visualized using a protein-protein
interaction assay called fluorescent two-hybrid (F2H). The F2H principle
is based on a tethering strategy: a GFP-tagged protein (here GFP-PARP1)
is enriched at a protein interaction platform engineered into F2H-BHK
cells and serves as bait, whereas the RFP-tagged PARP1 VHH serves as a
prey. Using the F2H assay, we could show that the PARP1 Chromobody is
functional within living cells and specifically recognizes its antigen in
a cellular environment. Moreover, by monitoring the PARP1 Chromobody
signal after microirradiation, we were for the first time able to follow
the recruitment of endogenous PARP1 to sites of DNA damage in living
cells.In summary, we developed a novel PARP1 VHH for both biochemical and
live cell analysis of human PARP1. We anticipate that PARP1-VHH based
reagents will provide new insights into the PARP1 enzyme. For example,
the use of the PARP1-Trap coupled with mass spectrometry analysis may
lead to the identification of hitherto unknown PARP1 interaction partners.

