Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel Ring1B-Bmi1 small molecule inhibitors target leukemia stem
cells


Leukemia is a clonal neoplastic disorder which possesses a rare
population of cells, termed leukemia stem cells (LSCs), capable of
limitless self-renewal and are necessary to initiate, sustain or
regenerate the disease. Targeting LSCs self-renewal not only would offer
substantial therapeutic benefit but also likely to be essential and
sufficient for selective eradication of LSCs. BMI1, polycomb group
protein, has been identified and shown to be required for self-renewal of
LSCs. Bmi1 alongwith Ring1B constitute enzymatic active unit of Poly-comb
Repressive Complex 1(PRC1) and execute gene silencing through histone H2A
lysine119 ubiquitination (H2AK119ub). Considering Bmi1 as a key regulator
of self-renewal, targeting Bmi1 activity could impair LSCs self-renewal
ability and may represent a new therapeutic approach for leukemia. Thus,
in this study we aimed to develop and characterize novel small molecule
inhibitors for Ring1B - Bmi1. Using NMR fragment-based screening and
extensive medicinal chemistry optimization we developed WY332 that binds
to Ring1B-Bmi1 with low micromolar affinity. Further characterization of
the WY332 demonstrated selective reduction in Ring1B-Bmi1 mediated
H2AK119ub levels in in vitro and in leukemic cells. Contrary,
structurally similar and less potent compound displayed similar effect at
much higher concentrations establishes that higher binding affinity of
potent inhibitor is associated with blocking Ring1B-Bmi1 E3 ligase
activity. Further evaluation of lead inhibitor, WY332, in colony
formation assay using leukemic cells demonstrated significant decrease in
the number and size of the colonies indicated that interference with
Ring1B- Bmi1 activity alter the frequency of LSCs colony forming
potential. Moreover, expression analysis of CD11b and CD34, cell surface
markers associated with myeloid differentiation and AML LSCs phenotype,
in WY332 treated TEX cells revealed marked increase in CD11b expression
and significantly decreased CD34 expression establishes the specific
effect of our Ring1B-Bmi1 small molecule inhibitors on induction of
differentiation in leukemic cells. Interestingly, gene expression
analysis of TEX cells treated with WY332 revealed significant increase in
expression of genes suppressed in LSCs. Overall, these compounds
represent the novel small molecule inhibitors of Ring1B-Bmi1 which
inhibit E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and impair leukemic stem cell
self-renewal capacity.

