Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of UCP2 upregulation on cellular redox status and
mitochondrial respiration


Uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) is a mitochondrial protein present in the
inner mitochondrial membrane. They belong to the family of anion
mitochondrial carriers. UCP2 are thought to have natural antioxidant
effect by attenuating the generation of superoxides.Since cancer cells
exhibit elevated oxidative stress, they can effectively adapt to this
situation by upregulating UCP2. As a matter of fact, UCP2 is
overexpressed in many forms of cancer including prostate, breast, lung
and head & neck. Not surprising, our early studies demonstrate that
knockout of UCP2 suppresses skin tumor formation in a multistage skin
carcinogenesis model.The purpose of this study was to detect the impact
of UCP2's upregulation on mitochondrial redox status and mitochondrial
respiration, using the well characterized tumor promotion model, JB6p+
cells. Our results have demonstrated that UCP2 overexpression enhanced
protein expression and activity levels of manganese superoxide dismutase
(MnSOD), a mitochondrial-resident enzyme that governs the egression of
superoxides. To assess the impact of MnSOD upregulation on mitochondrial
redox status, levels of superoxides and hydrogen peroxides were detected.
Our results indicated that MnSOD upregulation maintained steady flow of
hydrogen peroxides originating from mitochondria. We further examined the
effect of UCP2 upregulation-induced MnSOD expression on mitochondrial
respiration and glycolytic rate. In agreement with our data, cells
overexpressing UCP2 had significantly higher oxygen consumption rate
(OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR). In conclusion, our
data suggests that UCP2 promotes carcinogenesis via decreasing superoxide
generation whereas promoting hydrogen peroxide production via elevating
MnSOD. Collectively, our results support the hypothesis that enhanced
UCP2 expression sustains metabolic switch in cancer cells.

