Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CORO1B amplification and expression status identifies an
aggressive subset of chromosome 11q13 amplified HNSCC


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is highly invasive cancer
type that occurs with greater incidence in West Virginia and the rest of
Appalachia. The chromosome 11q13 region is amplified in approximately 30%
of late stage HNSCC cases and is associated with a poor patient
prognosis. The core 11q13 region encodes the well-studied tumor genes
CCND1 (cyclin D1) and CTTN (cortactin). The CORO1B (coronin 1B) gene
flanks the 11q13 core and is amplified in 9-14% of all HNSCC, but how
CORO1B amplification contributes to HNSCC is unknown. Coronin 1B governs
cell motility by negatively regulating F-actin stability through
displacement of cortactin at actin related protein 2/3 (Arp 2/3) branch
points, generating dynamic turnover of Arp2/3-F-actin networks required
for productive cell movement. Kaplan-Meier analysis of two independent
patient cohorts indicates that HNSCC cases with CORO1B amplification have
significantly reduced overall survival. Cox hazard ratios also indicate
the CORO1B amplification is strongly associated with increased mortality
in both cohorts. Automated quantitative analysis (AQUA) of coronin 1B
expression in HNSCC tissue microarrays indicates that coronin 1B
overexpression decreases median survival of HNSCC patients from 81 to 29
months. Reduced expression of coronin 1B by RNAi-mediated knockdown in
established HNSCC cell lines decreases several actin-mediated invasive
processes, including invadopodia formation and extracelluar matrix
degradation. Collectively these results suggest that elevated coronin 1B
expression levels in HNSCC function to enhance tumor invasion,
potentially through accelerated downregulation of cortactin stabilizing
activity at Arp2/3-F-actin junctions. Importantly, CORO1B amplification
and coronin 1B expression status may serve a role as a precision
biomarker for identification of a subset of late-stage HNSCC patients
that would benefit from more aggressive forms of initial clinical
treatment.

