Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of germline pathogenic alleles in 143 cancer
predisposing genes in Mexican patients with hereditary breast cancer by
massive parallel sequencing


Breast cancer is the neoplastic disease with the highest incidence and
mortality worldwide and nearly 10% of the cases are due to inherited
pathogenic alleles in cancer predisposing genes such as BRCA1 and BRCA2.
However, the spectrum of inherited breast cancer susceptibility not
caused by BRCA1/2 pathogenic alleles has not been explored in the Mexican
population. In this work we evaluated the presence of germline pathogenic
alleles in the coding sequence and splice sites of 143 cancer
susceptibility genes in 69 Mexican female patients with cancer that were
selected for family cancer history. Inclusion criteria followed the
guidelines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network for
Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment of Breast and Ovarian Cancer. Data
from international databases of normal populations and cancer patients,
as well as annotation information and technical parameters were used to
define pathogenic variants. The genes with the highest frequency of
pathogenic alleles (stopgain/loss, frameshift indels) were BRCA1 (8.7%,
6/69), BRCA2 (2.9%, 2/69), FANCC (2.9%), MSR1 (2.9%), FANCL (1.4%, 1/69),
SDHB (1.4%) and TSC2 (1.4%). New or rare missense variants with unknown
clinical significance (VUS), but defined as pathogenic in ClinVar or by
algorithms assessing evolutionary conservation and deleterious structural
changes at protein level, were found in single patients in the genes AIP,
ANTXR1, APC, ATR, CD96, CYP21A2, ERCC3, ERCC6, FANCA, FANCB, FANCE, LIG4,
LYST, MSH6, MSR1, MTAP, PDE11A, PDGFRA, PMS2, POLE, PTCH1, RAD50, RHBDF2,
RUNX1 and WRN. These patients did not have pathogenic alleles, suggesting
a potential contribution of these VUS to disease susceptibility. This
work contributes to identify new susceptibility alleles that can
predispose to hereditary breast cancer in the Mexican population. Further
studies need to be conducted to define the clinical impact of the VUS
identified here, which together with international efforts will better
define genetic susceptibility to breast cancer. This work was supported
by the National Autonomous University of Mexico, PAPIIT (IA204215).

