Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin contributes to radiation resistance in head and neck
cancer through regulation of DNA damage repair


Background: A major challenge affecting outcomes of patients with
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (SCCHN) is radiation
resistance. Overexpression of survivin is associated with radiation
resistance and poor survival. Our study objectives were to: 1) evaluate
the effects of survivin expression level on radiosensitivity in SCCHN
cell lines; 2) identify the effect of survivin on DNA damage repair
following radiation exposure in SCCHN cells; 3) evaluate the feasibility
and efficacy of the combination therapy of survivin inhibitor YM155 and
radiation in SCCHN. Methods: SCCHN cell lines, including JHU-022, PCI-15A
and Tu686 were used to evaluate the role of survivin in DNA double strand
break (DSB) repair following radiation exposure. To determine whether
survivin specifically targets the sites of DNA damage, we performed ChIP
assays using PCI-15A cells carrying the DR-GFP homologous recombination
reporter. The in vitro effects of YM155 on sensitizing resistant cells to
radiation were also evaluated using these cell lines. Results: The
fraction surviving radiation was about 2.5-fold greater in PCI-15A and
Tu686 cells compared with that in JHU-022 cells. As expected, survivin
protein levels were elevated in PCI-15A and Tu686 cells compared with
JHU-022 cells, suggesting an inverse correlation between survivin
expression and radiosensitivity. Clonogenic survival following radiation
exposure was inhibited by depletion of survivin in PCI-15A cells by
siRNA, and increased by overexpression of survivin in JHU-022 cells.
Inhibition of survivin by YM155 enhances the efficacy of radiation in
PCI-15A cells. Immunoblotting revealed that radiation induced nuclear
accumulation of survivin and its complex with -H2X, and DNA-PKCs in
PCI-15A cells, suggesting survivin was involved in DNA damage response
and repair induced by radiation. ChIP assay further confirmed that
survivin specifically targeted and bound to the DNA DSB site, which is
consistent with results obtained from immunofluorescence analysis.
Conclusions: Survivin is involved in DNA damage response and repair
induced by radiation exposure in SCCHN cells. Inhibition of survivin by
YM155 enhances the efficacy of radiation, and may provide a novel
therapeutic approach to improve the efficacy of radiotherapy in SCCHN.
(This research was supported by the National Cancer Institute award P50
CA128613, and GCC Distinguished Cancer Scholar to Dong M. Shin, Zhuo
(Georgia) Chen, and Jonathan J Beitler)

