Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy forms part of a metabolic switch during
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and metastasis in a murine
claudin-low breast cancer model


Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), the process through which
epithelial cells gain mesenchymal characteristics including reduced
adhesion and enhanced invasion, is a critical step in progression of
cancer cells toward metastasis. However, the molecular mechanisms
governing this process remain poorly understood. Furthermore, though
metastasis is the cause of 90% of cancer deaths, no targeted therapy is
currently available for metastatic disease. Metabolic reprogramming is a
key feature of most cancer cells, with oxidative phosphorylation often
being switched off in favor of glycolytic and synthetic pathways.
Autophagy is a catabolic process in which protein complexes, damaged
organelles and other macromolecules are lysosomally degraded. Autophagy
can promote cancer cell survival, providing protein, lipid, nucleic acid
and membrane precursors as well as auxiliary energy during periods of
energy stress. The role of metabolism in EMT and metastasis has not been
well studied. We hypothesized that the transition to metastasis involves
metabolic alterations, including activation of autophagy.Previously, we
derived (from a spontaneous mammary tumor in an MMTV-Wnt transgenic
mouse) epithelial-like (E-Wnt) and mesenchymal-like (M-Wnt) cell lines,
which recapitulate basal-like and claudin-low and breast tumors,
respectively. Here, a metastatic derivative of M-Wnt cells was generated
from lung metastases following serial passages in a severe combined
immunodeficient (SCID) mouse. metM-Wnt cells were more proliferative,
invasive and formed more colonies in soft agar than their parental M-Wnt
cell line. Tail vein injection or mammary fat pad orthotopic implantation
of metM-Wnt cells resulted in metastatic tumor formation in either the
lungs or liver as detected by IVIS imaging and histological analysis.
metM-Wnt cells displayed higher rates of glycolysis and oxidative
phosphorylation, indicating that these cells are highly energetic.
Furthermore, M-Wnt and metM-Wnt cells and tumors were found to have
increased autophagic flux, as measured by LC3B expression and cleavage
compared to E-Wnt cells and tumors. metM-Wnt cells were more sensitive to
autophagy inhibition (either via chloroquine treatment or knockout of
Atg5, a key component of the autophagic machinery) than M-Wnt or E-Wnt
cells. Conversely, metM-Wnt cells were resistant to treatment with
rapamycin, concomitant with sustained activation of mTOR, which controls
many metabolic pathways including autophagy and protein synthesis. These
results indicate that metabolic alteration is a feature of EMT in
claudin-low breast cancer, including increased glycolysis, oxidative
phosphorylation and autophagy. Furthermore, metastatic breast cancer
cells may be more reliant on autophagy than non-metastatic cells, and
autophagy may therefore be a therapeutic target in which to treat
metastatic breast cancers.

