Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Popdc proteins: novel targets in inhibiting breast cancer cell
migration and proliferation


Tumour growth and metastasis are major challenges in cancer treatment and
metastasis is the primary cause of death in more than 90% of cancer
patients with solid tumours (Gupta & Massagu 2006). This necessitates
identification and validation of clinically relevant anticancer
therapeutic targets that result in maximum clinical efficacy with minimal
side-effects when manipulated by drugs. Our research project has
identified Popeye domain containing (Popdc) proteins as promising
potential therapeutic targets in the treatment of breast cancer.Popdc
proteins are a class of membrane-tethered proteins encoded by the three
members of the Popdc gene family Popdc1, Popdc2 and Popdc3. Their
suppression has been correlated with disease progression and poor
clinical outcomes in various cancers including breast cancer, gastric
cancer, lung cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma and colorectal cancer (Kim
et al., 2010, Luo et al., 2012, Williams et al., 2011, Wang et al.,
2011). Loss of Popdc protein expression has been correlated with
increased cancer cell migration, invasion, metastasis, drug-resistance
and poor patient survival (Luo et al., 2012, Williams et al., 2011, Han
et al., 2014). In breast cancer, Popdc1 suppression has been reported in
breast carcinoma cells while upregulation of Popdc2 has been linked to
the mechanism by which arsenic trioxide mediates breast cancer cell death
(Williams et al., 2011, Wang et al., 2011).Our use of various assays
including single-cell migration assays, cell population migration assays,
cell proliferation assays and fluorescent imaging strongly implicate
Popdc proteins as drivers of cancer cell migration and proliferation.
Expression patterns of Popdc proteins revealed high expression levels in
non-malignant (HMepC) breast cells and low expression in breast cancer
(MCF7) cells. This suggests that loss of Popdc protein expression
correlates with an increasingly malignant phenotype. Furthermore,
knocking down Popdc1, Popdc2 and Popdc3 in MCF7 breast cancer cells
significantly promoted cell migration both at single cell and at cell
population level while Popdc2 knockdown significantly promoted
unstimulated MCF7 cell division. Taken together, this strong data set
suggests that Popdc proteins play significant roles in the migration and
proliferation of different cancer cell lines and that they indeed
represent promising potential therapeutic targets in reducing breast
cancer cell division and migration.

