Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential, dose-dependent, effects of curcumin/analogs, on long
(L) versus short (S) isoforms of a cancer stem cell marker, DCLK1, in
colon and pancreatic cancer cells: biological impact


Curcumin, a dietary agent, has potent anti-inflammatory/anti-cancer
activities, but is much less bioavailable, unlike some of its more potent
synthetic analogs, such as EF24. In recent years, inhibitory effects of
curcumin/analogs on DNMT1 have been described, resulting in
de-methylation and re-expression of several genes, including tumor
suppressor genes. Double-Cortin Like Kinase 1 (DCLK1) marks colon cancer
stem cells, and is required for colon-carcinogenesis in mice. We recently
reported a critical role of DCLK1 for maintaining tumorogenic/metastatic
potential of human colon cancer (CRC) cells (Kantara et al, Can Res
2014). More recently we reported that the 5 promoter of hDCLK1-gene is
epigenetically silenced in CRCs due to hypermethylation, while a novel
short (DCLK1-S) isoform is transcriptionally up-regulated in response to
oncogenic pathways, including NFB, from an alternate promoter, located in
intron V (OConnell and Sarkar et al, Sci. Rep 2015). Since curcumin
potently inhibits NFB pathway, and can potentially de-methylate
epigenetically silenced promoters, we examined possible
re-expression/loss of expression of L/S isoforms, respectively, in
colon/pancreatic cancer cells, in vitro and in vivo, in response to
curcumin/EF24, using several molecular approaches and bioassays.
Surprisingly, both agents had dose-dependent effects on demethylation.
Low concentrations of curcumin (10M) and EF24 (0.5M) inhibited DNMT1,
resulting in re-expression of DCLK1-L in both colon/pancreatic cancer
cells in vitro. However, higher concentrations of curcumin (>20M) and
EF24 (>1.0M) caused autophagic death of the cells, and re-expression of
DCLK1-L was not measured. NFB activation and DCLK1-S expression, on the
other hand, were increasingly decreased in all cell lines in a
dose-dependent manner, in response to curcumin/EF24. Low doses were
equally effective against DNMT1/NFB in vivo, resulting in re-expression
of DCLK1-L and loss of DCLk1-S, in xenografts of colon/pancreatic cancer
cells. However, the high doses used in this study continued to be
effective against the two enzymes, suggesting that the high dose used was
not enough for causing autophagic death in vivo, and may need to be
increased to replicate cell-death effects observed in vitro. Even though
DCLK1-L was re-expressed in the xenografts at both does, in vivo, the
size and weight of the tumors was reduced in a dose-dependent manner,
mimicking the loss of expression of DCLKL1-S. Our results thus show, for
the first time, a dose-dependent epigenetic effect of curcumin/EF24 on
cancer cells, which could significantly impact treatment decisions. Low
to moderate doses of curcumin/EF24 may allow re-expression of
normal/silenced genes, such as DCLK1-L, while reducing growth promoting
pathways (such as NFB/DCLK1-S).

