Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of MYPT1/2, ASPP2 and MYH9 in invasive lobular carcinoma


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) accounts for 10-15% of breast cancer
cases in women. One of the characteristics of this type of cancer is the
loss of intercellular adhesion which is facilitated by inactivating
mutations in E-cadherin. However the loss of E-cadherin alone is not
enough to induce ILC. An in vivo Sleeping Beauty insertional mutagenesis
screen was performed to identify genes that together with E-cadherin loss
contribute to ILC development in mice. In around 85% of the tumors that
were analyzed during this screen one of four hits were observed, namely
MYPT1, MYPT2, ASPP2 and MYH9. Interestingly these four hits appear to be
mutually exclusive indicating a shared mechanism of action.To investigate
how these genes might affect tumorigenesis we first looked at the
location of the transposon insertions. This revealed that for MYPT1,
MYPT2 and ASPP2 the transposons appeared to localize to a specific region
in the gene indicating that these insertions could result in a truncation
variant. In the case of MYH9 no clear localization of insertions was
found which in combination with the recently published data indicates a
loss of function. Northern blot analysis revealed the presence of
truncation variants for MYPT1/2 and ASPP2 which for MYPT1 were confirmed
to also result in truncated protein variants.In order to identify the
tumorigenic potential of truncated MYPT1 and ASPP2 we overexpressed them
in spontaneously immortalized mammary epithelial cell lines HC11 and
NMuMG. We are using these cell lines to analyse differences in cell
proliferation, anchorage independent growth, sensitivity to apoptosis in
vitro and tumor formation in vivo. To further analyse the hits in an
E-cadherin negative setting we made use of primary mammary epithelial
cells (MECs) isolated from genetically engineered mice with mammary gland
specific E-cadherin loss. These MECs normally do not grow past several
passages in vitro. However, these MECs when we overexpress truncated
MYPT1 or ASPP2, or use shRNA mediated knockdown of MYH9 can be passaged
and grown in vitro consistently.Finally we are generating conditional
mouse models with mammary gland specific E-cadherin loss in combination
of expression of the truncated variants of MYPT1 or ASPP2, or loss of
MYH9. We will to monitor whether these mice are prone to developing ILC.

