Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of whole slide digital image analysis for determination of
expression of Twist-1 in normal panceata and stage IV pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas


Pancreatic cancer is the 4th most common cause of cancer deaths in this
country. Close to 50,000 deaths occur every year. This is due to the fact
that most patients are not diagnosed until presentation at a stage IV. In
a recent study, it is estimated that more than 10 years go by between the
first genetic mutation and the formation of invasive cancer. More
mutations occur in metastatic lesions after an additional 6 years. Both
SNAIL and TWIST have gained more attention as biomarkers because that
contribute to E-cadherin dysregulation that allows the tumor cells to
invade. In this study we evaluated 17 cases of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma using twist-1 antibody to evaluate tumor cell expression
in these cases. All paraffin blocks were retrieved from the IU pathology
department files via an IRB approved protocol. The unstained slides were
stained with primary antibody Twist-1 using the DAKO Flex system. Control
sections were treated with an isotype control using the same
concentration as primary antibody to verify the staining specificity. The
Aperio whole slide system was used to image the slides. Computer-assisted
morphometric analysis of digital images was carried out using the Aperio
Image scope software using the positive pixel algorithm. The algorithm
was used to quantify the Twist-1 positivity of normal pancreas, and
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. This algorithm is the only FDA approved
algorithm for human clinical trials. The immunostaining of Twist-1 was
found only in the ductal epithelial carcinoma cells in the pancreas.
There was no staining in the stroma in any of the normal pancreas and
ductal pancreatic carcinoma cases. We analyzed 5 normal pancreata, and 12
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. The data from the image analysis was
3.38% expression in normal pancreata and 11.44% expression in the
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In summary, the image analysis data
demonstrates the overexpression of Twist-1 in stage IV pancreatic
adenocarcinomas compared to the normal pancreas. This suggests that this
marker may be a predictor of tumor invasiveness and metastasis.

