Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive TIL profiling by simultaneous DNA barcoding of
proteins, RNA and natively paired immune receptors from millions of
single cells


We present high resolution single cell profiling of tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) for immune research and cancer target discovery. TILs
hold the key to understanding anti-cancer immune responses but remain
challenging to study due to their vast range of phenotypes, functions and
abundance. Current approaches to TIL analysis such as immune receptor
sequencing, flow cytometry, and RNA expression profiling are limited,
since each approach gives only partial insights into a TIL repertoire and
their results cannot be connected at the single cell level. We therefore
built a technology for simultaneous determination of immune receptor
sequences, surface protein phenotypes and RNA expression profiles from
single TILs at unprecedented scale. Able to process millions of cells per
experiment, the throughput of our emulsion-based DNA barcoding method
allows deep and unbiased TIL profiling directly from tumor tissue without
the need for cell sorting, stimulation or culture.Briefly, single-cell
dissociated biopsy tissue samples are stained with DNA-labeled surface
marker antibodies and isolated into individual 65-pL microdroplets by a
microfluidic emulsion chip. Within the droplets, cellular RNAs are
reverse transcribed into cDNA, and a barcoding step attaches
droplet-specific DNA barcodes to all of the cDNAs as well as to the DNA
labels carried by the marker antibodies. At the end of the reaction, all
products associated with a single input cell carry the same DNA barcode
sequence, allowing subsequent high throughput sequencing to assign the
products to their cell of origin. During analysis the full-length immune
receptor pairs for each B- and T-cell are reconstructed and the marker
antibody tags are identified and quantified along with dozens of
additional mRNA markers, resulting in a high-dimensional dataset
containing integrated immune receptor clone, protein marker and RNA
expression profiles of thousands to hundreds of thousands of individual
lymphocytes in the input sample.We have successfully applied our method
to a variety of healthy blood and tissue samples including human cancers
such as pancreatic, ovarian and lung cancer, profiling millions of
B-cells and T-cells present in the samples. We identify likely
tumor-reactive TILs by finding BCR or TCR clonal lineages associated with
particular protein and RNA signatures, including expression of
immunosuppression markers such as PD-1 and CTLA-4. Following candidate
selection, full-length BCR and TCR pairs are synthesized and expressed
for functional screening and target antigen identification. By providing
an unprecedented view into TIL diversity across a wide range of disease
and sample types, our platform also has widespread potential for basic
and applied research into the patient immune response to cancer and the
dynamics of immunotherapy.

