Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypomethylation therapy leads to immune polarization and improved
efficacy of immunotherapy in transgenic model of pancreatic cancer


BACKGROUNDDespite significant activity of immunotherapies in several
malignancies, their efficacy in pancreatic cancer has been limited. One
possible explanation may be the absence of a tumor microenvironment and
immune cells that are necessary. We have demonstrated that
5-aza-2-deoxycitidine (DAC) had a profound effect on pancreatic cancer
associated stroma and up-regulated many immune pathways. Therefore we
proposed that hypomethylating therapy may alter the microenvironment to
allow immue checkpoint inhibitors greater therapeutic
efficacy.METHODSTransgenic mice that spontaneously develop pancreatic
cancer (Kras, Trp53, Pdx-1 Cre [KPC]) underwent weekly transabdominal
ultrasound to detect mice initially with larger (6-8 mm) and subsequently
with smaller (3-5 mm) tumors. PBS or DAC (5 mg/kg) and anti -PD1H or
isotype control antibody were administered every 72 hours
intraperitoneally for 3 doses. Tumor size was monitored biweekly and 3D
tumor volume reconstruction was used to estimate size. The immune cell
infiltrate was characterized by quantitative immunohistochemistry or by
FACS.RESULTSMice treated with DAC with 6-8 mm tumors demonstrated a
significantly increased survival and tumor necrosis as well as
polarization of the infiltrating macrophages towards an M1 (CD86, CD163)
phenotype and a trend towards an increase in infiltrating CD8 cells
compared with controls. The shift in the T cell population and the
macrophage phenotypes was not seen in the spleen or peripheral blood of
either wild type or tumor bearing animals treated with DAC compared with
controls. We subsequently treated mice with 3 doses of DAC followed by 3
doses of anti -PD1H and compared them to anti-PD1H alone in KPC mice with
smaller (3-5 mm) tumors. In DAC + anti-PD1H we noted a decrease in the
growth rate of tumors, an increased survival and a significant increase
in necrosis and CD8 infiltrates, as well as a significant decrease in
Ki67 and increase in Tunel staining compared with anti-PD1H
alone.CONCLUSIONSOur results suggest that DAC pre-treatment prior to
checkpoint inhibitors may favorably polarize the tumor infiltrating
immune cell population, lead to increased recruitment of CD8 positive T
cells, result in marked tumor necrosis and slow tumor growth. These
effects ultimately contribute to increased therapeutic efficacy of
checkpoint inhibitors in pancreatic cancer. We plan to optimize the
efficacy of epigenetic therapy and checkpoint inhibitors by using other
monoclonal antibodies (anti-PD1, PD1L)and different dosing regimens.

