Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison of parent and provider verified HPV vaccination
initiation and completion in US adolescents: findings from the National
Immunization Survey - Teen, 2014


Introduction:Several studies have examined predictors of HPV vaccine
initiation and completion. Two common methods to measure HPV vaccine
initiation and completion are parental recall and provider verified
vaccine history. Some studies use parental recall because it is
cost-effective and time-consuming. Others argue that the provider report
should be used because it is the gold standard, although it is more
costly and time-consuming. Yet, few studies compare the accuracy of
parental report versus provider report for HPV vaccine initiation and
completion.Objective:To compare the accuracy of parental reported and
provider reported data on HPV vaccine initiation and completion among a
national sample of adolescents in the United States.Methods:Data from the
2014 National Immunization Survey-Teen (NIS-Teen) were analyzed for
38,703 adolescents. HPV vaccine initiation and completion were assessed
using parental recall (shot cards) and provider verified (medical
records) vaccine history. Adjusted, weighted multivariable logistic
regression compared the accuracy of parental and provider reported data
on HPV vaccine initiation and completion.Results:HPV vaccine initiation
(a) and completion (b), by subgroup analysis, is similar for parental
recall and provider report. However, subgroup analyses for parental
report were slightly lower than provider report, although not
statistically significant (Table 1).Conclusion:This study showed that
parental report is comparable to provider report when measuring HPV
vaccine initiation and completion among adolescents in the US. For more
cost-effective and timely assessment of vaccine uptake, an accurate and
practical method of measuring HPV vaccine initiation and completion is
paramount. Utilizing parental report may be a more cost-effective and
timely alternative to provider report for clinical evaluation of vaccine
uptake.
Subgroup analysis of HPV vaccine initiation and completion, Odds Ratios
(95% CI)

