Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic landscape and clonal expansions of upper urinary tract
urothelial carcinoma


BackgroundsUpper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma (UUTUC) is a
relatively rare and poor prognostic cancer which accounts for 5-10% of
all urothelial malignancies. Despite the histological similarity, there
are epidemiological and clinical differences between UUTUC and bladder
urothelial carcinoma (BUC). Compared to BUC, the molecular pathogenesis
of UUTUC is poorly understood. Urothelial carcinoma is also characterized
by frequent multifocal lesions, suggesting field effects from mutagenic
agents in urine and/or a dissemination from the primary tumor. To reveal
the origin of the multifocality as well as the molecular pathogenesis of
UUTUC, we performed comprehensive molecular analysis of UUTUC with
regional multiple sampling.Materials & methodsSurgical specimens of UUTUC
and matched normal samples were obtained from 57 patients with various
stages who underwent nephroureterectomy. Morphologically normal
urothelial epithelia were also obtained in 5 cases, all of which were
confirmed to be pathologically intact by an expert pathologist. Genomic
DNA was extracted from each specimen and was subjected to whole exome
sequencing using Hiseq 2500 for the detection of both somatic mutations
and copy number lesions.ResultsIn copy number analysis, recurrent
deletions in 8p, 9p and 9q were identified, where homo deletions of
9p21.3 (CDKN2A) were most frequent (40.7%) Focal amplifications in
11q13.3 (CCND1) and 12q15 (MDM2) were also found. On average, 230 somatic
nonsynonymous mutations per sample were detected. The mutation signature
was biased to age-related and APOBEC patterns. Mutations were most
frequently observed in KMT2D (42% of cases), followed by TP53 (32%),
FGFR3 (24%), KDM6A (24%), EP300 (21%) and CREBBP (13%), which were also
reported to be significantly mutated in BUC. However, the frequencies of
these genetic lesions were substantially different between UUTUC and BUC.
For example, abnormalities in RB1, CDKN1A and PIK3CA were not detected or
rare in UUTUC but have been reported to be common targets of genetic
lesions in BUC. In the analysis of normal epithelia, an average of 12.7
somatic mutations per sample were found but with low variant allele
frequencies between 0.050.1. Somatic mutations in adjacent epithelia and
preoperative urine were frequently shared by primary tumor, supporting a
possibility of tumor disseminations from the original sites through
urinary flow. In contrast, in other cases, distant epithelia harbored
driver gene mutations that were not shared by the primary tumors,
suggesting the presence of a mutagenic field effect on urothelial
carcinogenesis.ConclusionsDespite the similarity in their mutation
spectrum, UUTUC and BUC seemed to have distinct pathogenesis in terms of
the difference in mutation frequencies. Our data suggested that both
dissemination and field effect might contribute to multifocal occurrence
of UUTUC. These findings will provide a new insight into the
pathophysiology of UUTUC.

