Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-targeting HGF-cMET signaling with MEK inhibitors in metastatic
uveal melanoma


Metastatic uveal melanoma (UM) patients usually die within one year,
emphasizing an urgent need to develop new treatment strategies.
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitors improve survival
in cutaneous melanoma patients but have limited efficacy in UM patients.
Our previous work show that HGF-cMET signaling provides resistance to MEK
inhibitors in metastatic UM cells. In this study, we further investigated
the mechanisms of HGF-driven resistance to MEK inhibitors in metastatic
UM cells. Cellular signaling pathway analysis was carried out to
determine the role of downstream Bcl2 family members in overcoming
trametinib-mediated apoptosis by HGF in metastatic UM cells. A new class
of clinical grade cMET antibody and inhibitor were tested for their
capacity to revert the resistance to trametinib mediated by HGF and tumor
microenvironment. Selective inhibitors were utilized to determine the
PI3K isoform dependency of metastatic UM cells in HGF-mediated protection
against trametinib in metastatic UM cells. We demonstrate that the
expression of two BH3-only family proteins, Bim-EL and Bmf, is
upregulated in trametinib treated cells, but returns to basal levels upon
HGF treatment in these cells. Targeting HGF-cMET signaling with
LY2875358, a neutralizing and internalizing anti-cMET bivalent antibody,
and LY2801653, a dual cMET/RON inhibitor overcomes resistance to
trametinib provided by exogenous HGF and by conditioned medium from
primary hepatic stellate cells. PI3K-sparing inhibitor GDC0032
effectively blocks HGF-induced AKT phosphorylation and HGF-mediated
resistance in trametinib treated cells in growth assays. In conclusion,
our data suggest that HGF promotes resistance to MEK inhibitors through
modulating Bim-EL and Bmf expression in UM cells. Our data also support
the notion that selectively blocking PI3K isoform activities or cMET
signaling may delay the onset of resistance to MEK inhibitors provided by
tumor microenvironment in metastatic uveal melanoma.

