Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting mechanisms of CART signalling through the estrogen
receptor in ER+ breast cancer


The cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) was first
discovered as a peptide up-regulated by the administration of cocaine and
amphetamine to rats. CART peptides are involved in regulating
physiological processes, such as feeding, reward and neuro-protection.
However, recent studies have associated high CART expression with worse
overall survival in patients with small-bowel carcinoid tumours [1] and
estrogen receptor-positive (ER+), lymph node-negative breast cancer [2].
Interestingly, in ER+ breast cancer, CART was also shown to be associated
with poor patient response to tamoxifen, suggesting CART may play a role
in conferring tamoxifen resistance [2].The aim of this study was to
elucidate the mechanism(s) by which CART signals in ER+ breast cancer. In
order to test whether CART could mediate the ligand-independent
activation of ER-alpha, MAP-Kinase pathway activation and levels of
downstream gene-targets of ER-alpha were assessed post CART stimulation.
Additionally, the ability of CART to activate ER-alpha using three LXD
motifs (nuclear receptor co-activator recognition motifs) present within
the CART sequence was also assessed. This was achieved through
selectively mutating these motifs and testing whether CART still
possessed the ability to activate ER-alpha using an ERE-Dual luciferase
reporter assay.Treatment of cells with CART demonstrated an increase in
MAP-Kinase activity through the detection of increasing phosphorylated
ERK levels. An increase in the phosphorylation of ER-alpha at serine 118
(a phosphorylation site thought to be involved in tamoxifen resistance)
was also evident following CART stimulation. CART stimulation also
resulted in an increase in levels of the progesterone receptor, a known
ER-alpha gene target. Mutagenesis of each LXD motif within CART resulted
in significant decreases in ER-alpha activity, suggesting a potential
structure-function relationship between CART and ER-alpha.In conclusion,
we suggest that CART can activate ER-alpha in a ligand-independent manner
through the MAP-Kinase pathway, and also potentially through specific LXD
motifs within its sequence. Further investigation into the relationship
between CART and ER-alpha will help us gain a better understanding of,
not only the potential structure-function relationship between CART and
ER-alpha, but also the role CART plays with regards to tamoxifen
resistance in ER+ breast cancer.[1] Landerholm K et al., Expression of
cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript is associated with worse
survival in small bowel carcinoid tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jul
1;18(13):3668-76[2] DJ Brennan, DP OConnor et al., The cocaine- and
amphetamine-regulated transcript mediates ligand-independent activation
of ER, and is an independent prognostic factor in node-negative breast
cancer. Oncogene 2011 Dec 5. Doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.519

