Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Number of ALK-amplified circulating tumor cells predicts
progression-free survival in ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer
patients treated by crizotinib


The duration of clinical response is unpredictable in ALK-rearranged
NSCLC patients treated by crizotinib but all patients invariably develop
resistance. Using filter-adapted fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FA-FISH) we previously reported ALK-rearrangement detection in
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from ALK-rearranged patients. Here we
report the monitoring of ALK-rearranged (13/5, 1x(3 and 5)) and
ALK-amplified (>23/5) CTCs at baseline and at an early time point under
crizotinib therapy in an extended cohort of ALK-rearranged patients. The
correlation between CTC subsets harboring distinct FISH patterns and
clinical parameters including progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) is presented.Forty ALK-rearranged patients were recruited.
Blood samples were collected at baseline to crizotinib and at 1-3 months.
Abnormal ALK-FISH patterns were examined in CTCs using immunofluorescence
staining (DAPI/CD45) combined with FA-FISH after isolation by size of
epithelial tumor cells (ISET) filtration. CTCs were defined into five
distinct subsets according to the number of FISH break-apart signals (3
and 5) or isolated red signals (3) and/or native copies (3/5). All
ALK-abnormal cells were validated by a cytogenetician. Clinical data was
collected retrospectively.Confirming our previous data, ALK rearrangement
was detected in CTCs: 32/39 patients (82%) had 4 ALK-rearranged CTCs per
1 ml of blood. Age >60 years and smoking status >15 pack years were
associated with a higher mean number of ALK-amplified CTCs (p = 0.0423
and p = 0.0407 respectively). No statistically significant correlation
was observed between the different CTC subsets with abnormal FISH
patterns at baseline and PFS or OS. However we observed a statistically
significant correlation (p = 0.0196) between the evolution under
crizotinib of the numbers of ALK-amplified CTCs and PFS. An increase in
the numbers of ALK-amplified CTCs during treatment is associated with a
PFS of 6.5 months, while a decrease in this subset is associated with a
PFS of 25 months. There was no corresponding correlation with OS.The
evolution under crizotinib therapy of numbers of ALK-amplified CTCs is
significantly correlated with PFS. Although not dominant, amplification
of the ALK gene has been reported to be one mechanism of acquired
resistance to crizotinib therapy in tumor biopsies. CTCs with an
amplification of ALK do not express the oncogenic ALK fusion protein and
are therefore not targeted by crizotinib. FISH patterns suggested these
CTCs may have a high degree of ploidy and chromosomal instability which
may contribute to promote the emergence of CTC subclones with a high
metastatic potential. Our data suggest that number of ALK-amplified CTCs
may be a predictive biomarker allowing prediction of ALK-rearranged NSCLC
patients who are at risk of early resistance to crizotinib.

