Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing combinations of chemotherapy in alveolar soft part
sarcoma cell lines


Background: Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare soft tissue
sarcoma subtype occurring mainly in children and young adults. Malignant
tumors develop in the connective tissues, typically in the lower
extremities of the legs and thighs, but can also be found in the head and
neck regions. ASPS is slow growing, highly angiogenic, and may have
unique metabolic properties. ASPS is characterized by an unbalanced
translocation between the ASPSCR1 gene (whose product tethers GLUT4
transporters) and the TFE3 gene (encoding a transcription factor). The
resulting ASPSCR1-TFE3 fusion gene is responsible for an aberrant
transcription factor that is thought to be involved in the pathogenesis
of the disease. Methods to assess a number of different agents in
combination are needed for practical use in clinical trials.Methods:
Here, we seek to examine the therapeutic activity of single agent and
combinations of epigenetic, anti-angiogenic and a diverse mix of other
mechanisms of action agents using high-throughput screening platforms and
well-established cell line models for ASPS (ASPS-1 and ASPS-KY). We
designed stringent screening conditions that assess the compounds at
clinically-relevant concentrations and time of exposures that mimic the
in vivo pharmacokinetics in an effort to maximize the translational
potential of these results to the clinical setting. 54 agents were
screened across the 2 cell lines with attention to existing clinical data
and angiogenesis inhibitors. The cell titer glo assay was used to
determine cell viability at three clinically achievable concentrations
for all agents. The most promising 8 agents were then studied in all
two-drug combinations to evaluate for synergy.Results: The results of our
screening showed that several agents significantly reduced cell viability
at clinically relevant concentrations and exposure times with belinostat
(an HDAC inhibitor) and dinaciclib (a CDK 1, 2, 5 and 9 inhibitor) in
particular having good activity. Several combinations with doxorubicin
showed good efficacy and synergy. Belinostat and doxorubicin affected
both ASPS-KY and ASPS-1 cell lines similarly, with an average fraction
affected (FA) of 0.87. The combination index (CI) indicated strong
synergy in the ASPS-KY (CI = 0.09) and some synergy in ASPS-1 (CI =
0.74). Similarly, dinaciclib and doxorubicin produced a FA of 0.85 with
good synergy (CI of 0.51-0.66). In addition, the combination of
belinostat and tivantinib showed additive effects in both cell lines (CI
of 0.88-1.2) with a FA of 0.8. These findings suggest potentially
promising opportunities for developing combinational approach to treating
childhood soft tissue sarcomas.

