Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabazitaxel is more active than first generation taxanes in
ABCB1(+) cell lines due to its higher intracellular accumulation and
reduction in ATPase stimulation


The taxanes paclitaxel (Taxol) and docetaxel (Taxotere) have substantial
clinical activity in breast, ovarian, lung, and other cancers, but their
clinical efficacy is limited by preexisting or acquired drug resistance,
such as the expression of the ATP-dependent multidrug resistance (MDR)
transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Cabazitaxel (Jevtana), the dimethoxy
derivative of docetaxel, was identified because of its activity in
taxane-resistant models both in vitro and in vivo. Our studies confirm
that cabazitaxel is more active in cell variants that express P-gp, and
the objective of this study was to investigate cabazitaxel's affinity for
the transporter. Taxane accumulation patterns were studied in ABCB1(+)
variants using [14C]-radiolabeled docetaxel and cabazitaxel over a time
course up to 1 h. Time points were collected and spun (10,000 x g, 1 min)
through Nyosil M20 oil thereby terminating uptake, cell pellets lysed
with 2% (w/v) SDS, and counts determined by liquid scintillation, with
all measurements normalized to protein content. The kinetics of drug
accumulation between the two taxanes is different, with the maximum
intracellular drug concentration achieved faster with cabazitaxel (5 min)
than docetaxel (15-30 min) in all cell lines. ABCB1(+) variants
accumulated less taxane, and these levels could be restored to parental
levels in the presence of known P-gp inhibitors (2 M PSC-833, valspodar).
However, the MDR cell models tested accumulated twice as much cabazitaxel
than docetaxel under identical experimental conditions. Efflux in
drug-free medium confirmed that ABCB1(+) variants retained 2.2x more
cabazitaxel than docetaxel. We observed a strong association (r2 = 0.91)
between the degree of taxane resistance conferred by P-gp expression and
the accumulation differences observed with the two taxanes. Several low
P-gp-expressing cell models were not cross-resistant to cabazitaxel while
demonstrating resistance to docetaxel. Furthermore, we determined ATPase
stimulation in membranes isolated from our MDR cell models as an indirect
measure of P-gp activity following taxane treatment. We observed a 1.9x
reduction in sodium orthovanadate-sensitive ATPase stimulation resulting
from treatment with cabazitaxel than with docetaxel (1 M for 30 min).
Future experiments will include direct photoaffinity labeling of P-gp
with [3H]-azido-cabazitaxel and docetaxel, and competition assays with
known P-gp substrates. Our studies indicate that the improved activity of
cabazitaxel in MDR models might be due to its reduced affinity for P-gp
compared to docetaxel.

