Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of HBO1 in epithelial ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (OC) is now the fourth leading cause of cancer
death among women in the U.S and the leading cause of death in
gynecological cancers. This lethality is due to both its asymptomatic
nature and the lack of effective treatment strategies for advanced stage
disease. OC comprises a variety of tumor types (histotypes) that differ
in morphology, prognosis, etiology and molecular biology. Despite the
knowledge of OC heterogeneity, current treatment strategies are very
similar, and unfortunately, very ineffectual. New approaches, to inhibit
OC growth and progression are therefore being sought, with few obvious
targets for directed therapy. Currently, large-scale gene expression, DNA
copy number and mutational screens have not been able to pinpoint new
high frequency drugable targets. Epigenetic therapy conceives a whole
genome approach, potentially circumventing the reliance on therapies that
target infrequently mutated genes. So far in OC, most studies have
focused on the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (DNMTi, EZH2i,
HDACi) with mixed success, while little is known about the epigenetic
activation of cancer-associated genes. Histone acetyl-transferases like
GCN5, PCAF and p300 have been targeted in cancer previously, and the main
purpose of this study is to assess the role of one such
acetyl-transferase, Histone acetyl-transferase binding to origin of
replication complex 1 (HBO1, also known as KAT7 and MYST2) in the
progression of OC. HBO1 is a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) that plays
important roles in diverse molecular processes including DNA replication,
transcription and DNA repair. Importantly, HBO1 is overexpressed in
primary cancers (breast, testis, ovarian), although the molecular basis
of its role is still unclear. To better understand HBO1's role in OC, we
characterized its expression in well-defined OC cell lines both at the
mRNA and protein level. Observed in vitro patterns of HBO1 expression
correlate well with previous observations; HBO1 is overexpressed in
several OC cell lines. Interestingly, the serous histotype (both the most
common and the most aggressive) generally shows the highest expression.
Thus far, we have now analyzed HBO1's downstream regulatory pathways in
several OC cell lines through use of siRNA knock-down coupled to
microarray analysis. Comparisons of the various datasets have revealed
pathways common to all cell lines studied, as well as distinction. Our
approach aims to identify known epigenomic signatures that may be
associated with HBO1 binding and downstream signaling which may drive
differentiation toward the most advanced stages of the disease.
Translating this new information through epigenetic targeting and
structural inhibition may lead to novel, next-generation therapies for
this most complex of disease presentations.

