Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of calcium and vitamin D supplementation on circulating
markers of inflammation


Chronic inflammation plays a major role in colon carcinogenesis. Recent
evidence from experimental models suggests that vitamin D and calcium may
reduce systemic inflammation and local inflammation in the colorectum,
thus contributing to reducing risk for colorectal neoplasia. However,
human experimental evidence to support these purported anti-inflammatory
effects remains inconclusive, coming from very few, small, mainly
short-term clinical studies with a variety of doses and administration
regimens, with and without calcium supplementation in very different
patient populations, and with a limited number of inflammatory biomarkers
measured. To address this, we tested the effects of calcium (1.2 g/d)
and/or vitamin D3 (1,000 IU/d) supplementation for 3 or 5 years on
circulating pro- (IFN, TNF, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12p40) and anti-inflammatory
(IL-10) cytokines in 471 participants with previous colorectal adenoma in
a recently completed, multi-center, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, modified 2 2 factorial chemoprevention clinical trial
(NCT00153816). The cytokines were measured in plasma using multiplex
electrochemiluminescence detection-based immunoassays. Over a 3- or
5-year treatment period, we found no appreciable effects of calcium
and/or vitamin D supplementation on pro-inflammatory cytokines (all
P-values > 0.3). However, there was a suggestion that vitamin D may
favorably modulate concentrations of IL-10, an anti-inflammatory
cytokine. In the calcium, vitamin D, and calcium plus vitamin D groups,
the relative increase vs. placebo in IL-10 from baseline to end of
follow-up was 3% (P = 0.78), 15% (P = 0.15), 13% (P = 0.35). Our
preliminary results indicate no considerable effects of calcium and
vitamin D treatment on circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines, and might
suggest that vitamin D may increase circulating levels of
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, which plays an important role in the
Th2-type immune response.

