Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cancer-specific monoclonal antibody against podocalyxin
developed by CasMab technology inhibited the tumor growth by
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity


Background: Podocalyxin (PODXL) is a CD34-related sialomucin and a
well-known marker of embryonic stem cells. PODXL is expressed in many
cancers including brain tumors, breast cancers, and colorectal cancers.
Overexpression of PODXL is an independent predictor of progression,
metastasis, and poor outcome. In contrast, PODXL is highly expressed in
normal cells such as vascular endothelial cells (VECs) or renal
podocytes. Although many monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against PODXL have
been established, they bind to both cancer and normal cells. We recently
established CasMab technology for developing cancer-specific mAbs, which
could target only cancer cells, although those membranous proteins are
highly expressed in both cancer and normal cells.Methods: We immunized
mice with human PODXL, which was overexpressed in a glioblastoma cell
line. Cancer-specific mAbs were screened using flow cytometry against
PODXL-expressing cancer and normal cells. The cancer specificity was
confirmed using immunohistochemistry against breast cancer tissues. A
mouse-human chimeric anti-PODXL mAb was produced and antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) was investigated in vitro. The in vivo
efficacy of anti-PODXL mAbs was evaluated using xenograft models of
PODXL-expressing cell lines.Results: One clone of anti-PODXL mAbs, which
was established by CasMab technology, reacted with PODXL-expressing many
cancer cell lines including breast cancers, brain tumors, and malignant
mesotheliomas, whereas it did not bind to VECs in flow cytometry. The
anti-PODXL mAb reacted only with PODXL-expressing cancer cells, not with
VECs in breast cancer tissues in immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, the
anti-PODXL mAb possesses ADCC activity in vitro and anti-tumor effect in
vivo.Conclusion: The anti-PODXL mAb established by CasMab technology
could be useful for targeting PODXL in cancer, although PODXL is highly
expressed in many normal cells.

