Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antidepressant use and risk of central nervous system metastasis


CNS metastasis is the spread of a primary cancer to the CNS and occurs in
up to 25% of cancer patients. Antidepressant therapy, used in 15-30% of
cancer patients, affects the blood-brain barrier, potentially making
patients more susceptible to CNS metastasis. This hypothesis is supported
by an experimental study reporting increased CNS metastasis from breast
cancer in mice receiving fluoxetine, an antidepressant in the class of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). However, no human
studies have looked at this association. We conducted a case-control
study to examine whether antidepressants, and specifically SSRIs,
increased the relative odds of CNS metastasis.We identified cancer
patients diagnosed with breast cancer, melanoma, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL) at one academic cancer center in Rochester, NY between 2005 and
2013. We ascertained 189 patients with CNS metastasis (cases) and 945
patients without CNS metastasis (controls). Cases of CNS metastasis were
identified by the ICD-9 code 198.3 secondary malignant neoplasm of brain
and spinal cord. Cases and controls were classified with regard to their
antidepressant use based on medical chart review. Using multivariable
logistic regression, we estimated the relative odds of CNS metastasis
associated with any antidepressant use (any antidepressant irrespective
of class), any SSRI use (SSRI use, nonexclusively), and exclusive SSRI
use (only SSRI use and no other class of antidepressant), all compared to
no antidepressant use. Subset analyses were planned a priori for breast
cancer and melanoma; subset analyses could not be conducted for NHL due
to the small sample size.Both cases and controls had a median age of 53
years (range: 25-94 years and 15-89 years, respectively). The prevalence
of any antidepressant use was 28.6% in cases and 25.7% in controls,
whereas SSRIs were used in 16.9% of cases and 15.6% of controls. Among
all patients, any SSRI use was not associated with CNS metastasis (odds
ratio (OR) = 1.21; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.74, 1.97). However,
among breast cancer patients, any SSRI use was associated with a 1.73
times greater odds of CNS metastasis (95% CI = 0.75, 4.04). No consistent
patterns of association were observed in the analyses of other cancer
subsets or exposure measures.This was the first study to examine the
association between antidepressant use and CNS metastasis. We did not
observe clear patterns of association which may be due in part to the
small sample size in many of our analyses. However, we believe that the
increased odds in the breast cancer subset warrants further investigation
as this is consistent with the animal research.

