Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes promote ovarian cancer invasion through CD-44 transfer to
mesothelial cells


Purpose:The peritoneum and organs in the peritoneal cavity are covered by
a single layer of mesothelial cells. Therefore, ovarian cancer cells,
which metastasize within the peritoneal cavity, directly encounter
mesothelial cells as the initial step of metastasis. This contact has
been found to involve cell-cell communication that affects cancer
progression. Possible actors in this cell-cell communication are
exosomes, 30-100 nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin, through the
cell-cell transfer of proteins, mRNAs, and microRNAs. Here, we aim to
identify the functional roles of ovarian cancer-derived exosomes in this
metastatic process.Methods:Exosomes were isolated from two ovarian cancer
cell lines (HeyA8 and TYK-NU) and immortalized normal ovarian epithelial
cell line (IOSE) using differential centrifugation. Human peritoneal
mesothelial cells (HPMCs) were isolated from normal omentum of patients
undergoing gynecologic surgery. The isolation of exosomes was confirmed
by electron microscope, nanoparticle tracking analysis, Western blotting
and electrophoresis of RNA. The transfer of exosomes into HPMCs was
confirmed by fluorescent-labeled exosomes. The effects of exosome
transfer from ovarian cancer cells to mesothelial cells in cancer
invasion were analyzed in vitro 3D culture model, morphological
assessment, Western blotting and gelatin zymography. CD-44 was enriched
in cancer derived exosome. Thus, gain or loss of function of CD-44 was
analyzed. CD-44 expression in ovarian cancer omental metastasis and
surrounding organs was assessed by immunohistochemistry using clinical
samples.Results:Fluorescent-labeled exosomes were evidently transferred
into HPMCs. Exosome-treated HPMCs changed in cellular morphology to
spindle phenotype. Ovarian cancer invasion was significantly promoted in
the presence of exosome-treated HPMCs. In exosome-treated HPMCs, MMP-9
secretion was up-regulated and E-cadherin expression down-regulated. The
clearance of mesothelial barrier was increased in exosome-treated HPMC
monolayer. CD-44 was enriched in cancer-derived exosomes and
exosome-treated HPMCs display high-level of CD-44. When CD-44 expression
was knocked down by siRNA in ovarian cancer cells, these effects to HPMCs
were significantly attenuated. In contrast, the enforced expression of
CD-44 into HPMCs promoted cancer invasion. In human omentum with
microscopic metastasis of ovarian cancer, positive CD-44 expression was
confirmed in a mesothelial cell layer when cancer cells are attaching
onto it, while CD-44 expression was generally negative in normal
mesothelial cells.Conclusion:Ovarian cancer-derived exosomes transfer
CD-44 to HPMCs, which can facilitate ovarian cancer invasion by
up-regulating of MMP-9 secretion and increasing mesothelial clearance.

