Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A-337, a potent bispecific antibody targeting EpCAMCD3, as a
potential immunotherapeutic agent for human solid tumors


T cell bi-specific antibodies are potent molecules by binding and
re-directing T cells to tumor cells through tumor associate antigens
(TAAs), and triggering strong T cell activation and resulting in the
killing of tumor cells. Bi-specific T cell engager antibody (BITE) has
demonstrated a remarkable clinical efficacy in liquid tumor. It remains
to be a tremendous challenge for the development these types of
bi-specific antibodies due to the induction of cytokine storm, thus
limiting the dose-escalation in patients. A new immunotherapy antibody
platform, (ITab TM), was developed to generate bi-specific antibody-like
molecules. The molecules target TAA and activate human CD3 T cells
simultaneously. A-337 is a bi-specific antibody targeting on EpCAM
(Epithelial cell adhesion molecule) on tumor cells and CD3 in human T
cells. In vitro, A-337 demonstrated high potency on activating human T
cell measured by CD69 expression, and killing of EpCAM highly expressing
tumor cell lines with EC50 values at T cell bi-specific antibodies are
potent molecules by binding and re-directing T cells to tumor cells
through tumor associate antigens (TAAs), and triggering strong T cell
activation and resulting in the killing of tumor cells. Bi-specific T
cell engager antibody (BITE) has demonstrated a remarkable clinical
efficacy in liquid tumor. It remains to be a tremendous challenge for the
development these types of bi-specific antibodies due to the induction of
cytokine storm, thus limiting the dose-escalation in patients. A new
immunotherapy antibody platform, (ITab TM), was developed to generate
bi-specific antibody-like molecules. The molecules target TAA and
activate human CD3 T cells simultaneously. A-337 is a bi-specific
antibody targeting on EpCAM (Epithelial cell adhesion molecule) on tumor
cells and CD3 in human T cells. In vitro, A-337 demonstrated high potency
on activating human T cell measured by CD69 expression, and killing of
EpCAM highly expressing tumor cell lines with EC50 values at < 100 pM in
the presence of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The
human PBMC dependent cell killing activity of A-337 was correlated to the
expression levels of EpCAM on the surface of tumor cell lines. In the
mouse model, A-337 showed dose-dependent growth inhibition of SW480
xenograft. In cynomolgus monkey studies, A-337 by single IV infusion
induced peripheral T cell re-distribution or activation and cytokine
release and showed favorable pharmacokinetics features. The current
studies reveal that A-337 has potent anti-tumor activities in vitro and
in vivo. These results demonstrate that A-337 is a promising and potent
immunotherapeutic agent to treat EpCAM-expressing solid tumors and
warrants further development.

