Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioengineered-induced cancer-like stem cells: characterization and
applications


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small subset of tumor cells capable of
self-renewal, tumor initiation, and growth. Isolation, expansion, and
differentiation of CSCs in the proper stem niches remain a topic of great
debate. To address some of the challenges, we developed
bioengineered-induced cancer like stem cells (iCLSCs) through in vitro
oncogenic reprograming of C57BL/6 mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). We
constructed retroviral plasmids through integration of well-defined
oncogenic elements such as SV40LTg and HrasV12 into a mouse stem virus
long terminal repeat (MSCV-LTR) plasmid fused with either a GFP or RFP
gene. We successfully acquired these bioengineered-iCLSCs through
retroviral introduction alongside with FACS sorting of positively
infected mESCs. We then cultured the bioengineered-iCLSCs on mouse
embryonic fibroblast (mEF) feeder cells. Bioengineered-iCLSCs expressed
the introduced oncogenic genes and showed enhanced proliferation similar
to cancer cells. In addition, we ascertained the unhampered stem
properties of the bioengineered-iCLSCs by examining the maintenance of
alkaline phosphatase activity as well as the expression of mouse stem
cell marker SSEA-1. Furthermore, the orthotopic inoculation of these
bioengineered-iCLSCs into either the mammalian fat pad or the ovarian
bursa of female C57BL/6 mice lead to the formation of teratomas in
supportive niches. Interestingly, the teratomas formed in the ovarian
bursa exhibited malignant and immature features, whereas the iCLSCs
introduced to the mammary fat pad were not able to generate teratomas
with similar features. These observations call for additional research to
identify the dependency on a supportive niche and their role in
metastasis based on a tumor-favorable microenvironment. Our study helped
to establish the use of in vitro oncogenic reprograming to generate
bioengineered-iCLSCs and suggests the potential application for the
initiation of organ-specific, malignant tumor formation in an orthotopic
small animal cancer model.

