Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caloric restriction slows tumor growth and metastases in both
hormone-sensitive and hormone-resistant prostate cancers


Introduction: The purpose of this study is to assess the effect of
caloric restriction (CR) on prostate cancer (PCa) tumor burden,
proliferation, and overall survival with and without radiation treatment
(RT). Additionally, we determined if the beneficial effect of CR noted
are due to a reduction in pro-inflammatory markers hypothesized to
enhance PCa tumorgenesis.Methods: To assess the effect of CR in vivo, 40
male 12 week-old NCRNu-M mice were injected with LNCaP or PC3 tumor
cells. Once tumors were palpable, mice were randomly assigned to one of
four treatment groups in cohorts of 10: ad libitum (AL) diet, 6.5Gy of
radiation (RT), 30% reduction in caloric intake (CR), or CR+RT. Tumor
growth and proliferation rate were measured 3 times per week via calipers
and live bioluminescent imaging. Additionally, PCa tumor tissue were
analyzed to determine if CR can exert its effect on tumor growth and
metastases via IGF-1R signaling pathway.Results: Adding CR to RT
decreased tumor progression. In the PC3 murine model, when compared to
AL, RT reduced tumor size by 22%, 77% with CR, and 80% with CR+RT. In the
LNCaP murine model, compared with AL, CR reduced tumor size by 49% and a
55% reduction with CR+RT. Primary tumor formation began 9 weeks post
tumor injection in the radiated cohort and was delayed to 15 weeks post
tumor injection in the CR and CT+ RT cohorts. Additionally, time to
metastasis was delayed with CR (86 days to metastasis in AL, 93 with RT,
and 108 when combining CR+RT). Molecularly, CR decreased multiple members
of the IGF-1R signaling pathway. The total IGF-1 and IGF-1R levels
exhibited 50% reduction with CR and CR+RT but total INSR levels. CR also
induced a significant decrease of pGSK3 and pAKT levels.Conclusions: For
the first time, we have shown that decreasing calories by 30% in both
hormone-sensitive and hormone-refractory prostate cancer models, enhance
the efficacy of radiation. Our experiments show that even CR alone and in
combination with RT can improve PCa tumor proliferation rate, tumor
burden, time to metastasis, and overall survival. We hypothesize that
these changes are in part, due to the decrease of the IGF-1R signaling
pathway. We propose that CR may be used as a novel therapeutic
intervention to enhance outcomes of radiation treatment by altering the
molecular profile of prostate tumors.

