Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toll like receptor 3 as an immunotherapeutic target for KRAS
mutated colorectal cancer


IntroductionNew therapeutic interventions are essential for improved
management of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). This is
especially critical for patients whose tumors harbor a mutation in the
KRAS oncogene (40-45%). This patient cohort is excluded from receiving
anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies that have added a significant therapeutic
benefit for KRAS wild type CRC patients. Reovirus, a dsRNA virus is in
clinical development for patients with chemotherapy refractory KRAS
mutated tumors. We hypothesize that effective expression of host Toll
Like Receptors 3 (TLR3) will dampen the infection potential of reovirus
propagation by mounting an innate immune response. Development of
strategies to mitigate the TLR3 response pathway can be utilized as a
tool towards improved virus productivity to specifically target the KRAS
mutated cancer cells.Methodology: TLR3 expressing HEK293 cells were
treated with reovirus to confirm that TLR 3 is the host pattern
recognition motif of the host cellular machinery that is responsible for
the detection of dsRNA harboring reovirus. TLR 3 was next down regulated
by shRNA technology in KRAS mutated HCT116 CRC cell line and treated with
reovirus at dose of 5 MOI (multiplicity of infection) for 48 hours. The
cell proliferation profile under this treatment condition was measured by
MTT assay and corelated with the proliferation pattern of TLR3 expressing
HCT116 cells undergoing similar treatment. Cytokine ELISA was performed
for interferon (INF) alpha ()and beta () to determine the downstream
consequences of the gene silencing. Finally xenograft tumor models of
athymic nude mice (Foxn1nu) were developed with TLR3 silenced HCT116
cells and treated with reovirus at a daily intra tumoral (IT) dose of
1107 TCID (tissue culture infective dose) and compared to tumors
generated by HCT116 cells receiving identical treatment.Results TLR 3 is
confirmed to be the host pattern recognition motif for dsRNA containing
reovirus TLR3 which is constitutively expressed by colon epithelium is
also a mediator of virus recognition in CRC cell line HCT116. Down
regulation of TLR3 by shRNA technology enhances viral propagation as
measured by MTT assay. Cytokine ELISA assay of INF distinctly reveals
that downstream activation post reovirus infection is compromised. In
xenograft models, those of TLR3 down regulated HCT116 cells, showed
improved control of tumor growth with reovirus treatment as compared to
those with TLR 3 expressing HCT 116 cells (p = 0.04)ConclusionTLR3 plays
an important role in recognition of reovirus and mounting an innate
immune response by inducing the secretion of type I INF. Mitigation of
the TLR3 receptor mediated pattern recognition by shRNA down regulates
host immune response and thus improves virus mediated cell cytotoxicity.
The findings can be therapeutically utilized towards improved and
beneficial killing of cancer cells by reovirus.

