Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling in African American NSCLC patients to identify
novel potential driver mutations


African Americans continue to have poorer 5 year survival after a lung
cancer diagnosis than whites for reasons that remain to be fully
characterized. This disparity remains even with advances in treatments
targeting specific driver mutations that have improved outcomes for some
patients. Although the relative frequency of these genetic alterations
varies in subsets of individuals defined by sex, histologic subtype,
smoking history and race, little is known about the occurrence of these
mutations in African Americans. In this study, we characterize the
spectrum of known driver mutations in 200 African American NSCLC patients
and seek to identify novel somatic mutations in this population.
Initially, the population was screened using the Sequenom LungCarta panel
of 216 mutations in 24 genes known to contain alterations associated with
lung cancer, RET and ROS1 fusion gene expression, and amplification of
FGFR1. Whole-exome sequencing is being performed on tumors from those
patients with no known somatic mutations. Paired normal and tumor DNA/RNA
samples are being genotyped to distinguish germline from somatic
mutations in both the screening and sequencing phases. Initial screening
has been completed on 130 patients, with the remaining 70 underway. The
mean age of the patients enrolled is 61.7 years, 58.5% are female, and
8.5% are never smokers. In profiling the first 130 African American
patients, we find that only 28% of patients (N = 36) carry a known
somatic mutation that is not present in the germline, far lower than the
41% reported in white patients in our previous studies. Of the identified
mutations, approximately 23.8% are KRAS and 23.8% are PT53 alterations.
The next most frequent somatic alterations are in EGFR (16.7%). The
remaining alterations occurred in only 1 or 2 tumors and include EPHA3,
ERBB2, FGFR1, MET, NOTCH1, NRAS, NTRK2, PIK3CA, PTEN, RET and STK11. Five
percent of patients have tumors with two driver mutations. Half of the
tumors carrying 2 driver mutations had concurrent alterations in KRAS and
TP53. Patients with known genetic alterations were more likely to be
female than patients with no known genetic alterations (p = 0.42), but
did not differ in age, smoking status, pack-years, family history of lung
cancer, history of COPD, stage at diagnosis or histology. Mutations in
EGFR were responsible for the differences by sex. Exome sequencing is
complete for the first 48 of the 92 patients with no known somatic
mutations. Sequences are being aligned using Novoalign and GATK will be
used for variant calling; results will be available soon. Genetic
profiling of NSCLC in African Americans has the potential to both
identify novel mutations, expanding the list of potential targets for
tailored treatments, and aid clinical decision making in African American
patients leading to improvements in outcomes.

