Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation and function of PIK3CA and HRAS in human oral squamous
cell carcinoma cells


Whole-exome sequencing studies showed the mutational landscape of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma including oral cavity. Recent several
reports also demonstrated the somatic mutations of oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), and identified
the mutations of HRAS, BRAF, FGFR3, SMAD4, KIT, PTEN, NOTCH1, AKT1,
CTNNB1, and PTPN11 to predict disease-free survival of OSCC patients. In
this study, we have attempted to elucidate somatic mutations of these
genes and their functions in human OSCC cells. We isolated and cultured
tumor cells from the resected primary tumor (KT-T), metastatic lymph node
(KT-N), and cancerous pleural effusion (KT-M) in the same patient with
OSCC. KT-T cells showed epithelial-like shape, whereas both KT-N and KT-M
cells indicated the morphological changes to fibroblast-like spindle
shape. Genomic DNA was extracted from these cells, and then we performed
the mutational analysis by ultra-deep targeted sequencing using Haloplex
Cancer Research Panel. All types of KT cells had the mutation of TP53
(R141P, C135S, and E182*) and PIK3CA (H1047R), and an additional active
mutation of HRAS (Q61R) was detected in only metastatic KT-N and KT-M
cells. Subsequently, we transfected all KT cells with synthetic small
interfering RNA (siRNA) specific for PIK3CA (siPIK3CA) and/or HRAS
(siHRAS) at the concentration of 10 nM complexed with Lipofectamine
RNAiMAX. We confirmed the knockdown effects of these siRNAs in KT cells
by quantitative RT-PCR. After transfection of these siRNAs for 72 hours,
the growth of KT cells was evaluated by WST-8 assay. Knockdown of PIK3CA
or HRAS expression significantly suppressed the growth of KT-T cells
only, whereas double knockdown of PIK3CA and HRAS inhibited the growth of
KT-N and KT-M cells as well. Next, we investigated the function of mutant
HRAS (Q61R) in KT-T cells. Overexpression of mutant HRAS did not change
the growth rate and morphology of KT-T cells. Finally, we examined the
effects of BEZ-235 (dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor) and trametinib (MEK1/2
inhibitor) on the growth of KT-T, KT-N, and KT-M cells. BEZ-235 (100 nM)
almost completely suppressed the growth of these cells. Trametinib (2 M)
also reduced the growth rate by 16.9% in KT-T, 13.5% in KT-N, and 45.7%
in KT-M cells. Furthermore, BEZ-235 combined with trametinib inhibited
the cell growth more effectively even at low concentrations. These
results suggest that constitutive active mutations of HRAS and PIK3CA
support the growth of human OSCC cells and these signaling pathways may
be useful therapeutic targets for the patients with OSCC.

