Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C alpha suppresses AKT activation in endometrial
cancer


Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecological malignancy and
the fourth leading cancer in women in the United States. Hyperactivation
of the PI3K/AKT pathway is observed in 90% of EC cases and this pathway
is the most prominent driver of endometrial carcinogenesis. Mutations in
multiple PI3K/AKT pathway components (including PTEN, PIK3CA, PIK3R1,
AKT) often coexist in EC, indicating that EC development requires full,
unopposed activation of PI3K/AKT signaling. In this study, we identified
PKC as a negative regulator of AKT activation that suppresses endometrial
carcinogenesis. Our analysis revealed that PKC protein and mRNA are
reduced or lost in 50% of EC cell lines and 60% of human ECs. PKC
deficiency was also observed in hyperplastic endometrial lesions in
murine models with allelic knock-in of mutant Pten (pten4-5/+,
ptenC124R/+ and ptenC129E/+) or endometrial-specific Pten deletion
(ptenpr-/-, ptenltf-/-), indicating that loss of PKC is an early event in
endometrial carcinogenesis.Mechanistic analysis has further revealed that
loss of PKC is independent of changes in PI3K/AKT signaling; however, the
enzyme acts as a potent negative regulator of the PI3K/AKT pathway in EC
cells. PKC agonists reduced AKT phosphorylation/activity in EC cells that
retain PKC, via a PP2A-dependent mechanism. Conversely, PKC knockdown led
to increased AKT phosphorylation. Notably, while PKC agonists did not
affect AKT in EC cells with loss of PKC, exogenous expression of the
enzyme in these cells restored the inhibitory effect of the agonists on
PI3K/AKT signaling. Collectively these data indicate that PKC has a
restraining effect on PI3K/AKT signaling in EC cells, providing a basis
for its loss during endometrial tumor progression.Physiological relevance
of these findings was established using cell lines, patient samples and
mouse models. PKC restoration in human EC cells decreased expression of
oncogenes such as cyclin D1 and Id1 and abolished their
anchorage-independent growth, supporting a tumor suppressive role for the
isozyme in this tissue. Analysis of PKC expression in patient specimens
determined that loss of PKC expression correlates with high grade
disease. Finally, in mice heterozygous for mutant Pten, PKC knockout led
to a 3-fold increase in endometrial tumor burden at three months,
confirming a role of PKC as a tumor suppressor in the endometrium.Taken
together, our results provide evidence that PKC 1) negatively regulates
AKT signaling and the expression of important oncogenes in EC cells; and
2) functions as tumor suppressor in the endometrium whose loss is
associated with disease progression. Thus, PKC signaling represents a
promising biomarker for risk stratification in early stage disease and
may provide insight into therapeutic strategies for late stage
disease.Supported by NIH grants CA036727, CA016056, and DK60632.

