Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRGAP2 expression levels may induce a biphasic metastatic
phenotype in osteosarcoma cell lines


The purpose of this study is to characterize the role of Slit-Robo
GTPase-Activating Protein 2 (SRGAP2) in osteosarcoma (OS) metastasis. OS
is the most common primary bone tumor and the eighth leading pediatric
cancer. Despite combined therapies, treatment failure is experienced
within 5 years of diagnosis by over 40% of patients, generally due to
metastatic disease. Using the conditional Sleeping Beauty transposon
mutagenesis system, our laboratory recently identified candidate tumor
promoting genes in transgenic mice that develop OS, including the
potential tumor suppressor SRGAP2 involved in regulating actin dynamics.
We hypothesized that loss of SRGAP2 would increase the metastatic
potential of OS cell lines in vitro and in vivo, whereas gain would
decrease metastatic potential. Gene expression was amplified with a
stably integrated, tetracycline-inducible over expression vector
containing SRGAP2 cDNA and gene silencing was accomplished with a
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)
targeting the gene. Studies were conducted in the well-characterized
murine osteosarcoma cell lines K12 and its more aggressive derivative
K7M2 and human osteosarcoma cell lines HOS and its more aggressive
derivative 143B. Compared to luciferase-controls, overexpression and
knockout of SRGAP2 had no effect on cell proliferation in K12, K7M2, HOS,
and 143B (n = 4). A reduction of soft agar colony formation was observed
in knockout cell lines but not in cell lines with SRGAP2 overexpression
for K12 and 143B (n = 3); HOS cell lines did not form colonies in soft
agar. Interestingly, overexpression of SRGAP2 decreased wound-healing
closure in 143B and K12 lines, but increased closure time in HOS (n = 4).
Tail vein injections in NRG mice are currently being investigated.
Overexpression of SRGAP2 in K12 decreased development of macrometastases
in lungs, whereas knockout of SRGAP2 eliminated gross detection of lung
masses (n = 3). Future studies include imaging fixed cells to determine
if SRGAP2 knockout and overexpression affects cell morphology and
completing studies with K7M2 lines. These results suggest that SRGAP2 has
a biphasic phenotype in osteosarcoma cell lines, with an optima in
expression for efficient metastasis. It's dual role of deforming cell
membranes independent of its ability to activate Rac GTPases and alter
actin dynamics may be responsible for the observed results.

