Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation regulates EZH2 neoplastic functions in
triple-negative breast cancer


Background: Triple negative (estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor,
HER2-neu negative) breast cancers (TNBC) comprise 15% of all breast
cancers but are responsible for a disproportionately high number of
deaths. Overexpression of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 (Enhancer of
Zeste Homolog 2) is an independent prognostic biomarker significantly
associated with poorly-differentiated TNBCs and poor patient outcome. We
previously identified a novel link between EZH2 and the p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase, an important mediator of progression
and metastasis of TNBC. We found that EZH2 binds to p38, and that EZH2
and activated p38 are concordantly expressed in the metastases of breast
cancer patients. Based on these data and previous in vitro studies, we
hypothesized that p38 MAPK may also regulate EZH2 through phosphorylation
in breast cancer. We further hypothesized that this phosphorylation event
may be important for EZH2 contribution to malignancy.Methods: In order to
test this hypothesis, we performed knockdown rescue experiments in
triple-negative breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-436.
Stable knockdown of EZH2 was achieved using shRNA targeting the 3UTR.
Knockdown of EZH2 was rescued by reintroduction of myc-EZH2 (WT) or a
T367A-EZH2 phosphorylation-deficient mutant. Cell lines were then used in
functional assays of proliferation, migration, and invasion. In order to
further interrogate the importance of this phosphorylation event, we
developed a phospho-specific EZH2 T367 antibody.Results: p38-mediated
phosphorylation of EZH2 at T367 contributes to the migratory and invasive
properties of TNBC. Mechanistically, phosphorylation by p38 does not
affect binding to other PRC2 members but may affect EZH2 activity. We are
currently investigating the relevance of pEZH2 as a biomarker of breast
cancer survival with our new antibody.Conclusions: We provide evidence
that p38 phosphorylation of EZH2 at T367 contributes to malignancy of
triple-negative breast cancers. Our data suggest a new mechanism by which
EZH2 is regulated and may offer an additional mechanism by which EZH2
contributes to TNBC progression.

