Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and anticancer properties of some naturally occurring
sesquiterpene lactones from Pulicaria undulate


Sesquiterpene lactones are natural compounds abundant in several plant
families with a variety of biological activities such as antitumor
effects. Camptothecin is famous topoisomerase interactive agent with
anticancer properties against several types of malignancies. The purpose
of this study is to investigate the potential chemotherapeutic effects of
some naturally occurring sesquiterpene lactones isolated from Pulicaria
undulate. Compounds with promising anticancer profile has been further
investigated for potential chemomodulatory effects to camptothecin in
different tumor cell types. Cytotoxicity of the isolated terpenoids were
assessed against human breast adenocarcinoma (MCF7), human colorectal
cancer (HCT116 and LS174T) and human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2)
cells using sulpharhodamine-B assay after cell exposure for 72 h.
Cytotoxic parameters (IC50 and R-fraction) were calculated from cell
viability after fitting using Emax model. Two sesquiterpene lactones,
2-hydroxy alantolactone and tomentosin, showed considerable cytotoxic
profile against cell lines under investigation with IC50's ranging from 5
to 22 M and from 14 to 39 M, respectively. Treatment with camptothecin
alone showed significant cytotoxicity with IC50's range from 0.13 to 1.5
M in the same panel of cell lines. Equitoxic combination of tomentosin
with camptothecin (combination ratio was 1:100) resulted in 60% reduction
for the IC50 of camptothecin alone in HCT116 cells. On the other hand,
equitoxic combination for hydroxy alantolactone with camptothecin did not
significantly enhance the cytotoxicity of camptothecin against HCT116
cells. To explain the interactive characteristics of hydroxy
alantolactone and tomentosin with camptothecin, annexin-V/PI staining
coupled with flow cytometry analysis for apoptosis and necrosis was
assessed after treatment with camptothecin alone or in combination with
hydroxy alantolactone or tomentosin. Again, tomentosin combination with
camptothecin significantly increased apoptotic as well as necrotic cell
populations compared to camptothecin treatment alone by 2-3 folds. On the
other hand, combination of camptothecin with hydroxy alantolactone
significantly increased apoptotic cell population with reciprocal
decrease in necrotic cell population. In conclusion, hydroxy
alantolactone and tomentosin might be promising anticancer agents.
However, further molecular investigation is required to understand the
nature of interaction between the isolated sesquiterpene lactones and
cornerstone chemotherapeutics such as camptothecin.

