Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CCL2 CCL17 CCL22-CCR4 axis in prostate cancer
metastasis


BACKGROUND: Multiple steps and factors are involved in prostate
carcinogenesis and tumor progression. The early studies have found that
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) have great effects on tumor
developments. TAMs release a variety of cytokines, and chemokines
enabling cancer cells to proliferate, migrate, invade, and metastasize.
Some chemokines and their receptors were reported to play a key role
during these processes of prostate cancer. Prostate cancer cells
themselves also have been shown to express various chemokines and their
receptors, such as CCL2, CCR2, CXCR4. Recently, CCR4 has been reported to
be expressed in breast cancer cells and is associated with lung
metastasis. However, the possible role of CCR4 in prostate cancer has not
been well elucidated, and little is known about the relationship between
TAMs and CCL2/CCL17/CCL22-CCR4 axis in tumor invasion of prostate
cancer.AIM: The aim of our study was to investigate whether TAMs and the
chemokine CCL2 (a low-affinity ligand for CCR4 and a high-affinity ligand
for CCR2), CCL17 and CCL22 (high-affinity ligands for CCR4) -CCR4 axis
promotes prostate cancer progression.METHODS: Human prostate cancer cell
lines and monocyte cell lines were used in this study. To evaluate
effects of chemokines on prostate cancer cells, we performed transwell
migration and invasion assay co-cultured with or without macrophages.
PCR, western blot, immunocytochemistry, immunohistochemistry, human
chemokine array, ELISA were done to elucidate the mechanisms of prostate
cancer progression caused by macrophages.RESULTS: Chemokine receptor CCR2
and CCR4 were expressed in human prostate cancer cell lines both in mRNA
and protein level. Prostate cancer tissue also expressed both CCR2 and
CCR4. In vitro co-culture system of prostate cancer cell lines and
macrophages showed that the level of chemokine CCL2 from both prostate
cancer cell lines and macrophages was increased and chemokine receptor
CCR2 and CCR4 expressions were increased in prostate cancer cell lines.
They promoted the migration and invasion of prostate cancer cell lines
via their receptors and also enhanced phosphorylation of protein kinase
Akt and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). Our results
suggested that CCL2/CCL17/CCL22-CCR4 axis might play an important role in
prostate cancer progression.CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that chemokine
receptor CCR2 and CCR4, for the first time, were expressed by prostate
cancer cell lines. CCL2/CCL17/CCL22-CCR4 axis, which is activated by
TAMs, may be a potential candidate for molecular targeted therapy in the
future.

