Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of small molecule direct AMPK activators for the
treatment of cancer


5-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key sensor of cellular energy
status and is critical for maintaining energy homeostasis under
conditions of nutrient stress. During cellular transformation, metabolic
reprogramming enables the aberrant growth and proliferation of tumor
cells. Both positive and negative roles for AMPK in tumor cell
proliferation and survival have been reported. However, only a limited
number of studies addressed this question with potent direct AMPK
activators. AMPK exists as heterotrimers composed of the catalytic
subunit and reguratory subunits and . We expressed the full length of all
three human AMPK subunits in insect cells, purified the heterotrimer
complexes, and used them for biochemical screening and characterization
of AMPK activators. The purified complexes displayed basal activity,
which was further enhanced by AMP. The compounds we identified potently
activated the complexes in vitro at AC(2X)s (the concentration that gives
a twofold activation) of 0.001-0.3 M. Importantly, the compounds
up-regulated substrate phosphorylation (pS79 Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase)
and/or auto-phosphorylation (pT172 AMPK) in multiple cancer cell lines
including HepG2 hepatoma cells, A549 liver kinase B1 (LKB1) null lung
cancer cells, and MOLM14 myeloid leukemia cells, indicating activation
was irrespective of functional status of LKB1, which is a key
AMPK-activation kinase. Activation of AMPK by the compounds was also
confirmed using native AMPK isolated from normal tissues and tumor cells.
We further investigated anti-proliferative effects of the compounds and
found that up-regulation of AMPK kinase activity was correlated with
anti-proliferative effects in A549 and MOLM14, but not in HepG2,
suggesting that positive effects of direct AMPK activators could be
cell-type dependent. Interestingly, we identified compounds that display
comparable AMPK activation in HepG2 and A549 yet possessed divergent
activities on proliferation across a panel of tumor lines. Analysis of
cellular signaling across several of these tumor lines with this set of
the compounds revealed dose-dependent effects on mTORC1 substrates,
feedback signaling to PI3K and mTORC2, and inhibition of kinases
downstream of RAF. Direct activation of AMPK could be a good therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of subsets of cancers.

