Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new innovative and robust targeted deep sequencing system: 36
hours turn round time from patient samples to the final mutation report


The emergence of next-generation sequencing (NGS) has changed the
paradigm for genetic and genomic studies in many medical and life science
fields. Despite its growing popularity and importance in many life
science applications, several factors such as complicated sample
preparation, high cost, and time-consuming data analyses may prevent NGS
applications from being more widely used in clinical and research
settings. Therefore, it is crucial that the current methods are improved
or newly developed to become faster, more robust, and accurate in NGS
applications. Targeted sequencing, focusing on small but important gene
sets or genetic regions, is a very powerful approach to screen
disease-related key genes. Reductions in cost and experimental time as
well as availability of targeted sequencing are fueling the use of NGS
for many genetic applications.We have developed a new, simple, and robust
sample preparation method called NextDay Seq, enabling us to obtain
targeted deep sequencing data within the next day of sample arrival.
Researchers and clinicians can obtain sequencing data within 36 hours.
Our method starts with a 15 minute DNA extraction kit followed by library
preparation, sequencing, and then data analysis. The NextDay Seq library
preparation method directly ligates adapters to targeted genes/amplicons.
This new protocol does not require restriction enzyme digestion (i.e. Ion
Torrent Ampliseq) or hybridization of the target region (i.e. Illumina
TruSeq). It is faster and simpler than previously referenced library
preparation kits. We have also developed a new data analysis tool called
DanPA: a fast, accurate, and robust NGS data analysis tool. DanPA, yet
developed mainly for targeted sequencing analysis, can also be used for
whole exome or genome sequencing data analysis. DanPA detects any kind of
reported mutations registered in the database such as Catalogue of
Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC). We have so far analyzed 866 cancer
FFPE tissue samples, 431 flash-frozen tissue samples, 18 cell lines
samples, and 515 other biological or synthesized (i.e. plasmids) samples
using these new inventions.Our system will help clinicians in better
deciding which therapeutic options (personalized medicine) or biological
applications are optimal to treat patients with specific mutations.
Cancer patients should have exact mutation information in a timely manner
in order to select treatment options. By combining our new FFPE DNA
extraction method, NextDay Seq library preparation method, and DanPA data
analysis software, we are able to provide key mutation data to patients,
medical doctors, and researchers within 36 hours (next day). We believe
this new innovative NGS system can change the paradigm for mutation
screening in clinical and research applications.

