Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adjuvant effect of anti-PD-L1 in boosting HER2-targeted T cell
adoptive immunotherapy


In a phase I clinical trial, we used anti-CD3 x anti-HER2 bispecific
antibody (HER2Bi) armed T cells. Utilizing HER2-directed T cells
benefitted both HER2+ patients and patients with 1 or 2+ HER2 expression,
ones that would be considered HER2-negative by classical criteria. We
have also shown that the level of cancer stem cell (CSC) marker ALDH in
HER2+ breast cancer cells (ALDHhighHER2+) is much higher than that in
HER2- breast cancer cells (ALDHlowHER2-), and that in luminal breast
cancers that are considered HER2-, HER2 is actually selectively expressed
in the ALDHhigh CSC population. These observations might account for the
surprising result that HER2Bi-armed T cells, while intended to target
HER2, seemed to benefit HER2- patients after adoptive transfer. In this
study, we found that the HER2Bi-armed T cells used in the clinical trial
killed ALDHhigh human breast CSCs isolated from MCF7 (HER2-) tumor
significantly more than ALDHlow MCF7 cells in vitro, while the same
HER2Bi-armed T cells killed ALDHhigh human breast CSCs (ALDHhighHER2+)
isolated from BT474 (HER2+) tumor equally to ALDHlow BT474 cells
(ALDHlowHER2+). We then tested the mouse HER2 (neu) expression on
ALDHhigh vs. ALDHlow 4T1 cells (mouse TNBC), and found that mHER2 was
selectively expressed in the ALDHhigh 4T1 CSC population. These results
replicated our findings in human breast cancers that HER2 is selectively
expressed on CSCs, even in HER2- murine tumors, such as 4T1. For mHER2
targeting in animal models, we generated anti-mouse HER2-CD3 bispecific
(mHER2Bi) that binds to mouse HER2 and mouse CD3. In vitro, the
mHER2Bi-armed T cells killed ALDHhigh 4T1 CSCs significantly more than
ALDHlow 4T1 cells. In vivo, adoptive transfer of mHER2Bi-armed T cells
for HER2 targeted therapy showed antitumor effect in mHER2- 4T1-bearing
host. To boost the therapeutic efficacy of mHER2-targeted T cells, we
administrated anti-mouse PD-L1 during mHER2Bi-armed T cell adoptive
transfer. This combination decreased metastases significantly more than
the use of either strategy alone. Collectively, these studies have
generated evidence providing proofs of principle that due to the
selective expression of HER2 on CSCs, HER2-targeted T cell therapy could
benefit HER2- host as well as HER2+ hosts via immune destruction of HER2+
CSCs, and use of anti-PD-L1 as an adjuvant could significantly boost the
efficacy of HER2-targeted T cell therapy.

