Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung cancer cells growing under prolonged period of serum
starvation display increased stemness


Purpose: Resistance to anticancer drugs is a common cause of failure in
chemotherapy. We recently found that adherent cells growing under
prolonged periods (7-12 days) of serum starvation become highly resistant
to conventional anticancer drugs such as Paclitaxel, Hydroxyurea and
Colchicine but retain sensitivity to therapeutic levels of the cardiac
glycoside Digitoxin.Objectives: The main goal of this study is to
characterize the biological properties of cells growing under prolonged
periods of serum starvation (PPSS), and to elucidate the underlying
mechanism of chemoresistance to Paclitaxel and sensitivity to Digitoxin
with particular emphasis on Sox2 and the PI3K/AKT signaling
pathway.Experimental setup: Distribution of cell cycle was characterized
by flow cytometry. Cell viability was assessed using the MTT assay.
Western blotting was employed to evaluate the expression of several key
protein markers of cancer stemness (Sox2, Wnt), multidrug resistance
(MDR1, ABCG2), epithelial mesenchymal transition (Vimentin), and cell
survival (Bcl-2, XIAP, PI3K/AKT).Results: Cells grown under PPSS showed a
higher proportion of cells in G1/S and G2 compared to cells growing under
routine culture conditions (RCCs). Western blot analysis showed that
these cells expressed higher levels of Sox2, MDR1, ABCG2, Bcl-2 compared
to cells growing under RCCs. Pretreatment of cells for 3 h with Verapamil
or Sorafenib (MDR1 and ABCG2 inhibitors, respectively) followed by
co-incubation with Paclitaxel for 72 h did not overcome Paclitaxel
resistance. Obatoclax (a Bcl-2 inhibitor), Wortmannin or LY294002 (PI3K
inhbitors) also failed to overcome Paclitaxel resistance. It was
interesting to observe that cells growing under PPSS were highly
resistant to Obatoclax, Wortmannin and LY294002 compared to cells growing
under RCCs. However, these cells were highly sensitive to treatment with
Digitoxin.Conclusions: It is likely that multiple mechanisms (increased
stemness, overexpression of multidrug resistance protein and prosurvival
proteins) contributes to the resistance of cells under PPSS to
Paclitaxel, Obatoclax and PI3K inhibitors. Preliminary results indicates
that Digitoxin exerts its antiproliferative effect in part by
downregulating Sox2. However, the lack of effect of Wortmannin and
LY294002 on Paclitaxel resistance suggests that this effect is not via
the PI3K/AKT pathway. Adherent cells growing under PPSS provide a simple
yet powerful system to screen for drugs targeting cancer stemness.

