Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the novel lncRNA, PCAT14, clinically
associated with metastatic prostate cancer


Each year, over 180,000 men are diagnosed with prostate cancer in the
United States. Advances in research have established a molecular
stratification of prostate cancer disease improving screening and
treatment options. However, some patients lack these genetic aberrations,
indicating that prostate tumors may harbor disease-associated noncoding
RNAs that further characterize molecular subtypes. Long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) are largely unexplored and are emerging as a new aspect of
cancer biology through advances in sequencing technologies. To discover
novel transcripts, and overcome the shortcomings of relying on incomplete
or inaccurate annotations, we focused on an approach using a genome-wide
annotation-independent method to identify regions of differential
expression named SWORD (Sliding WindOw Region Discovery tool). We applied
SWORD to recently generated data from aggressive prostate tumors and
adjacent normal tissue. We discovered ten novel lncRNAs including the
previously annotated Prostate Cancer Associated Transcript-14 (PCAT14).
PCAT14 was consistently altered in an integrative analysis performed
across three patient cohorts consisting of primary tumors with matched
control transcriptome sequencing and Affymetrix gene expression including
metastatic tumors. Utilizing the clinical data associated with the
Affymetrix cohort, PCAT14 significantly associated with both high (9) and
low (6) Gleason scores. Interestingly, PCAT14 is highly upregulated in
primary tumors relative to control tissue and its expression is
downregulated in metastatic tumors relative to primary tumors. These data
suggest that PCAT14 expression promotes a metastatic phenotype.
Therefore, we assessed PCAT14 expression within a cohort of 1008 radical
prostatectomy specimens from three independent patient cohorts across
institutes. We found that patients with high versus low PCAT14 expression
showed significantly different rates of distant metastasis free survival,
biochemical recurrence free survival, prostate cancer specific survival,
and overall survival. Moreover, PCAT14 was implicated with protein-coding
genes involved in biological processes promoting aggressive disease. In
vitro experiments in prostate cancer cell lines further supported the
clinical data associating PCAT14 with aggressive disease. Overall, we
discovered that PCAT14 is broadly deregulated, promotes aggressive
oncogenic phenotypes, and is significantly prognostic for multiple
clinical endpoints supporting its significance for predicting metastatic
disease. Due to its tissue-specific expression PCAT14 may serve as a
valuable biomarker to define a subgroup of high-grade prostate carcinomas
and improve disease management and patient prognosis.

