Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New platinum (Pt)-based anticancer agents, bearing a PtN2SO
coordination core, for treating advanced melanoma


The aim of this project is to demonstrate the potential utility of a new
series of platinum (Pt) compounds having a PtN2SO coordination core in
treating advanced melanoma. There is currently an unsatisfied medical
need for a more effective treatment of advanced melanoma, which is
notorious for its prominent resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs due to elevated DNA repair capacity and dysregulation of cancer
apoptotic pathways. Platinum (Pt)-based anticancer drugs, exemplified by
cisplatin, are key component in combination chemotherapy. They bind to
DNA and form mainly the DNA-Pt bifunctional crosslink, subsequently
leading to apoptosis to mediate cell death. A series of new Pt(II)
compounds possessing a bidentate ligand modified from oxaliplatin has
been synthesized, with one of the oxygen ligating atom substituted for a
sulfur atom (resulting in a PtN2SO coordination core structure). This
novel design is to minimize competition from protein and other
bionucleophiles for the Pt drug but maximize drug-DNA interaction. We
hypothesize that the unique features of the new PtN2SO compounds may make
them good candidates for treating advanced melanoma by (i) overcoming DNA
repair-mediated drug resistance; and (ii) generating excess reactive
oxygen species (ROS) to selectively trigger apoptosis in melanoma cells.
The new compounds were found to be more cytotoxic than cisplatin in a
panel of human and mouse melanoma cell lines. Importantly, the new
compounds were also found to be minimally affected by Pt resistance,
which is presumably caused by the formation of unique DNA-Pt monoadduct
and reduced DNA repair. DNA-platination study in melanoma cell lines
revealed that the new PtN2SO compounds are able to form more DNA-Pt
adducts and there was less repair than treatment with cisplatin. The new
compounds were also found to cause a greater induction of the MAPKs (p38,
JNK and ERK) than cisplatin to mediate apoptosis. On the other hand, at
equipotent concentration, some of the new Pt compounds were found to
generate more ROS than cisplatin as indicated by a general fluorescent
dye-based oxidative stress indicator. Interestingly, the cytotoxicity of
the new compounds were blocked to a greater extent than cisplatin by ROS
scavengers, suggesting a more prominent role played by ROS in mediating
the cytotoxicity of the new compounds. Our study thus advocates further
investigation of the new PtN2SO compounds in treating advanced melanoma.

