Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inducible knockdown of insulin receptor substrate I desensitizes
ER alpha response to both agonist (estradiol) and antagonist
(fulvestrant) in MCF-7L breast cancer cells


Insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins are adaptor proteins
phosphorylated by insulin and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) receptors.
In addition to their roles in regulating IGF and insulin responses, IRS
proteins function in other pathways in normal and malignant physiology.
Our data suggested that IRS1 enhanced IGF/insulin stimulated
proliferation while IRS-2 was important in regulating motility. Therefore
IRS proteins could be potential therapeutic target for cancer therapy. We
have previously shown that reduced IRS1 can hinder cancer cell growth and
tumorigenicity stimulated by IGF-I, IGF-II and insulin. In this study, we
evaluated whether inducible IRS1 suppression affected estrogen
receptor-alpha (ER) responsiveness to ER agonist estradiol and antagonist
fulvestrant. We evaluated several doxycycline inducible shRNA IRS1
constructs (Thermo Scientific pTRIPZ inducible Lentiviral IRS1 shRNA)
expressed in the ER+ MCF-7L cell line. Doxcycline treatment reduced IRS1
mRNA and protein levels confirmed by qRT-PCR and immunoblot in several
independently selected clones. We used a representative clone (3G5) to
evaluate effects on ER function. After IRS1 inducible knockdown,
estradiol (E2) stimulated growth was suppressed. To investigate if
reduced IRS1 regulated E2 stimulated binding of ER to the pS2 estrogen
response element (ERE), chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were
performed. Compared to non-induced MCF-7L cells, inducible IRS1
suppression demonstrated significantly reduced binding of ER to this
promoter. The pharmacologic antagonist of IRS proteins, NT157, also
resulted in diminished ER binding to pS2 promoter. mRNA of several ER
regulated genes, such as PGR, TFF1, etc, showed downregulation in
response to E2 when IRS-1 was suppressed. We have shown that the pure
steroidal ER antagonist fulvestrant activates EGFR signaling in an ER
dependent manner through upregulation of EGFR ligands. However, inducible
IRS1 suppression blocked this ER-dependent activation of EGFR
phosphorylation by fulvestrant yet EGFR phosphorylation remained intact
when stimulated by addition of EGF. These data suggest that regulation of
EGFR ligands by fulvestrant also requires IRS-1 expression. We conclude
that ER function is affected by IRS-1 expression. Thus, IRS-1 may also be
a target in endocrine responsive and resistant breast cancers.

