Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alpha-tocopheryloxyacetic acid (aTEA) induced immune activation
synergizes with radiation therapy to treat primary and metastatic murine
mammary carcinoma


Immunotherapy has now emerged as a promising treatment for metastatic
cancer. However, immunotherapy for advanced stage breast carcinoma
remains an unmet need. Here we demonstrate that the novel immunomodulator
alpha-tocopheryloxyacetic acid (aTEA) synergizes with radiation therapy
(RT) in a metastatic murine mammary carcinoma model to improve tumor
control more than each individual therapy, and we propose a mechanism
based on the stimulation of type I interferons by aTEA.For in-vivo
studies, C57BL/6 mice bearing 4T1 murine mammary carcinoma lesions were
treated with dietary aTEA, 20 Gy x 2 fractions ionizing radiotherapy, or
the combination of aTEA/RT. Immune activation in animals treated with
dietary aTEA was determined by analyzing the percentage of proliferating
CD4 and CD8 T cells using a Ki-67 assay. Pulmonary metastatic burden was
determined using a clonogenic metastasis assay. For in-vitro studies,
murine mammary carcinoma cell lines were treated with aTEA or LPS and
whole cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot. Expression of
interferon regulation factor 3 (IRF3) pathway proteins, including
phospho-TANK binding protein kinase 1 (TBK1) and stimulator of interferon
genes (STING) were determined.Our results indicate that treatment with
the combination of aTEA and RT significantly improves tumor control
compared to either treatment alone. Combination therapy resulted in
complete and durable tumor regression in a subset of animals treated, an
effect not observed with aTEA or RT alone. Dietary administration of aTEA
stimulates proliferation of both CD4 and CD8 T cells and significantly
reduces metastatic burden in 4T1 tumor bearing mice. This immune
stimulatory effect of aTEA appears to be mediated by reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production and release of type I interferons through a
STING mediated pathway.These preliminary results suggest that the
combination of aTEA and ionizing radiation may be a viable therapy for
the treatment of metastatic breast carcinoma. This therapeutic
combination may provide more durable response to radiotherapy while
simultaneously reducing further metastatic spread.

