Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of sorafenib resistance in acute myeloid leukemia


Activating mutations in FLT3 occur in up to 35% of patients with AML and
correlate with poor prognosis. Therapy directed against FLT3 has been
shown to induce response in patients with AML, but these responses are
almost always transient. Dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors have displayed
promising results in the treatment of solid tumors, and of hematological
cancers. In this report we describe that a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor is
effective against sorafenib-responsive, and -resistant, AML cell lines
both in vitro and in vivo. We generated two cell lines by sustained
treatment with sorafenib. Parental cell lines carry the FLT3-ITD mutation
and are highly responsive to FLT3 inhibitors, while sorafenib-resistant
cell lines display resistance to multiple FLT3 inhibitors. Next
generation sequencing did not show any significant difference in the
mutational burden in between responsive and resistant cell lines. While
next generation sequencing identified FLT3-D835Y with an allele-depth of
67:37 in a resistant cell line, Sanger sequencing and protein
mass-spectroscopy did not identify any acquired mutations in the kinase
domain of FLT3 in the resistant cells. Moreover, sorafenib treatment
effectively blocked FLT3 activation in resistant cells, while it was
unable to block colony formation or cell survival, suggesting that the
resistant cells are no longer dependent on FLT3. Gene expression analysis
of sorafenib-sensitive and -resistant cell lines, as well as of blasts
from patients with sorafenib-resistant AML, suggested an enrichment of
the PI3K/mTOR pathway that correlated with the resistant phenotype, which
was further supported by phospho-specific-antibody array analysis. The
selective PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, gedatolisib, efficiently blocked
proliferation, colony and tumor formation of resistant cell lines as well
as induces apoptosis. Taken together, our data suggest that aberrant
activation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway results in FLT3-inhibitors-resistance
and a dual specific PI3K/mTOR inhibitor is an effective treatment in both
tyrosine kinase inhibitor sensitive and resistant AML.

