Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of copy number, sequence variant and gene
expression data in kidney chromophobe cohort


The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) contains various types of genomic data
from a wide variety of cancers, including several rare tumor types. Here
we analyze copy number, sequence variant and RNA-Seq data from TCGA for
kidney chromophobe (KICH). Level 1 (raw) data, rather than Level 3
(segmented) data, from TCGA was used for an integrated analysis of copy
number and gene expression profiles of the two cancers. Using the copy
number and SNP probes, re-processed tumor profiles were more consistent
with a control set in terms of median number of copy number events,
sample ploidy, and breakpoint genes than with the published level 3 TCGA
data. Probe-level data were analyzed using Nexus Copy Number SNP-FASST2
algorithm (a multi-state HMM algorithm), with systematic correction
applied to correct for GC biases. Additionally we performed manual
baseline adjustment to correct for sample ploidy based on whole-genome
B-allele frequency data for each sample. Overall, the median number of
copy number events in the KICH TCGA data set was reduced from 408 (in the
level 3 set) to 85. After manual inspection, more than 87% of the TCGA
KICH samples available at level 3 were found to have incorrect baseline
ploidy assignments. Given KICH samples are known to have low ploidy
overall, this step was critical for downstream analysis. RNA-Seq results
for the entire cohort were evaluated to obtain normalized relative RNA
expression. Somatic sequence variation results from whole exome
sequencing and relative RNA expression were integrated with the
individual copy number profiles to yield integrated per-sample results
across all three data modalities. Aggregate analysis indicates highly
recurrent losses (50-85% of samples) on chromosomes 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17
and 21. Lower level recurrent losses (15-20% of samples) were identified
on chromosomes 3, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 18. Concordance analysis revealed
statistically significant subsets of samples with co-occurring lower
level recurrent losses. Aggregate sequence mutation analysis of
chromosomes among 3, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 18 did not identify any mutational
hotspots. Integration with RNA-Seq expression data from each tumor type
revealed statistically significant correlations (pThe Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) contains various types of genomic data from a wide variety of
cancers, including several rare tumor types. Here we analyze copy number,
sequence variant and RNA-Seq data from TCGA for kidney chromophobe
(KICH). Level 1 (raw) data, rather than Level 3 (segmented) data, from
TCGA was used for an integrated analysis of copy number and gene
expression profiles of the two cancers. Using the copy number and SNP
probes, re-processed tumor profiles were more consistent with a control
set in terms of median number of copy number events, sample ploidy, and
breakpoint genes than with the published level 3 TCGA data. Probe-level
data were analyzed using Nexus Copy Number SNP-FASST2 algorithm (a
multi-state HMM algorithm), with systematic correction applied to correct
for GC biases. Additionally we performed manual baseline adjustment to
correct for sample ploidy based on whole-genome B-allele frequency data
for each sample. Overall, the median number of copy number events in the
KICH TCGA data set was reduced from 408 (in the level 3 set) to 85. After
manual inspection, more than 87% of the TCGA KICH samples available at
level 3 were found to have incorrect baseline ploidy assignments. Given
KICH samples are known to have low ploidy overall, this step was critical
for downstream analysis. RNA-Seq results for the entire cohort were
evaluated to obtain normalized relative RNA expression. Somatic sequence
variation results from whole exome sequencing and relative RNA expression
were integrated with the individual copy number profiles to yield
integrated per-sample results across all three data modalities. Aggregate
analysis indicates highly recurrent losses (50-85% of samples) on
chromosomes 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17 and 21. Lower level recurrent losses
(15-20% of samples) were identified on chromosomes 3, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 18.
Concordance analysis revealed statistically significant subsets of
samples with co-occurring lower level recurrent losses. Aggregate
sequence mutation analysis of chromosomes among 3, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 18 did
not identify any mutational hotspots. Integration with RNA-Seq expression
data from each tumor type revealed statistically significant correlations
(p<0.05) with these copy number alterations, identifying potential driver
genes of interest. Closer evaluation of copy number alteration and
RNA-Seq expression at the individual sample level confirmed co-occurrence
of significantly downregulated RNA expression within these regions of
loss but no expression changes in samples without loss. This correlated
with an overall difference in survival but was not statistically
significant, given the overall small size of the data set. While still
limiting in sample size, the TCGA KICH data series offers unique insight
into a rare tumor type. Cross data integration for individual samples
offers additional strength and validity to findings initially uncovered
through traditional aggregate analysis.

