Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput single cell gene expression profiling by multiplex
qPCR


Single cell gene expression analysis is a powerful technique that
provides a unique and insightful perspective on biological pathways and
processes. Here we present a robust workflow that enables fast and
accurate analysis of up to 100 genes in isolated single cells. Our
workflow is highly sensitive, by assessing RNA reference standards we
find that a single RNA transcript is detected with about 80% efficiency.
We used this workflow to study differentiation in cultured NTera2 cells
(NT2), a human embryonic stem cell model system. We analyzed untreated
NT2 cells, and NT2 cells treated with low and high doses of retinoic acid
(RA) for 10 days to initiate differentiation to a neuronal lineage. The
expression levels of 16 genes were quantified in 164 single cells by
multiplex real-time qPCR with two technical replicates. The entire
experiment, from cultured cells to results, can be completed in 2-3 days
and requires four 384-well qPCR plates for gene expression
quantification. We find that control cells and cells treated with a high
dose of RA (10 uM) are relatively homogeneous in the expression levels of
the targeted genes. However cells treated with a low dose of RA (0.25 uM)
exhibit significant heterogeneity with respect to gene expression; about
half of the cells are similar to the high-dose RA cells, the other cells
exhibit a wide range of partial differentiation. Interestingly, we find
that LEFTY2 expression is almost exclusive to the low dose RA cells and
strongly correlates with partial differentiation. A time-course study
analyzing cell populations reveals that LEFTY2 is only transiently
expressed in differentiating NT2 cells with peak expression at 3 days of
high dose RA treatment. These findings imply that, in NT2 cells, LEFTY2
is a potential biomarker of early differentiation. In summary, we present
an accurate, sensitive and robust single cell analysis procedure that
uses standard reagents and platforms. We envision that this workflow will
enable researchers to investigate cell heterogeneity in biological
pathways in a cost-effective way.

