Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel live imaging system for inflammation-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colorectal cancers


Background: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a biological
process, by which epithelial cancer cells acquire the mesenchymal
phenotype with malignant properties for invasion and metastasis, leading
to poor prognosis. However, as EMT is a reversible process and depends on
tumor microenvironment, the precise role of EMT in cancer progression
remains unclear. Inflammatory microenvironment has been shown to be
responsible for the development and progression of colorectal cancers. To
evaluate the implication of EMT in the inflammation-mediated colorectal
cancer progression, a live imaging system for EMT is needed on the in
vitro and in vivo experiments. In this study, we generated the
EMT-detectable colorectal cancer cells by introducing mesenchymal cell
marker promoter-driven fluorescence protein expression vector, and
investigated whether inflammation-induced EMT is detectable in
vitro.Methods: To generate the EMT-detectable colorectal cancer cells
HCT116-VIM635, human colorectal cancer cell line HCT116 was stably
transfected with vimentin promoter-driven red fluorescence protein
TurboFP635 expression vector. EMT was induced in HCT116-VIM635 cells by
treatment with inflammatory cytokines, IL-1 (1 ng/ml) and TNF- (20
ng/ml), or by co-culture with mouse macrophage cell line RAW264.7 in the
presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (200 ng/ml). The time-lapse live
imaging was observed by confocal laser scanning microscope. Migration and
invasion properties were examined by transwell chamber assays. The
fluorescence intensity was measured by microplate reader and flow
cytometric analysis. The expression of EMT-related markers was assessed
by Western blot analysis.Results: Administration of IL-1 or TNF- induced
the TurboFP635 expression in consistent with morphological change like
mesenchymal phenotype in HCT116-VIM635 cells. Removal of these
inflammatory cytokines attenuated the TurboFP635 expression and
morphological change in HCT116-VIM635 cells, suggesting the detection of
reverse EMT process in these cells. Inflammatory cytokines also induced
the migration and invasion properties and the expression of EMT-related
markers in HCT116-VIM635 cells. Moreover, co-culture with RAW264.7 cells
stimulated with LPS also induced the TurboFP635 expression and
morphological change as well as inflammatory cytokines in HCT116-VIM635
cells.Conclusions: Our results suggest that this unique live imaging
system for EMT has a great potential to detect reversible EMT process
during inflammation-induced cancer progression. This system would be
useful strategy to assess the role of EMT during inflammation-mediated
cancer progression in vivo.

