Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ETV6-RUNX1 targets a developmentally restricted embryonic human
B-myeloid progenitor


Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (cALL) is distinct from that in
adults with higher incidence, better prognosis and a distinct mutational
spectrum. One hypothesis for this difference is that cALL arises in
transient cells unique to early human development. We explored this in
ETV6-RUNX1 cALL where evidence from twins and neonatal heel prick testing
has shown that this mutation arises in utero and is an initiating event.
We characterized B cell development in first trimester human fetal liver
(FL) to identify compartments vulnerable to ETV6-RUNX1. Using CD19 as a
marker of B lineage commitment we found the first CD19+ B cells emerge in
the human FL at Carnegie Stage (CS) 17 and were distinct from adult in
that the majority expressed surface IL7 receptor. We used IL7R to
identify a CD19-IL7R+ B progenitor compartment that produced B cells in
vitro, possessed DJH recombination, but also had monocytic potential.
Single cell analysis of CS20 IL7R+ progenitors revealed co-expression of
lymphoid and myeloid programmes, whereas at CS17 they were strongly
myeloid primed indicating that IL7R+ progenitors acquire lymphoid
potential in this developmental window. Some co-expression of lymphoid
and myeloid programmes also persisted in CS20 FL B cells. We tested
whether FL B cell development could be modeled using human pluripotent
stem cells (hPSCs). In vitro B cell differentiation of hPSCs produced
IL7R expressing pro and preB cells as well as an IL7R+ progenitor that
switched from myeloid to B-myeloid priming during culture. At the global
transcriptional level the hPSC lymphoid hierarchy mapped closely with FL,
with both separating from adult suggesting that hPSCs provide a
developmentally relevant model of early FL B lymphopoiesis. We next used
CRIPSR-directed homologous recombination to engineer the expression of
ETV6-RUNX1 under the endogenous ETV6 promoter. ETV6-RUNX1 hPSCs displayed
a partial block in B cell differentiation at the level of the IL7R+
progenitor. ETV6-RUNX1 expressing B cells co-expressed an abnormal
B-myeloid gene expression signature akin to that seen in the IL7R+
progenitor. Both the transcriptional and differentiation phenotypes were
dependent on ETV6-RUNX1 as demonstrated by their reversion upon
cre-mediated excision of the knock-in cassette. Our data support a model
where expression of ETV6-RUNX1 inhibits lymphoid specification in an
early FL IL7R+ lymphomyeloid progenitor, arresting B lineage
differentiation and resulting in the production of myeloid-primed B
cells. This may explain the relatively high levels of myeloid antigen
expression lineage promiscuity seen in cALL. ETV6-RUNX1 hPSCs will afford
the systematic evaluation of the contribution of additional mutations
seen in cALL and may offer a tractable platform for drug screening. In
conclusion we propose that a novel IL7R+ lymphomyeloid progenitor in the
human FL is a candidate target cell for in utero pre-leukemic initiation
in cALL.

