Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) enhances
obesity-related breast tumorigenesis


Introduction and Aim: Epidemiological studies have shown an association
between obesity and poor breast cancer prognosis. We have reported that
IGFBP-3 influences both breast cancer growth and adipocyte maturation.
This study investigated the role of endogenous IGFBP-3 on the development
of obesity and subsequently on breast tumor growth. Methods: Wild-type
(WT) C57BL/6 or IGFBP-3 knock-out (BP3KO) mice were fed either a high-fat
diet (HFD) or control chow diet for 15 weeks, then injected with the
syngeneic mouse breast cancer cell line E0771 in the 4th left mammary
gland. When the largest tumor reached 1000 mm3, tissues including the
mammary fat pad were excised, formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded for
immunohistochemical analysis. Results and Conclusion: Compared to WT
mice, BP3KO mice showed both significantly reduced weight gain and
mammary fat pad mass (contralateral to tumor) in response to HFD (p
Introduction and Aim: Epidemiological studies have shown an association
between obesity and poor breast cancer prognosis. We have reported that
IGFBP-3 influences both breast cancer growth and adipocyte maturation.
This study investigated the role of endogenous IGFBP-3 on the development
of obesity and subsequently on breast tumor growth. Methods: Wild-type
(WT) C57BL/6 or IGFBP-3 knock-out (BP3KO) mice were fed either a high-fat
diet (HFD) or control chow diet for 15 weeks, then injected with the
syngeneic mouse breast cancer cell line E0771 in the 4th left mammary
gland. When the largest tumor reached 1000 mm3, tissues including the
mammary fat pad were excised, formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded for
immunohistochemical analysis. Results and Conclusion: Compared to WT
mice, BP3KO mice showed both significantly reduced weight gain and
mammary fat pad mass (contralateral to tumor) in response to HFD (p <
0.0001, 1-way ANOVA), despite similar food intake between WT and BP3KO
mice on HFD. E0771 tumor weight and volume were overall increased by HFD
independent of IGFBP-3 status (p = 0.051), and decreased in BP3KO mice
independently of diet (p Introduction and Aim: Epidemiological studies
have shown an association between obesity and poor breast cancer
prognosis. We have reported that IGFBP-3 influences both breast cancer
growth and adipocyte maturation. This study investigated the role of
endogenous IGFBP-3 on the development of obesity and subsequently on
breast tumor growth. Methods: Wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 or IGFBP-3 knock-out
(BP3KO) mice were fed either a high-fat diet (HFD) or control chow diet
for 15 weeks, then injected with the syngeneic mouse breast cancer cell
line E0771 in the 4th left mammary gland. When the largest tumor reached
1000 mm3, tissues including the mammary fat pad were excised,
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded for immunohistochemical analysis.
Results and Conclusion: Compared to WT mice, BP3KO mice showed both
significantly reduced weight gain and mammary fat pad mass (contralateral
to tumor) in response to HFD (p < 0.0001, 1-way ANOVA), despite similar
food intake between WT and BP3KO mice on HFD. E0771 tumor weight and
volume were overall increased by HFD independent of IGFBP-3 status (p =
0.051), and decreased in BP3KO mice independently of diet (p < 0.001,
2-way ANOVA). Despite differences in tumor volumes and weights, tumors
from WT and BP3KO mice did not show differences in either the number of
mitotically active (Ki67+) or apoptotic (cleaved caspase-3+) cells.
Tumors from BP3KO mice however, showed greater infiltration of CD3+
T-cells compared to WT mice (p = 0.0299, 2-way ANOVA). WT and BP3KO mice
showed similar intra-tumoral mean vessel densities (CD31+ area) but
differed in terms of the relationship between vessel density and final
tumor volume. Increased vessel density was associated with decreased
tumor volume in BP3KO mice (r = -0.62, p = 0.03, Spearman's correlation
test) in contrast to the increased vessel density associated with
increased tumor volume in wild-type mice (r = 0.63, p = 0.02, Spearman's
correlation test). These data suggest that endogenous (circulating and/or
stromal) IGFBP-3 (i) has a potentially stimulatory role in the expansion
of adipose tissue, (ii) can enhance mammary tumor growth in
immune-competent mice, potentially by influencing T-cell infiltration
into the tumor and (iii) may influence the relationship between tumor
vascularity and growth.

