Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-671-5p and miR-638 serve as novel biomarkers for early breast
cancer detection


Breast cancer progression involves stepwise transition from atypical
ductal hyperplasia (ADH), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) to invasive
ductal carcinoma (IDC). Percutaneous core needle biopsy (CNB) is the
standard procedure after an abnormal mammography finding. However, a CNB
diagnosis with either ADH or DCIS is often non-conclusive. A definitive
diagnosis relies on surgical excision for further pathological analysis
to differentiate simple ADH (sADH) from ADH coexisted with advanced
lesions such as DCIS and/or IDC (cADH). Therefore, development of
reliable molecular biomarkers is essential to avoid unnecessary surgical
excision. microRNAs (miRNAs) are single-stranded non-coding RNAs that
play an important role in breast cancer progression. A series of miRNAs
that are differentially expressed during stepwise transition of breast
carcinogenesis were identified earlier, of which miR-638 and miR-671-5p
were functionally characterized. The expression of these miRNAs was
decreased gradually from ADH, DCIS, to IDC. We hypothesize that these
miRNAs may serve as valuable biomarkers following abnormal mammogram and
CNB procedure. Using an improved microdissection protocol, we isolated
normal, hyperplasia, DCIS, and/or IDC lesions from FFPE tissue of CNB. We
also collected patients blood samples before CNB procedure. In addition,
we employed the Human 21T breast epithelial cell lines, which were
originally derived from the same patient diagnosed with metastatic breast
cancer, including H16N2 (normal mammary epithelial), 21PT (ADH), 21NT
(DCIS) and 21MT-1 (IDC) for in vitro model study. Real-time qRT-PCR assay
was performed for examination of miRNA expression. Cell proliferation and
invasion capability were examined by MTT and Transwell assays,
respectively after transfection of candidate miRNAs. EMT markers were
evaluated by Western blot and Immunofluorescence assays. In clinical
samples, we found a synergistic expression pattern between miR-671-5p and
miR-638 in cADH but not in sADH lesions. Interestingly, decreased
miR-671-5p expression was detected in cADHs, but not in sADHs in both
FFPE and serum samples. To explore the potential function of the two
miRNAs in the transition from sADH to cADH, we performed further analysis
in the Human 21T breast epithelial cell lines. Forced expression of
miR-671-5p significantly inhibited cell proliferation in H16N2, 21PT,
21NT and 21MT-1 series cell lines. Overexpression of miR-671-5p
attenuated invasion in 21PT, 21NT, and 21MT-1 cell lines but not in H16N2
cell line. Further, miR-671-5p overexpression resulted in significant
suppression of mesenchymal marker, vimentin, and promoted the expression
of epithelial marker, E-cadherin, in 21PT, 21NT, and 21MT-1cell lines.
Our data suggest that miR-671-5p and miR-638 expression in serum and/or
CNB tissue may server as a novel companion screening tool following an
abnormal mammogram and a subsequent ADH diagnosis by CNB.

