Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of functional P-selectin ligands expressed on colon
cancer tissue using a novel flow-based assay


The presence of functional P-selectin ligands is well-documented for
human colon cancer cell lines, but not in situ on human colon carcinoma
tissue. Presently, immunostaining with antibodies is used to detect
critical components of selectin ligands, e.g., sialofucosylated moieties.
However, this static biochemical tissue analysis (SBTA) cannot ascertain
if a potential selectin ligand is able to mediate (rolling) adhesion. Due
to the immense difficulty in detecting functional selectin ligands using
traditional methods, we have developed a flow-based assay known as
dynamic biochemical tissue analysis (DBTA) for detecting functional
selectin ligands expressed on human tissue. DBTA using P-selectin
microspheres was performed on colon cancer tissue sections from multiple
cases, in conjunction with SBTA using P-selectin, antibodies against
purported selectin ligand carbohydrate moieties sLeX and sLeA (HECA-452,
CSLEX-1, and KM-231), and antibodies against peptide structures of
putative P-selectin ligands (CD24, CD44, and PSGL-1). Examination of
serial sections, in the same regions of tissue displaying DBTA probe
adhesion, revealed significant detection inconsistencies with SBTA.
Subsequently, due to the well-documented force-dependency of selectin
ligands, DBTA was conducted with microspheres coated with either
HECA-452, CSLEX-1, or KM-231 to determine the effect of applied force on
the detection capabilities of these antibodies. Analysis of signet ring
cell colon carcinoma tissue revealed microspheres coated with HECA-452,
CSLEX-1, or KM-231 antibodies all displayed significantly lower amounts
of adhesion than the DBTA P-selectin microspheres. Interestingly,
although microspheres coated with these antibodies adhered to signet ring
cell carcinoma tissue, these DBTA probes did not interact with all
regions of tissue that displayed adhesion with P-selectin microspheres.
Specificity of interaction was validated using corresponding isotype
control coated microspheres. Taken together, these results show DBTA with
P-selectin coated microspheres is able to unequivocally detect functional
P-selectin ligands, in contrast to SBTA (immunostaining) and DBTA using
microspheres coated with antibodies. In summary, DBTA using P-selectin
coated microspheres is able to detect functional P-selectin ligands
expressed on colon cancer tissue, data that may provide valuable
diagnostic and prognostic information for malignant tumors.

