Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of glypican-1 expression on tumor stromal cells in
gastric carcinoma


Background: Glypican1 (GPC1) is a cell surface heparan sulfate
proteoglycan that acts as a co-receptor for heparin-binding growth
factors, and it plays a crucial role in cancer growth. Recently, it has
been reported that GPC1 enriched on cancer-derived exosomes, and
GPC1-positive exosomes in the circulation was frequently found in the
patients with early pancreatic cancer. However role of GPC1-positive
exosomes derived from tumor stromal cells remains to be unclear. The aim
of this study is to clarify the significance of GPC1 expression on
stromal cells in gastric carcinoma.Methods: A total of 597 patients with
gastric cancer was enrolled in this study. An anti-GPC1 antibody was used
for immunohistochemical staining. GPC1 expression was scored by the
intensity of staining and the percentage of positive cells. GPC1
expression on cancer cells or stromal cells was evaluated. The corelation
between GPC1 expression and clinicopathological features was
statistically analyzed.Results: GPC1 expression on cancer cells was found
in 473 (79%) of 597 cases. GPC1 expression on stromal cells was found in
147 (75%) of 597 cases. A Kaplan-Meier survival curve showed that overall
survival of patients with GPC1-positive stromal cells was significantly
better (log-rank p = 0.0028) than that with GPC1-negative stromal cells
(5-year survival rate; 72.5% vs 57.9%, respectively). In contrast,
overall survival was not statistically different (log rank p = 0.090)
between patients with GPC1-positive tumor cells and GPC1-negative tumor
cells (5-year survival rate; 71.8% vs. 64.6%, respectively). GPC1
expression on stromal cells was significantly correlated with T stage,
lymph node metastasis, lymphatic vessel invasion, and clinical
stage.Conclusions: GPC1 expression on stromal cells was associated with
the good prognosis of patients with gastric cancer. GPC1-positive
exosomes in stromal cells might be correlated with the progression of
gastric cancer.

