Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptionally mediated effects of radiation on the expression
of immune susceptibility markers in murine and human melanoma


Radiation therapy (RT) may enhance tumor susceptibility to immune
response. We and others have observed a cooperative interaction between
RT and various immunotherapies, which appears dependent on the relative
sequencing of each therapy. We reported a synergistic interaction between
RT and the antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) response
to tumor-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAb) in murine melanoma. We
reported enhanced cooperative effect when immunotherapy is administered
6-10 days after RT compared to administration on days 1-5 or 11-15. We
hypothesized that this might reflect a delayed,
transcriptionally-mediated effect of RT on the expression of tumor
markers of immune susceptibility. In this study, we investigated the
effect of RT on a variety of immune susceptibility markers at both
transcriptional and post-translational levels to explore mechanisms
behind the observed RT-induced changes.We used flow cytometry to examine
the time course of phenotypic changes in immune susceptibility markers in
B78 murine melanoma cells following in vitro RT. We observed a time- and
RT dose-dependent increase in the expression of specific death receptors
(Fas, DR5), as well as T cell co-stimulatory/co-repressor ligands (PD-L1,
CD80). The timing of these changes correlated with tumor susceptibility
to ADCC immune response in vivo. All protein expression changes observed
by flow cytometry were found to occur over a similar time course by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), suggesting that RT-induced
protein expression changes were mediated by changes in transcriptional
activity. Using high throughput qPCR, we observed a similar time course
of transcriptional effects in additional markers of tumor cell immune
susceptibility, including Fas, MHC I, CD40, and others. We compared the
effect of RT on these markers in human and mouse melanoma cell lines and
observed a comparable time course for transcript-level changes across
species.This study sheds light on the mechanistic basis of time
sensitivity in the interaction of RT with ADCC in vivo and suggests
opportunities to enhance anti-tumor immune response by combining RT and
immunotherapeutic agents. Such findings bear relevance for research
investigating the potential role for RT in driving and optimizing the
response to various cancer immunotherapies.

