Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular determination of the clonal relationship between
multiple tumors in BRCA1/2-associated cancer patients has clinical
relevance


PURPOSEFemale BRCA1/2 mutation carriers commonly develop breast cancer
and ovarian cancer. It is of utmost importance to know the clonal
relationship between multiple tumor localizations, (multiple primaries or
metastasized disease), since prognosis and treatment differ between these
tumors and their metastases. We evaluated the value of targeted Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) in the diagnostic workup of BRCA1/2 mutation
carriers with 2 tumor localizations and uncertain tumor
origins.METHODSForty-two female BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with 2 tumor
locations with tumor material available for pathologic revision were
selected. Median age at first cancer diagnosis was 48.0 years (range
30-68). Four patients with inconclusive tumor origin after histological
and immunohistochemical analyses were cases; 10 patients with certain
tumor origin of 3 tumors served as controls. Tumors of cases and controls
were analyzed by targeted NGS using a panel including CDKN2A, PTEN and
TP53, hotspot mutation sites for 27 different genes and 143 single
nucleotide polymorphisms for detection of loss of heterozygosity (LOH).
Based on prevalence of identical or different mutations and/or LOH
patterns, tumors were classified as multiple primaries or one
entity.RESULTSIn 44 tumors, 48 mutations were found; 39 (81%) concerned
TP53 mutations. In all 10 controls and all 4 cases, the intrapatient
clonal relationships between the tumors could be unequivocally identified
by molecular analysis. In all controls, tumor origins based on molecular
outcomes matched the conventional histopathological
diagnosis.CONCLUSIONIn 90% of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with multiple
tumors routine pathology work-up is sufficient to determine tumor origins
and relatedness. In case of inconclusive conventional pathology results,
molecular analyses using NGS can reliably determine clonal relationships
between tumors, enabling optimal treatment of individual patients.

