Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated macrophages enhance DNA damage repair and improve
survival of murine breast cancers after irradiation


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are known to promote physiological
processes that drive tumor progression and survival, including
angiogenesis, immunosuppression, and invasion. While most studies on TAMs
have focused on the molecular mechanisms by which TAMs drive these
processes, less focus has been given to direct effects that TAMs may
exert on tumor cells. It is known that monocytes are recruited to tumor
sites after radiotherapy and support tumor regrowth. In this study we
sought to determine if TAMs are able to exert a direct, protective effect
on tumor cells against radiotherapy in vitro. We used murine 4T1 cells, a
well-characterized animal model for breast cancer, and murine RAW264.7
macrophages to carry out co-culture experiments. Co-culture of 4T1 cells
with RAW264.7 macrophages resulted in increased 4T1 cell survival rates
post-irradiation compared to 4T1 cells cultured alone. We further
determined that this effect is not contact-dependent but mediated through
macrophage secreted factors. Next, we tested whether co-culturing
RAW264.7 macrophages with 4T1 cells induced macrophage polarization to an
M2/TAM phenotype. Using antibodies against M2 markers and FACS, we found
that co-culture of RAW macrophages with 4T1 cells polarizes these
macrophages toward an M2 phenotype. We hypothesized that the increased
4T1 cell survival rates were mediated by an enhanced DNA damage repair
mechanism induced by TAMs. We tested this via a combination of
immunofluorescence against phosphorylated histone H2AX and comet assays.
We show that co-culture of 4T1 cells with TAMs after irradiation results
in lower 4T1 cell levels of DNA damage and a faster decrease in DNA
damage over time compared to 4T1 cells alone. Future work will focus on
characterizing the molecular mechanism through which TAMs induce this
enhanced DNA damage repair response in 4T1 cells after irradiation and we
will test whether such response occurs in vivo after radiotherapy. In
conclusion, we show that TAMs confer resistance against ionizing
radiation to tumor cells in vitro and that this resistance is driven by
an enhanced DNA damage repair mechanism in tumor cells induced by TAM
secreted factors.

