Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor heterogeneity and lesion-specific response to targeted
therapy in colorectal cancer


How genomic heterogeneity associated with acquired resistance to targeted
agents affects response to subsequent lines of therapy is unknown.
Exposure to therapy may result in selection of sub-clonal cell
populations, capable of growing under drug pressures. Therefore, a
single-lesion biopsy at disease progression may vastly underrepresent the
molecular heterogeneity of resistant tumor clones in an individual
patient and may fail to detect the existence of distinct but important
resistance mechanisms that could impact clinical response.We identified a
colorectal cancer (CRC) patient in whom multiple tumor biopsies were
obtained at resistance following prolonged response to with the anti-EGFR
antibody cetuximab. Full-exome sequencing of 1000 cancer genes of both
primary tumor and progression biopsy revealed a TP53 mutation in all
samples and a novel MEK1 p.K57T mutation in one of the progressing liver
biopsy. A mutation at the same MEK1 codon was identified in the
cetuximab-resistant HCA46 CRC cell line. Biochemical analysis showed
constitutive activation of MEK and ERK despite cetuximab treatment.
However, the combination of the MEK inhibitor trametinib with either
cetuximab or panitumumab restored sensitivity, suggesting a potential
therapeutic strategy to overcome resistance to EGFR blockade caused by
this mutation.Accordingly, the patient was treated with the combination
of panitumumab and trametinib. After 3 months, imaging demonstrated a
reduction in size of the biopsied liver metastasis harboring the MEK1
mutation, but revealed that some other lesions had progressed. Plasma
collected prior to therapy was analyzed by next-generation sequencing
confirming the presence of both TP53 and MEK1 variants, but surprisingly
unveiling a previously unrecognized KRAS mutation. ddPCR analysis of
longitudinal timepoints of ctDNA unveiled that TP53 mutant levels dropped
after initiation of therapy, but rose later during treatment in parallel
with CEA tumor marker levels. However, MEK1 mutant levels declined
sharply, indicating effective suppression of MEK1 mutant clones by
panitumumab and trametinib; while KRAS mutant levels rose, indicating
outgrowth of a resistant KRAS-mutant clone. Biopsy of a different liver
metastasis that progressed despite panitumumab and trametinib revealed
the same KRAS mutation identified in ctDNA.In summary these findings
illustrate how distinct acquired resistance mechanisms can arise
concomitantly in separate metastases within the same patient, leading to
mixed lesion-specific responses to subsequent targeted therapies. Liquid
biopsy approaches, in association with single-tumor biopsies, have the
potential to detect the presence of simultaneous resistance mechanisms
residing in separate metastases in a single patient and to monitor the
effects of subsequent targeted therapies.

