Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor inhibits NF-B activity by sequestering IkB-a in the
nucleus and blocking IkB-a degradation


Background: Selinexor is a small-molecule therapeutic that inhibits XPO1
mediated nuclear export, resulting in nuclear accumulation of tumor
suppressor proteins (TSPs) and subsequently cancer cell death while
sparing normal cells. It has been previously demonstrated that the
inhibitor of NFB, IB-, is localized to the cytoplasm by XPO1 in several
cancer cell lines and that treatment of cancer cells with selinexor
reduces NF-B transcriptional activity. The mechanism of NF-B inhibition
by selinexor, however, is not fully understood. We hypothesized that
nuclear retention of IB- and down-regulation of IB- kinase (IKK) in
response to selinexor treatment would inhibit NF-B transcriptional
activity.Methods: U2OS (Osteosarcoma) cells were treated with selinexor
in the presence or absence of TNF stimulation and whole protein lysates
were analyzed by Western blotting. IB- localization was evaluated by
immunofluorescence microscopy and NF-B transcriptional activity by ELISA
(Thermo Scientific).Results: TNF induced the phosphorylation of NF-B p65
subunit on serine 536 and IB- on serine 32/36 through IKK. This resulted
in the dissociation of IB- from NF-B and led to IB- degradation via the
26S proteasome. Free NF-B could now migrate into the nucleus and initiate
transcriptional activation supporting tumorigenicity and inflammation.
The IKK kinase is a complex made of two kinases (IKK and IKK) and one
regulatory subunit, NEMO/IKK. We found that selinexor treatment blocked
IKK activity through the down regulation of the IKK (IKK) gamma subunit
protein levels. This inhibition was dose dependent and prevented IB-
phosphorylation, thereby protecting IB- from degradation. The protection
of intact IB- from degradation and its forced nuclear accumulation
through XPO1 inhibition enabled inhibition of NF-B transcriptional
activity even in the presence of TNF. Selinexor did not alter the protein
levels of IKK or IKK.Conclusions: Selinexor blocks TNF induced
degradation of IB- by reducing the levels of IKK. In addition, selinexor
increased nuclear IB- levels through the inhibition of nuclear export.
This blocked NF-B activity and enhanced cancer cell death. We are
currently investigating the beneficial effects of combining selinexor
with proteasome inhibitors, which are known to prevent IB- degradation.

