Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded miRNAs in ATM regulating
DNA damage response in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an aggressive epithelial malignancy
that has remarkably high incidence and mortality rates in Hong Kong and
south China. It is well-known to be associated with Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection. Previous work in our team revealed that EBV-encoded
miRNAs derived from the BARTs (miR-BARTs) were abundantly expressed in
primary NPCs. They function in controlling apoptotic and immune responses
in the infected cells during NPC development.Most recently, we attempted
to use in silico method to predict cellular targets of miR-BARTs. Results
suggested that there were multiple putative miR-BART binding sites on the
3UTRs of an important DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) repair gene,
Ataxia-Telangiectasia-Mutant (ATM). The down-regulation of ATM mRNA and
protein had also been demonstrated in our local primary NPC samples.
Although the interaction of miR-BARTs on each suggested putative binding
site had not been completely validated, our preliminary data indicated at
least three EBV-encoded miRNAs (BART5-5p, BART9-3p and BART14-3p) were
involved in repressing ATM expression in NPCs. They could work either
alone or cooperatively to control ATM expression in transient assays.
Notably, ectopic expression of these three miR-BARTs could successfully
suppress irradiation-induced ATM activity in two EBV-negative cell lines,
NP69 and HeLa.It had been reported that ATM null cells were defective to
repair the DSB lesions and sensitive to the Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitor treatment in the presence of DNA-damaging agents. In
contrast, the DSBs are effectively repaired in normal cells to retain
genetic integrity. We believed that EBV infection, via miR-BARTs to
reduce ATM activity and disrupt Homologous Recombination (HR) repair
function, made the NPC cells sensitize to ionizing radiation and
DNA-damaging agent treatment. Hence, the knowledge generated from this
project is not only enhance our understanding of EBV biology, but also
opens an avenue for the development of effective NPC therapies.

