Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter hypermethylation status of Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway
genes FANCF, FANCL and FANCS in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Gene promoter methylation is an epigenetic mechanism used by cells to
control gene expression. Over recent decades, scientists have made
various discoveries linking DNA methylation to several adverse outcomes,
including human cancers. The Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway is involved in
homologous recombination, one of the major mechanisms of DNA repair. This
pathway is essential for human cells to maintain integrity following DNA
damage. Cancers with defective FA pathways are expected to be more
sensitive to cross-link based therapy, or to treatments in which
additional repair mechanisms are targeted. The FA pathway contains at
least 19 genes, and some of the members have been implicated in
susceptibility to a number of cancers by genetic or epigenetic
alterations. Promoter methylation in FA genes is thought to play a role
in the occurrence of cancer.Recently we screened 139 non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumors for FANCD2
foci formation by FA triple stain immunofluorescence (FATSI) analysis.
Among the 104 evaluable tumors, 23 (22%) were FANCD2 foci negative. Since
epigenetic inactivation can be one of the mechanisms for FA functional
deficiency in these tumors, we evaluated 39 NSCLC samples (21 foci
positive and 18 foci negative; 21 adenocarcinomas, 17 squamous cell
carcinomas, 1 large cell carcinoma) for FANCF, FANCL and FANCS (BRCA1)
promoter methylation.Human lung tumor tissue samples were obtained from
The Tissue Procurement Shared Resources of the Ohio State University
after IRB approval. Genomic DNA and total RNA samples were isolated from
frozen lung tumor and matching non-tumor tissues. The promoter
methylation status of FANCF, FANCL and FANCS was evaluated using
methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR).Among the 18 FATSI negative tumors,
promoter methylation was found in FANCF (1 adenocarcinoma), FANCL (1
adenocarcinoma) and FANCS (1 adenocarcinoma). Among the 21 FATSI positive
tumors, no promoter methylation was detected in FANCF or FANCL. Promoter
methylation in FANCS was found in 1 (squamous cell carcinoma) of 21 FATSI
positive tumors.The above observations suggest that epigenetic
alterations, specifically methylation, can be one of the factors that
contribute to FA functional deficiency in NSCLC patients. These findings
may have clinical implications, since these tumors may be more sensitive
to cross-link based therapy. However, an important caveat is that these
changes may not be stable and could revert during treatment. Further
studies in FA gene expression are needed to determine the impact of FA
gene promoter methylation on FA repair foci formation.

