Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An Intact G1/S checkpoint determines response to CDK4/6 inhibitor
in breast cancer


Deregulation of the cell cycle machinery is a hallmark of most cancers,
making the positive regulators of cell cycle such as Cyclin dependent
kinases (CDKs) as attractive and druggable targets. Palbociclib or
PD-0332991, a potent CDK4/6 inhibitor is an anti-proliferative agent that
induces G1 arrest, senescence and inhibits tumor growth in breast cancer.
Based on the drug's success in phase II clinical trials, Palbociclib was
recently awarded FDA approval for the treatment of metastatic ER+ breast
cancer. However, one of the main limitations of this treatment is the
associated adverse events of grade 3&4 neutropenia (62%) and grade 3&4
leukopenia (25.2%). Moreover, despite promising results in clinical
trials, little is known about palbociclib's mechanism of action and
mode(s) of resistance in ER+ breast cancer. A clear understanding of
these mechanisms is critical to identify biomarkers and understand the
biology of treatment response, drug resistance and combination
strategies, and this study is aimed at addressing these gaps in
knowledge.In order to examine the mechanism of action and identify nodes
of sensitivity to Palbociclib, we used a model system of two ER+ breast
cancer cell lines (MCF7, T47D) and a mammary epithelial cell line
(MCF10A). Results from drug response studies, cell cycle analysis and
senescence assay revealed that treatment with palbociclib induces a
dose-dependent sustained growth inhibition and G1 arrest specifically in
the ER+ cell lines. Additionally, palbociclib induced senescence in a
dose-dependent manner in the ER+ cancer cells and not in MCF10A.Further,
to interrogate if deregulation of the G1/S checkpoint can render cells
resistant to palbociclib, we examined the effect of knocking down Rb and
overexpressing the oncogenic low molecular weight isoforms of cyclin-E
(LMW-E), which are known to induce constitutive phosphorylation of Rb, in
our model system. Drug response, cell cycle analysis and senescence assay
revealed that both downregulation of Rb and overexpression of LMW-E
expression significantly diminished the sensitivity of breast cancer
cells to palbociclib (6 to 7 fold) and its ability to induce
senescence.Moreover, while Palbociclib is known to be a specific CDK4/6
inhibitor, drug response studies showed that downregulation of either
kinase in our model system did not completely recapitulate the drug's
anti-tumor effects. This suggests that Palbociclib could inhibit another
target, albeit, at a higher concentration, and this would be the subject
of our future studies.Collectively, our study indicates that the CDK4/6
inhibitor, Palbociclib, acts in a dose-dependent manner to induce
senescence, specifically in breast cancer cells. Further, our results
suggest that the presence of an intact G1/S checkpoint is necessary for
response to palbociclib, providing rationale to utilize Rb positivity and
absence of LMW-E as biomarkers of response to the drug in ER+ breast
cancer patients.

