Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trigonella foenum (fenugreek) inhibited cancer stem cell
properties and increased sensitivity to Doxorubicin resistant ZR-75-1
human breast cancer cell line by targeting mutant p53 and Notch-4


Despite advances in detection and therapies, breast cancer is the most
common malignant disease in women worldwide. Doxorubicin is one of the
effective agent for breast cancer treatment, but the resistance to it is
representing a major obstacle for breast cancer treatment.Herein, we
established a breast cancer cell line that showed a significant
resistance to doxorubicin at clinically relevant concentrations. The
epithelial breast cancer cell line ZR-75-1 was sequentially treated with
doxorubicin for several treatment cycles. In consequence, we obtained
chemoresistant cells displaying a mesenchymal-like phenotype, ZR-75-1-DR.
The ZR-75-1-DR cells showed an increase in breast cancer stem cells
(BCSC) activity, mutant p53 but not wild type, NOTCH-4 and microRNAs,
small noncoding RNAs, expression compared to parental cells, suggesting
their expression may contribute to the evolvement of BCSCs. Understanding
the early molecular mechanisms of cross talk among mutant p53, Notch-4
and microRNAs in resistant to doxorubicin is crucial to provide better
therapeutic strategies for breast cancer progression.Recently, we showed
that Trigonella foenum (Fenugreek) extract (FCE), a traditional herbal
plant with anti-tumor activity, induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells mediated
by up-regulation of wild P53. To investigate the possible effect of FCE
in the expression levels of mutant p53, Notch-4 and miRNAs in ZR-75-1-DR
and parental cell lines, cells were pre-treated with or without FCE
and/or doxorubicin for different time intervals. miRNAs were quantified
using qRT-PCR and p53, Notch-4 expression and BCSC phenotype were
evaluated by western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry.Our results
revealed that FCE treatment showed a significant decrease in cell
viability, clonogenicity and invasion capacity with a decrease in
expression of mutant p53 and Notch-4 in ZR-75-1-DR compared to untreated
cells. Furthermore, the inhibition of mutant p53 and Notch-4 expression
was associated with a significant decrease in miR-21 and miR-142 with an
increase in expression of let-7a and miR-34a. Furthermore, ZR-75-1-DR
pre-treated with FCE showed an increase in chemosensitivity to
doxorubicin at low doses with reduction in expression of stemness factor,
ALDH1, compared to the parental and doxorubicin treated cells. In vivo,
knockdown both mutant p53 and NOTCH-4 showed a significant regression in
tumor size of ZR-75-1-DR xenografts compared to those of parental cells
and control lentivirus after combined treatment with FCE and doxorubicin,
but not with doxorubicin alone.All in all, our data introduced FCE as a
promising non-toxic herbal, which has fourteen bioactive compounds and
therapeutic potential to reduced cancer stem cell properties and
increased sensitivity to doxorubicin treatment, by directly targeting
mutant p53, NOTCH4 and microRNAs.

