Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor fibroblast targeting via uPAR retargeted measles virus: In
vitro and in vivo effects


Tumor stromal cell components, in particular cancer associated
fibroblasts, play an important role in cancer progression. Few studies
have focused on stromal fibroblast targeting by oncolytic viruses. The
urokinase receptor (uPAR) is a clinically and biologically validated
target, which is overexpressed in tumor and stromal cells compared to
non-cancer tissues. MV-h-uPA and MV-m-uPA are fully retargeted oncolytic
measles viruses directed against human and murine uPAR, respectively,
which have shown in vitro and in vivo safety and antitumor effects.
Species specific retargeted viral vectors allow to dissect the specific
effects of the viruses on murine vs. human tissues in xenograft models.
Our aim is to characterize the in vitro and in vivo effects of stromal
targeting by oncolytic measles virus via uPAR, with a focus on tumor
fibroblasts. In vitro, MV-h-uPA and MV-m-uPA preferentially infected and
induced cytotoxicity in human cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF 19, CAF
23) as well as murine fibroblasts (3T3), compared to non-tumorigenic
fibroblasts. Murine-murine and human-human fibroblast to cancer cell
viral transfer via heterofusion was observed after fibroblast infection
by species specific MV-uPA, in breast, colon and renal cancer models,
while no viral transfer was observed between cells of different species.
In vivo, systemic administration of the murine uPA retargeted virus
(MV-m-uPA) significantly decreased tumor progression and prolonged
survival in a human breast cancer xenograft model (MDA-MD231), where the
host stroma expresses murine uPAR (target of MV-m-uPA). Tumor studies
revealed induction of apoptosis (TUNEL assay), while no significant
effects on cancer cell proliferation was observed. Dual staining for
measles virus nucleocapsid proteins and fibroblasts markers demonstrated
viral infection of fibroblasts in treated tumors. Gene expression studies
using murine as well as human specific arrays were performed to
characterize the effects of stromal targeting by the murine retargeted
virus on murine stroma as well as the indirect effects on human cancer
cells in vivo.In conclusion, for the first time our results show
feasibility and antitumor effects of stromal fibroblast targeting by
oncolytic measles virus via uPAR and demonstrate that stromal fibroblasts
are viable targets for oncolytic virotherapy. Studies characterizing
other stromal cell components and evaluation of the molecular changes in
the tumor stroma as result of viral infection are underway.

