Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rigorous validation of a clinical circulating tumor DNA assay for
cancer molecular profiling


Background:Profiling cell-free circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) for genomic
alterations which drive oncogenesis in patients with cancer promises to
provide information important for understanding cancer biology, informing
therapy selection when conventional FFPE biopsies are unobtainable and
potentially monitoring response to therapy. To allow routine use of
blood-based ctDNA molecular profiling with clinical samples we developed
and performed analytic validation of an accurate, targeted NGS-based
assay. The analytic validation included over 400 samples demonstrating
99% sensitivity and 99% positive predictive value for base substitutions,
indels and rearrangements with limit-of-detection below 1%.Methods:To
ensure robust performance, the ctDNA assay was developed as part of an
integrated workflow including sample collection, storage and transport,
and ctDNA purification, followed by optimized construction of
adaptor-ligated sequencing libraries and enrichment by solution
hybridization and then sequencing to high depth (Illumina HiSeq).
Computational methodologies were developed to enable sensitive and
specific detection of base substitutions, indels, genomic rearrangements
and high-level amplifications from ctDNA. Accuracy and reproducibility
were analytically validated in a CLIA-certified laboratory using
reference samples with known alterations (117 cell-line mixtures and
synthetic constructs) and 268 clinical ctDNA samples. Many alterations
found in clinical ctDNA samples were validated with orthogonal reference
methods including a CLIA-validated NGS assay, droplet digital PCR and
break-point PCR.Results:The ctDNA assay validation demonstrated 99%
sensitivity and 99% positive predictive value for base substitutions,
indels and rearrangements with a limit-of-detection below 1% and robust
detection of high-level, focal amplifications when present at adequate
tumor fraction. In addition, the assay accurately reports the allele
frequency of alterations in the sample. In 48 clinical ctDNA samples, 95
alterations of all classes were 100% confirmed by orthogonal testing. As
part of our extensive clinical utility study, we report results comparing
alterations from patient-matched ctDNA and FFPE biopsies across more than
200 lung, breast and other cancer samples.Conclusions:Accurate clinical
profiling of ctDNA enables detection of genomic alterations in patient
plasma samples to provide rationale targeted therapeutic options. Our
rigorous analytic validation study demonstrates high-sensitivity
detection of alterations present in blood at low frequency with a very
low rate of false positives, realizing the potential of ctDNA-based
molecular profiling for the management of patients with cancer. This
validated assay allows us to embark upon a rigorous investigation of
clinical best-practices based on tumor-type specific assessment of
matched ctDNA and solid biopsy specimens.

