Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of pharmacodynamic and predictive biomarkers to
define response to proteasome inhibitor marizomib in glioma


Proteasome inhibitors (PIs) have been employed with clinical success in
multiple myeloma, but have been much less effective in solid tumors,
despite the central role of the proteasome in controlling cellular
metabolism. Marizomib (MRZ) is a novel second generation proteasome
inhibitor which binds irreversibly to and inhibits the enzymatic activity
of all three subunits of the proteasome. The unique ability of MRZ among
PIs to cross the blood-brain barrier, combined with its pan-proteasome
activity, suggest that MRZ may have distinct therapeutic advantages over
the approved PIs in the treatment of glioma. Preclinical studies with MRZ
have demonstrated anti-tumor activity in intracranial glioma studies, and
MRZ is currently being evaluated in a Phase I clinical trial in WHO Grade
IV recurrent glioma in combination with bevacizumab (NCT02330562). The
aim of this study was to identify pharmacodynamic and predictive
biomarkers of response to marizomib in glioma patients.Analysis of the
pharmacodynamic profile of MRZ in packed whole blood from MRZ-treated
glioma patients demonstrated >70% inhibition of the chymotrypsin-like
(CT-L) activity as early as day 1 of cycle1 at 1 hr post-infusion, with
100% inhibition post-infusion in all patients by the end of cycle 1.
Pre-infusion data demonstrate a prolonged effect, with >60% inhibition of
CT-L persistent between day 15 of each cycle and day 1 of the next cycle.
Trypsin-like (T-L) and caspase-like (C-L) activities increased after the
first 1-2 MRZ doses, presumably due to compensatory hyperactivation of
these subunits triggered by CT-L inhibition, which was subsequently
overcome by repeated MRZ infusion, resulting in 40-60% inhibition of T-L
and 10-30% inhibition of C-L evident through cycle 5.Analysis of
proteasome enzymatic activity in archival glioma tumor tissue revealed
that levels of all three proteasome activities are variable between high
grade glioma samples, suggesting the potential for differential
sensitivity to proteasome inhibition in glioma patients. Further, there
is a linear correlation between CT-L activity (the rate limiting enzyme
for proteasomal proteolysis) and C-L activity in these samples,
suggesting that a PI such as MRZ with pan-proteasome specificity could
potentially exhibit more activity in glioma compared to CT-L specific
PIs. The data are currently being expanded to evaluate both proteasome
enzymatic activity and subunit mRNA levels, to establish whether these
endpoints might serve as a proteasome based biomarker.In conclusion, this
study demonstrates that packed whole blood may be suitable as a
pharmacodynamic biomarker for proteasome inhibition. This biomarker
strategy may be crucial to stratify MRZ responsive patients in glioma.

