Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potential immune targets in controlling
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma metastatic progression


Endometrial adenocarcinoma is a common cause of gynecological cancer
death in Europe and North America. The most dominant subtype,
Endometrioid Endometrial Cancer (EEC) accounts for >80% of this cancer
and is estrogen-dependent. At diagnosis, 75% of women have the disease
confined to the uterus, which is considered Stage One. Five-year survival
for Stage One patients is 80%, however, about 15-20% develop
metastasis.Total RNA extracted from tissues obtained after surgical
resection from three women at stage one EEC was subjected to
RNA-sequencing. The publicly available dataset (SRP045645) was downloaded
directly from the Sequence Read Archive and the FASTQ files were
processed with Biomedical Genomics Workbench for secondary analysis
including mapping, quantification and differential expression analysis.
Through streamlined integration the data was uploaded to Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA) for biological interpretation.We show how in
silico solutions developed by QIAGEN Bioinformatics enable us to analyze
the biological parameters involved in EEC metastatic progression from an
early stage in the three patients diagnosed at Stage One. By comparing
these patients RNA-seq results, we determined that key Canonical Pathways
and other biological processes differentiated the three patients from one
other. In particular, the predicted transcriptional program allowed us to
visualize key upstream drivers. Three of these transcriptional drivers
are immune related molecules (two cytokines: CXCL14 and GDF15 and one
growth factor FGF3). They have been predicted to be potential master
regulators of a Causal Network that drives increase of EEC, metastasis,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition (EMT), and cellular invasion in one
of the three patients. Based on these results we propose these three
immune molecules as possible therapeutic targets to counteract the
metastatic processes in EEC.

