Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PSMA antibody functionalized docetaxel-loaded magnetic
nanoparticles for prostate cancer therapy


Objectives: Prostate cancer (PrCa) is the second most leading cause of
cancer-related death in men in the United States. Chemotherapy
(Docetaxel, Dox) is currently the most common first-line therapeutic
option. However, adverse side effects and chemo-resistance of docetaxel
limit its clinical use. Improving docetaxel targeted delivery and its
activity at the tumor site using a targeted nanoparticle system could be
an attractive strategy for PrCa therapy. Prostate Specific Membrane
Antigen (PSMA) is highly overexpressed in PrCa cells, thus is a highly
attractive molecular target for PrCa therapy. In this study, we developed
and determined anti-cancer efficacy of a novel docetaxel loaded, PSMA
targeted magnetic nanoparticle (PSMA-MNP-Dox) formulation for PrCa
therapy.Methods: Docetaxel loaded magnetic nanoparticle (MNP-Dox)
formulation is composed of an iron oxide core coated with cyclodextrin
(for drug loading) and F127 polymer (for particle stability and
chemosensitization). Therapeutic efficacy of this unique nanoparticle
formulation was evaluated using clinically relevant cell line models
(C4-2, PC-3, and DU-145) through cell proliferation and colony formation
assays. Molecular effects of this formulation on apoptosis,
anti-apotosis, and drug resistance associated proteins were evaluated
using immunoblotting assays. Contrast imaging property of MNP-Dox
formulation was examined using Phantom Gel MR imaging model. For active
targeting, PSMA antibody conjugation to this formulation was achieved
through N-hydroxysuccinimide group containing PEG polymer. Active
targeting potential of this formulation was evaluated in PSMA+ (C4-2) and
PSMA- (PC-3) cell lines, C4-2 generated tumor xenografts.Results: MNP-Dox
formulation showed optimal particle size and zeta potential which can
efficiently internalized in PrCa cells. Our formulation showed
anti-cancer efficacy in prostate cancer cell lines. Additionally, it
induces the expression of apoptosis associated proteins, Bax and Bad,
cleaved PARP, and caspase 3, and downregulated the expression of
anti-apoptotic proteins, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. Moreover, it also inhibited
the expression of chemoresistance associated proteins (PSMA and MDR1).
Our PSMA antibody targeted MNPs-Dox formulation exhibited a profound
uptake pattern in PSMA+ cells (C4-2) compared to PSMA null (PC-3)- cells,
suggesting its targeting potential. A similar targeting potential was
also observed in ex-vivo studies while using C4-2 tumor xenografts,
however, no intense targeting was observed in normal tissues due to lack
of PSMA expression.Conclusion: PSMA antibody functionalized MNP-Dox
formulation can efficiently target PSMA + PrCa cells and deliver
docetaxel into prostate tumors. This targeted drug delivery system could
reduce the dose of docetaxel required to kill cancer cells, thus
minimizing long-term docetaxel associated systemic toxicity and
drug-resistance.

