Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative DNA damage and transcriptomic effects of engineered
nanoparticles in human lung cells in vitro


A series of six titanium dioxide and two cerium oxide engineered
nanomaterials were assessed for their ability to induce cytotoxicity,
reactive oxygen species (ROS), various types of DNA damage, and
transcriptional changes in human respiratory BEAS-2B cells exposed in
vitro at several concentrations for 72 hours. Only limited cytotoxicity
was observed at concentrations up to 300 g/ml for all of the
nanomaterials. Small increases in 8-oxo-deoxyguanosine were induced by
some of the nanomaterials, but did not achieve statistical significance.
No increases in ethenoadenosine or ethenocytidine were detected by ELISA
assays for any of the tested nanomaterials. Several of the nanomaterials
exhibited concentration related increases in levels of
apurinic/apyrimidinic sites, endogenous DNA adducts measured by
32P-postlabeling, lipid peroxidation, and ROS. Consistent with these
findings, several of the nanomaterials also affected expression of genes
involved in p53, ATM, and mismatch repair pathways. Integrin signaling
pathways were also altered by a majority of the nanomaterials tested.
There was general agreement between activity in DNA damage assays and
extent of pathway transcriptional alteration. One out of the cerium oxide
nanomaterials tested did not induce a high enough incidence of
differentially expressed genes relative to controls to allow analysis at
the pathway level, and also elicited the lowest response in multiple DNA
damage assays. Taken together, these data are consistent with the
contribution of DNA damage induced by reactive oxygen species as
mediators of potentially adverse biological effects following exposure to
engineered titanium and cerium oxide nanomaterials, and suggests the
utility of short term in vitro tests to predict relative potencies of
these particles.This is an abstract of a proposed presentation and does
not necessarily reflect EPA policy.

