Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolution during propagation and treatment of patient-derived
triple negative breast cancer xenografts


Individual tumors, including the aggressive and difficult to treat
triple-negative (ER-/PR-/HER2-) breast cancers (TNBCs) are heterogeneous
collections of cells with multiple subclonal populations each
contributing to the tumor. While subclonal heterogeneity is likely
responsible for the development of drug resistance, identification of how
tumor cell populations change over time has been difficult, largely
because of the challenges in resampling tumor tissue at close time
points. Here we quantify tumor evolution in human patient-derived
xenografts implanted into NSG mice, which we use to test subclonal
heterogeneity as a function of location within a tumor, propagation time,
and drug treatment. We used high-depth (400x) sequencing of a targeted
panel of 358 genes to quantify somatic mutation allele frequencies from 6
spatially-separated and 8 temporally-propagated xenograft samples derived
from the same TNBC patient tumors. Samples ranged in age from 2-4 months
post-engraftment. Although we observed a few low frequency mutations
distinguishing samples, overall we found that allele frequencies of
somatic mutations were well-preserved on this time scale. We then
generated replicate xenografts from the same patient tumor and treated
them respectively with cisplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide,
docetaxel, or vehicle control for 25 days. Although again somatic
mutations showed few differences in allele frequency across samples,
substantial variations were seen when data were analyzed for copy number
alterations. To confirm these effects we repeated the treatments for
xenografts derived from two additional TNBC patients. Again we observed
strong changes in tumor heterogeneity at the copy number level. This
effect was particularly, but not exclusively, apparent in tumors with the
greatest response to therapy. We further verified these measurements
through Sanger and digital PCR sequencing on the treated mice and other
mice in the same cohorts. Using a multi-sample xenograft propagation,
dissection, sequencing, and computational analysis protocol, we have
shown that tumor subpopulation changes in response to treatment can be
quantified and distinguished from spatial or temporal effects, even for
treatment time courses as short as 1 month. In triple negative breast
cancer these variations are most apparent at the level of copy number
variation. Our study demonstrates how patient-derived xenografts can
provide detailed resolution of tumor population evolution during the
manifestation of resistance.

