Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell death triggered by sustained IRES inhibition is a
population-wide event involving a quorum-sensing mechanism in which
putative tumor stem cells are eliminated along with their progeny


The internal ribosome entry site (IRES) is a feature contained within the
5-untranslated region of the mRNA which allows the efficiency with which
that mRNA is translated to be regulated independently of the general rate
of protein synthesis in the cell. It appears that tumor cells rely on
IRES-mediated translation to promote their own survival under adverse
microenvironmental conditions, ultimately contributing to
chemoresistance, relapse, and metastasis. Our lab has identified and
characterized a series of compounds (prototype IRES inhibitors) which
selectively modulate IRES function. Here we examine the phenotypic
consequences of sustained IRES inhibition in triple-negative breast
carcinoma and glioblastoma.72 hours continuous exposure to the IRES
inhibitor results in sudden loss of viability affecting >99.9% of the
tumor cell population. Cell death is a consequence of the inhibition of
synthesis of critical IRES-driven proteins, and not a typical cytotoxic
response. The treated cells exhibit prominent features of terminal
differentiation, with marked gains in cytoskeletal organization and
planar polarity, extensive intercellular networking, and formation of
tight junctions or neuronal processes. In addition to depletion of Myc
protein, specific changes in IGF1R, connexin 43, BiP, and CHOP also
correlate with phenotypic outcome. The highly undifferentiated
triple-negative breast tumor and glioblastoma cells apparently cannot
tolerate the transition to a fully differentiated state, or the
restoration of normal homeostatic mechanisms allows the abnormalities
that cause these cells to be malignant to be recognized. Once triggered,
cell death is rapid and comprehensive. PARP cleavage is not observed,
caspase 3/7 activation is limited, and no protection afforded by
Z-VAD-fmk. The cells show no evidence of recovery even following
prolonged incubation in the absence of compound. In contrast, normal
human mammary epithelial cells (which are already differentiated) are
resistant to IRES inhibition.The synchronized cell death response to IRES
inhibition is a highly orchestrated event, with the population of
malignant cells becoming physically linked together and responding as a
unit, in contrast to typical stochastic processes such as apoptosis,
programmed necrosis, and autophagy, where cell death decisions are made
at the level of the individual cell. Importantly, tumor stem cells, which
typically are resilient to conventional cytotoxic or targeted therapeutic
regimens, appear to be vulnerable to IRES inhibition.Together, these
findings support the concept that IRES-mediated translation is critical
for maintenance of the undifferentiated phenotype. IRES inhibition
potentially represents a new strategy for treatment of undifferentiated
tumor types such as triple-negative breast cancer and glioblastoma.

