Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic trioxide inhibits overexpression of NAMPT in oral cancer


Purpose: Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) is a key enzyme
for a rate-limiting step in the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
salvage pathway. Tumor cells are reliant on the NAMPT salvage pathway for
NAD regeneration, thus making this enzyme an attractive therapeutic
target for cancer treatment. Overexpression of NAMPT has been observed
across a broad range of solid tumors including ovarian, breast, and
prostate cancers. However, it is unknown regarding the expression and
function of NAMPT in oral cancer. Arsenic trioxide (ATO) has been
approved for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia, and
accumulating evidence indicate that it is a promising therapeutic drug
for certain solid malignant tumors. Up to now, the effect of ATO on NAMPT
in oral cancer remains unclear. In the present study, we investigated the
expression of NAMPT in different differentiated degree oral cancer and
examined the effects of ATO on NAMPT in oral cancer cell line.Materials
and methods: Tissue microarray (TMA) was performed by
immunohistochemistry to examine the NAMPT expression in well
differentiated (n = 39), moderately differentiated (n = 6), and poorly
differentiated (n = 5) tissue samples collected from surgical specimens
of the oral cancer patients. Human oral squamous cell carcinoma Tca-8113
cells were treated with ATO for 48 hrs. PrestoBlue activity assay was
used to detect cell activity and NAMPT mRNA expression was measured by
RT-PCR.Results: In paracancer tissue, NAMPT was mainly distributed in
cytoplasma and lightly located in nuclear. Intensely increased staining
of NAMPT was found in all differentiated grade oral cancer by
immunohistochemistry. Moreover, while increased NAMPT are mainly located
in cytoplasma in well-differentiated cancer, the marked increase of NAMPT
occurred both in cytoplasma and nuclear in moderate- and
poor-differentiated cancer. TMA results showed that comparing with normal
oral tissue, the protein expression of NAMPT increased by 2.20, 2.66, and
3.03 fold in well-, moderate-, and poor- differentiated oral cancer,
respectively. ATO (1, 2.5, 5, and 10 mol/L) pretreatment of Tca8113 cells
significantly reduced the cell activity in an ATO concentration-dependent
manner. More importantly, NAMPT mRNA expression was markedly decreased
8.60%, 26.92%, 71.01%, and 78.26%, respectively, compared with control
cells.Conclusion: Our novel findings suggest that increased NAMPT
expression were highly associated with cellular differentiation in oral
cancer, indicating that NAMPT may participate in the development of oral
cancer. ATO can inhibit cell activity by depressing NAMPT transcription
in oral cancer. These findings may have implications for exploring the
NAMPT pathway for oral cancer treatment.

