Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complex, 3D tissues for modeling the immune response in cancer and
predicting the activity of immunotherapies


The immune system plays an active role in both the prevention and the
promotion of cancer dependent upon its interaction with the tumor cells.
The roles of both macrophages and T-cells in cancer progression have been
heavily studied over the past few years. Macrophages have been found to
be either tumor promoting or tumor preventing depending upon their
differentiation status and the tumor microenvironment while the homing
and cell destroying capabilities of T-cells have been manipulated to
effect better, more specific tumor cell cytotoxicity through the
development of therapies such as chimeric antigen receptor T-cells (CAR-T
cells). Unfortunately the majority of research in the area of
immune-oncology has relied upon either 2D cell culture or animal models.
While a large amount of information has been learned from these models,
it has been well established that 2D cell culture does not mimic in vivo
biology and the immune system of mouse models differs from that of humans
in numerous ways including T-cell subsets, cytokine receptors, and
costimulatory molecule expression. To overcome these limitations, we have
developed a number of 3D in vitro tissue models including multi-cell type
models of glioblastoma (GBM), breast, and ovarian cancer. Our GBM model
combines tumor cells, endothelial cells, and macrophages; the ovarian
cancer model includes patient-derived tumor cells and macrophages; our
breast cancer model incorporates 5 cell types including tumor cells,
fibroblasts, adipocytes, endothelial cells, and macrophages. We have also
begun preliminary work to incorporate patient-specific T-cells into these
models. Preliminary work in GBM and breast has utilized a combination of
cell lines and primary cells while ovarian modeling has relied solely
upon primary patient cells from either solid tumors or ascitic fluid.
These models have been characterized for tumor cell viability, biomarker
expression, and drug response. We have noted changes in both tumor cell
viability and biomarker expression dependent upon macrophage
differentiation and have also observed the reciprocal effect of tumor
cells upon the macrophages. Additionally, employing multiphoton
microscopy we have identified the incorporation of macrophages into the
3D microtumors. Utilizing primary patient tumor cells and immune
components, we can test these models for patient-specific responses to
not only traditional chemotherapeutics, but also immunotherapies such as
CAR-Ts and antibody drug conjugates.

