Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell invasion dynamics in microchannels during stromal cell
coculture


Metastasizing cancer cells must escape their tumor microenvironment and
invade into surrounding healthy stromal tissue. During this process, they
must balance intercellular crosstalk with ECM degradation, physical force
generation, and cytoskeletal rearrangement. To mimic this process in
vitro, PDMS microchannels fabricated with photolithography and replica
molding were used to examine the interaction of cancer cells with healthy
stromal cells during physical confinement in three dimensional
environments. A focus was placed on understanding the variations in
invasion behavior between healthy cells and cancer cells, then attempting
to explain these differences by cell mechanical properties and gene
expression. Distinct differences in cancer cell invasion characteristics
were observed between wide 10 m channels and narrow 3 m channels, with
the latter exhibiting smooth velocity profiles and increased channel
permeation. Live cell actin staining, ECM protein alteration, and
chemical inhibition of both Rac1 and RhoA mechanical pathways were all
used to better understand these differences, leading to the conclusion
that the actin cytoskeleton is greatly altered during invasion into very
confined channels. To better understand the role of stromal cells in this
process, both indirect and direct coculture of MDA MB-231 basal breast
cancer cells and stromal cells were performed in microchannel chips with
the aid of live cell permeable tracking dyes. To reflect a diverse range
of stromal cell types, cocultures were performed with MCF 10A
non-tumorigenic breast epithelial cells, macrophage-differentiated THP-1
monocytes, and HN-CAFs (head and neck carcinoma-associated fibroblasts).
Both the cancer cells and the stromal cells exhibited increases in
invasion speed upon direct co-culture of the two cancer cell lines, both
in wide and narrow channels. The use of stromal cell-conditioned media as
well as observed differences in migration speed and persistence when
unconfined provided further understanding of the complex processes
underlying cancer cell and stromal cell invasion.

