Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical expansion of tissue microarrays for high-resolution
imaging of normal and cancer samples with conventional microscopy


BACKGROUNDArchival formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues are an
excellent and abundant source of human cancer and normal tissues, useful
for cancer research and diagnosis. Moreover, FFPE tissue microarrays
enable analysis of hundreds of samples from many different patients on
the same slide. Super resolution microscopes have been used for cancer
tissue imaging; however, these methods are expensive and require long
recording times, limiting their usefulness for the cancer research
community. Recently, a new approach (Expansion Microscopy) was developed
to enable physical magnification and high resolution imaging of cell
lines and fresh-frozen (and fixed) mouse brain with conventional
microscopes (Chen F, Tillberg PW, Boyden ES, 2015, Science 347:543-548).
In the current study, we developed expansion microscopy for expanding and
imaging formalin fixed paraffin embedded normal and cancer human tissues,
both in tissue microarrays and whole tissue slides.METHODSExpansion
microscopy (ExM) physically magnifies tissue samples by embedding them in
a dense swellable polymer, anchoring key biomolecules to the polymer
mesh, and adding water to swell the polymer. ExM physically magnifies the
brain tissue with nanoscale isotropy and a post-expansion measurement
error of 2-4%. Proteins can also be visualized by a modified
immunofluorescence assay (Chen F et al., Science, 2015).In the present
study, we optimized the ExM chemistry, labeling, and imaging
methodologies to enable ExM to be used in cancer research and diagnosis,
for morphological and protein imaging and analysis of both tissue
microarrays and whole tissue slides on a wide variety of human tissues.
Nuclei were detected by DAPI, and protein markers, including those of
stroma (vimentin) and epithelium (keratins), were detected using
immunofluorescence.RESULTS and CONCLUSIONSWe developed ExM protocols to
enable expansion of human normal and cancer tissues 4.5x in linear
dimension, with a post-expansion measurement error of 5% or less. We
successfully expanded normal and cancer human FFPE tissue microarrays
containing over eight different tissue origins, including breast,
prostate, lung, colon, pancreas and ovary. We expanded fresh frozen
tissue samples of normal and cancer tissues. Our method makes possible
the use of ExM on routinely collected FFPE pathology samples, enabling
super resolution optical investigation of morphology and protein
expression/localization in tissue microarrays with conventional
fluorescent microscopy. Future applications include both large-scale
retrospective and prospective studies of carcinogenesis in clinical
tissue samples. * Yongxin Zhao and Octavian Bucur contributed equally; #
Edward Boyden (esb@media.mit.edu) and Andrew H. Beck are corresponding
authors (abeck2@bidmc.harvard.edu);

