Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXM1 and FOXQ1 are novel oncogenes in colorectal cancer and can
be therapeutically targeted through miRNA-based therapeutics


OBJECTIVES: The development of colorectal cancer (CRC) is a highly
complex process which needs coordinated regulation in the gene regulatory
network. Forkhead box (FOX) proteins constitute a large family of
transcriptional regulators. Accumulating evidence indicates that several
FOX family members are critical regulators of tumor progression. However,
the role of FOX proteins in CRC remains vastly unknown. miRNAs are single
stranded small non-coding RNAs which can regulate a variety of biological
processes in various human diseases including cancer.AIMS: Herein, we
aimed to identify the expression patterns of FOX family members in CRC,
followed by extensive characterization for their functional and
mechanistic role in this malignancy. In addition, we sought to identify
specific miRNAs that are responsible for dysregulated expression of FOX
proteins in CRC.METHODS: The web-based database ONCOMINE was used to
identify most highly expressed FOX family members in CRC. A cohort of 178
frozen tissues including 134 primary CRC tissues, and 44 matched normal
mucosa tissues were collected to analyze the expression levels of FOX
genes. For functional analysis, cell proliferation, migration and
invasion assays were performed following siRNA knockdown of specific FOX
proteins in CRC cells. The potential FOX-targeting miRNAs were initially
identified using in-silico approaches, followed by luciferase reporter
assays to validate their binding to downstream target genes.RESULTS: We
systematically analyzed the expression profiles of FOX family members
across 24 studies in cancer and normal tissues, and identified FOXM1,
FOXQ1 and FOXA2 as the most highly expressed FOX genes in CRC. The
over-expression of FOXM1 and FOXQ1 in CRC was confirmed in a cohort of
CRC and matched adjacent normal tissues. Furthermore, the analysis of 134
CRC samples revealed that high FOXM1 and FOXQ1 expression resulted in
worse overall survival. We next identified miR-342 as a potential
regulator of both FOXM1 and FOXQ1, and subsequently validated its direct
binding to the 3UTR regions of both genes. Furthermore, the expression of
miR-342 in CRC tissues inversely correlated with both FOXM1 and FOXQ1
expression. In-vitro functional analysis revealed that suppression of
FOXM1 or overexpression of miR-342 inhibited CRC cell proliferation,
while FOXM1 and FOXQ1 knockdown or miR-342 overexpression suppressed
migration and invasion capacity of CRC cell lines. The stable
overexpression of miR-342 reduced FOXM1 and FOXQ1 expression and
significantly inhibited tumor growth in CRC xenografts in nude
mice.CONCLUSIONS: FOXM1 and FOXQ1 promote cancer progression and act as
potential prognostic factors in colon cancer. The downregulation of
miR-342 in tumor tissues may contribute to the CRC development through
inhibition of FOXM1 and FOXQ1 expression, suggesting that miR-342 could
be used as a therapeutic target in colorectal cancer.

