Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptide prodrugs targeting the SH2 domains of p85 block PI3K
signaling


Class IA phosphoinositol-3-kinases (PI3Ks) play pivotal roles in cancer
and inflammation and are targets for anti-cancer therapies. p85 was first
described as a regulatory subunit of Class I PI3Ks which complexes with
the p110 catalytic domain to form the heterodimeric enzyme. PI3Ks are
recruited to cytokine and growth factor receptors via the SH2 domains of
p85. While p85 represses the kinase activity of p110 subunits in the
cytosol, binding to pTyr residues on receptors or adapters activates
p110, resulting in the phosphorylation of the 3-hydroxyl group of
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-diphosphate (PIP2) to form
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3). Membrane-associated PIP3
subsequently recruits kinases such as PDK1 and Akt to the cell membrane.
PDK1 phosphorylates and activates Akt, which propagates growth and
survival signals. In biochemical assays, doubly phosphorylated peptides
enhance catalytic activity of p85/p110 dimers, which led to the dogma
that phosphopeptides should activate PI3K in cells.Due to the challenges
of cellular entry of negatively charged phosphopeptides, blocking
protein-protein interactions mediated by p85 has been largely unexplored
in intact cells. We targeted the SH2 domains of p85 with
phosphatase-stable, cell-permeable prodrug analogs of Y(p)VPML, a
high-affinity ligand derived from Tyr751 of PDGF. To allow cell entry and
to protect against phosphatase degradation, we replaced pTyr with
bis-pivaloyloxymethyl esters of 4-phosphonodifluoromethylphenylalanine
(F2Pmp(POM2)), which have not been reported. We synthesized
Z-NMe-F2Pmp(POM2)-OPcp with the -amino group methylated to enhance cell
penetration and the carboxyl group esterified with pentachlorophenol.
Z-protection was necessary for phosphonate protecting group manipulation
and for stability of the Pcp ester. A series of inhibitors was prepared
by coupling Z-NMe-F2Pmp(POM2)-OPcp to analogs of VPML. Hydrogenation in
the presence of Ac2O gave an N-terminal acetyl prodrug. Screening for
inhibition of EGF-stimulation of pAkt in serum starved MDA-MB-468 cells
led to the identification of the lead inhibitor, PM-190I. In serum
starved MDB-MB-231 cells, PM-190I inhibited EGF-stimulated
phosphorylation of Akt with an IC50 of 5 M. At 30 M Akt phosphorylation
was negligible. These results suggest that the phosphopeptide mimic
blocks recruitment to p85/p110 dimers to EGFR or its substrates, thereby
preventing PI3K pathway signaling. Further, in intact cells, a
mono-phosphopeptide does not stimulate PI3K activity, which contradicts
current dogma.In addition to its role as a regulatory subunit,
non-catalytic roles of p85 include complexing Rab4 and Rab5, stabilizing
PTEN, invadopodium formation, cytokinesis, and nuclear trafficking of
proteins such as XBP-1 and OPNi. Phosphopeptide mimics targeted to the
SH2 domain of p85 have potential applications both in blocking PI3K
signaling as well as in modulating non-catalytic functions.

