Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting breast and ovarian cancer risks for BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutation carriers using polygenic risk scores


Women who carry a pathogenic mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene are at
high risk of breast (BC) and ovarian cancer (OC). Their clinical
management usually includes invasive risk-reducing interventions with
substantial side effects. Improved personalized cancer risk estimates may
help to identify women at particularly high risk or with high risk of
disease at early ages who may benefit from early intervention as well as
women at lower risk who may opt to delay surgery or chemoprevention.
Genome-wide association studies have identified >100 common genetic
variants that are associated with BC or OC risks. Several of these
variants are also individually associated with risk of BC or OC for BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutation carriers. However, no study has evaluated the combined
effects of all the known common genetic variants on BC or OC risk for
BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.We constructed polygenic risk scores (PRS)
based on results of genetic association studies conducted in the general
population. Each PRS was formed by the sum of the number of risk alleles
across the variants weighted by their log-Odds Ratio estimate from
population-based studies of BC or OC. We investigated 3 PRS for BC
(overall, estrogen receptor (ER) positive, and ER-negative) and one PRS
for OC. We used data for 15,252 BRCA1 and 8,211 BRCA2 female carriers.
The association of each PRS with BC or OC risk was evaluated using a
weighted cohort analysis with time to diagnosis as the outcome and
estimated the Hazard Ratios (HR) per standard deviation increase in the
PRS.All PRS were significantly associated with cancer risks for BRCA1/2
carriers. The PRS for ER-negative BC displayed the strongest association
with BC risk in BRCA1 carriers (HR = 1.29 [1.25-1.33], p = 81064). In
BRCA2 carriers, the strongest association was seen for the overall BC PRS
(HR = 1.26 [1.21-1.31], p = 31027). The OC PRS was strongly associated
with OC risk for both BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers. These relative risks
translate to large differences in absolute risks for carriers: e.g., the
OC risk was 6% by age 80 for BRCA2 carriers at the 10th percentile of the
OC PRS compared with 19% risk for those at the 90th percentile of PRS.Our
findings demonstrate that BC and OC PRS derived from studies in the
general population are predictive of cancer risks in BRCA1 and BRCA2
carriers. Incorporation of the PRS into risk prediction models would
improve risk prediction and hence inform decisions on cancer risk
management.

