Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the role of MYC in BRCA1-associated breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women in the Western world.
Approximately 8% of all breast cancer cases may be caused by inheritance
of mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes. Of these, BRCA1 is
the most important one, contributing to approximately half of all
familial breast cancer cases. BRCA1-related breast tumors show a
triple-negative (TBNC) basal like phenotype, that correlates with
aggressive characteristics and bad prognosis. A number of BRCA1
associated genes have been identified; among those MYC overexpression
seems to have an important role in aggressive TBNC. In line with this, we
found MYC to be frequently amplified in both mouse and human
BRCA1-deficient breast cancers. Thus, evaluating the contribution of MYC
to BRCA1-associated breast cancer might unravel new mechanistic insights
and potentially open the way to new therapeutic approaches.To pursue
this, we generated a WAPCre;Brca1F/F;Trp53F/F;Myc (WB1P-MYC) mouse model
to monitor tumor development. Whereas the WAPCre;Brca1F/F;Trp53F/F (WB1P)
mouse model develops tumors after 300 days, Cre-conditional
overexpression of the MYC transgene leads to a dramatic acceleration in
tumor development with a median survival of 100 days. Tumors of both
models were histopathologically classified as solid carcinomas. Further
characterization revealed that WB1P-MYC tumors show higher levels of
apoptosis and DNA damage. Moreover, we also observed a strong difference
in immune infiltrate between WB1P and WB1P-MYC tumors. To better
characterize these differences between WB1P and WB1P-MYC tumors we
obtained tumor organoids. Importantly, these tumor organoids maintained
characteristics of the original tumor like Brca1, P53 deletion status and
MYC overexpression. Moreover, they can be orthotopically transplanted in
vivo, leading to formation of solid carcinomas. Therefore, they represent
a versatile platform to test new drug combinations both in vitro and in
vivo.To test if MYC overexpression is also required for maintenance of
established tumors, we are developing a double-layered system for
Cre-conditional and doxycycline-regulatable overexpression of the MYC
gene in the WAPCre;Brca1F/F;Trp53F/F model. By administering doxycycline
we will induce MYC only in Cre-expressing mammary epithelial cells. After
tumor formation MYC will be switched-off to assess its role in tumor
maintenance and progression. Furthermore, we would like to test new
therapeutic approaches, like combining Myc down-regulation with
administration of PARP inhibitors. In addition, tumor organoids of this
inducible WB1P-MYC model will be a powerful system to study the
MYC-associated phenotype, drugs combinations and forward genetic screens.

