Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interaction of TLK1 and NEK1 in Prostate cancer as key
regulators of the DDR and in mitosis


Background: The Tousled Like Kinases (TLKs) are involved in DNA repair,
the DDR, and also in mitotic segregation. However, only a few substrates
of TLK1 have been identified thus far, such that the mechanism of action
of these kinases remains largely unknown. We have recently identified the
proteome target of TLK1 that consists of 165 proteins identified with
high confidence. Among these, stands out prominently NEK1, and member of
the NIMA family of protein kinases that is specifically involved in the
DDR and in mitotic segregation, making NEK1 and ideal target to explain
several of the functions of TLK1. Specifically, NEK1 is involved in the
early response of the DDR such that it regulates the activity of the
effector kinases Chk1 and Chk2, while specific inhibitors of TLK1 lead to
prolonged S phase arrest and Chk1 activation after treatment of cells
with doxorubicin or hydroxyurea (HU). We have now begun to investigate
the relationship between TLK1 and NEK1.Results: The strong interaction
between TLK1 and NEK1 was established by reciprocal coIP. We also found
that the interaction is cell cycle regulated in DU145 cells, with
strongest interaction in S and G2/M phases after synchronization of cells
with HU. The expression of NEK1 in the most common human PCa cell lines
was also established, and the protein was found to be variably expressed
and phosphorylated. The activity of NEK1 was also found to be cell cycle
regulated using immunoprecipitated NEK1 and casein as the substrate.
Again maximal activity was found in S and phases of the cell cycle. The
activity of NEK1 and TLK1 is regulated by the DDR, and NEK1 activity was
increase after treatment of cells with doxorubicin. However, an inhibitor
of TLK1 suppressed the increased activation, reinforcing a strong
relation between TLK1 and NEK1 activity. Recombinant TLK1B stimulates the
activity of recombinant NEK1 using casein as a substrate. Further
suggesting that TLK1B is a regulator of NEK1 activity in cells. LNCaP
cells when treated for 4 hours in charcoal stripped medium, have much
higher NEK1 activity.Conclusions: We have identified, first through a
proteomic screen, a strong interaction between TLK1 and NEK1. The
activity of the two proteins throughout the cell cycle and in response to
DNA damage is exactly coregulated, and we propose that TLK1 is a direct
regulator of NEK1 activity. TLK1 and NEK1 are highly expressed in PCa
samples compared to normal prostate cells (Atlas of human cancers), and
we propose a novel axis that is upregulated in PCa that leads to
resistance to DNA damaging agents/treatments (including androgen
deprivation) and to the induction of mitotic aberrations that are a
common occurrence in cancer cells. Since TLK1B expression is induced by
androgen deprivation (ADT), we suggest that NEK1 activity is also
increased following ADT via the PI3K/AKT/ mTOR/eIF4E pathway.

