Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multifunctional peptide for targeted imaging, localization of
transformed cell and chemotherapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma and other
cancers


Introduction: In treating cancer with chemotherapy, the ultimate goal is
to deliver sufficient amounts of the drug to tumor cells while minimizing
the damage of normal tissue. To achieve this purpose, using a
phage-displayed random peptide library to screen the nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC)-TW01 cell line, we identified a specific peptide
(L-peptide), which binds specifically to NPC tumor cells but not normal
cells. To investigate whether this L- peptide can also bind to other
cancer cell lines, be used for cancer tissue binding, targeted imaging
and chemotherapy, we have performed this experiment. Methods: A
fluorescein-labelled L-peptide was used to perform FACScan for 7 cancer
cell lines. The L-peptide was linked to dextran coated iron oxide
(L-P-Fe3O4) nanoparticles and a biotin labeled modified L-peptide
(biotin-mL-P) were also used to localize L-peptide targeted protein
(X-protein) in NPC and breast cancer surgical specimens. This conjugate
was also injected intravenously to SCID mice bearing NPC and breast
cancer xenografts for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis.
Furthermore, L-peptide-linked liposomal doxorubicin (L-P-Lipo-Dox) was
used to observe the efficacy of peptide-targeted chemotherapy in both
cancers. Results and Conclusions: FACscan revealed specific binding of
L-peptide to NPC, breast cancer, lung cancer, and neuroblastoma. The
X-protein in both cancer specimens localized by biotin-mL-P was seen in
many NPC and breast cancer tumor cells with some unstained tumor cells,
but not or very weak in normal tissue; the X-protein in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded section could be localized by L-P-Fe3O4 histochemistry
in both cancer specimens. MRI analysis of both cancer xenograft bearing
mice after injection of L-P-Fe3O4 revealed significant change in the MR
signal intensity. A high efficacy of L-P-Lipo-Dox treatment for both
cancers with minimal adverse effect was obtained. This multifunctional
L-peptide seems able to be used for localization of its binding protein
in each cancer cell type, molecular MRI analysis and targeted
chemotherapy with minimal adverse effect in different cancer types.

