Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intraperitoneal CAR-T infusion results in durable protection
against peritoneal metastases and control of systemic tumor growth


Colorectal carcinomatosis due to peritoneal metastases (PM) is a
significant cause of morbidity and mortality. Present treatments fail to
cure the majority of patients with PM. We are developing a chimeric
antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) regional infusion immunotherapy platform
for PM. We treated mice with established CEA+ MC38 PMs with anti-CEA
CAR-Ts either via regional intraperitoneal (IP) or systemic tail vein
(TV) infusion. When compared to TV infusion, IP delivery resulted in
significantly improved responses (37-fold reduction in tumor growth,
pColorectal carcinomatosis due to peritoneal metastases (PM) is a
significant cause of morbidity and mortality. Present treatments fail to
cure the majority of patients with PM. We are developing a chimeric
antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) regional infusion immunotherapy platform
for PM. We treated mice with established CEA+ MC38 PMs with anti-CEA
CAR-Ts either via regional intraperitoneal (IP) or systemic tail vein
(TV) infusion. When compared to TV infusion, IP delivery resulted in
significantly improved responses (37-fold reduction in tumor growth,
p<0.01). To measure the durability of protection from IP tumor growth, we
re-challenged mice with IP tumor following successful treatment with IP
CAR-Ts. Mice who had received initial IP CAR-T treatment were protected
from tumor growth following re-challenge for 20 days compared to control
animals (1390-fold reduction in tumor growth, p = 0.016). Assessment of
IP tumor 10 and 28 days following tumor re-challenge revealed a high
proportion of intratumoral CAR-Ts (Day 10- 70.0%, Day 28- 46.6%; p =
0.10) and the proportion of CAR-Ts with an effector memory phenotype
(CD44+CD62L-CCR7-, Day 10- 19.3%, Day 28- 60.0%; pColorectal
carcinomatosis due to peritoneal metastases (PM) is a significant cause
of morbidity and mortality. Present treatments fail to cure the majority
of patients with PM. We are developing a chimeric antigen receptor T cell
(CAR-T) regional infusion immunotherapy platform for PM. We treated mice
with established CEA+ MC38 PMs with anti-CEA CAR-Ts either via regional
intraperitoneal (IP) or systemic tail vein (TV) infusion. When compared
to TV infusion, IP delivery resulted in significantly improved responses
(37-fold reduction in tumor growth, p<0.01). To measure the durability of
protection from IP tumor growth, we re-challenged mice with IP tumor
following successful treatment with IP CAR-Ts. Mice who had received
initial IP CAR-T treatment were protected from tumor growth following
re-challenge for 20 days compared to control animals (1390-fold reduction
in tumor growth, p = 0.016). Assessment of IP tumor 10 and 28 days
following tumor re-challenge revealed a high proportion of intratumoral
CAR-Ts (Day 10- 70.0%, Day 28- 46.6%; p = 0.10) and the proportion of
CAR-Ts with an effector memory phenotype (CD44+CD62L-CCR7-, Day 10-
19.3%, Day 28- 60.0%; p<0.01). In separate experiments, we studied the
effect of IP CAR-T infusions on tumor growth at distant sites. We
established both IP and subcutaneous (SQ) flank tumors in mice prior to
CAR-T infusions. Following treatment, IP CAR-T infusion resulted in a
significant decrease in SQ tumor growth on day 8 compared to control
(5.7-fold, p = 0.03), and a trend toward improvement compared to TV
(4.9-fold, p = 0.224). While CAR-Ts were not detected in whole blood, SQ
tumor, or draining lymph nodes following IP CAR-T infusion, serum IFN
levels were significantly elevated on day 4 compared to control mice (p =
0.04), and returned to baseline by day 7. Our findings demonstrate that
regional IP CAR-T delivery provides durable protection against IP tumor
growth in association with CAR-T effector memory programming, in addition
to a systemic anti-tumor effect.

