Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution of skin carcinomas during tumor progression and
metastasis


Tumor heterogeneity and the ongoing evolution of tumor subpopulations
have presented considerable challenges to the success of cancer
therapies, highlighting a critical need for greater understanding of
these phenomena. We used a K5CreER-Confetti reporter mouse in combination
with the DMBA (dimethylbenzanthracene)/TPA
(12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) skin carcinogenesis model to study
the genetics, clonality, and evolutionary behavior of tumor
subpopulations from tumor initiation to metastasis. Treating the skin of
K5CreER-Confetti mice with tamoxifen results in widespread labeling of
the epidermis and hair follicles, which persists for at least 18 months.
Papillomas that develop from Confetti-activated skin are of clonal
origin, evidenced by each tumor being distinctly dominated by a single
Confetti color (RFP, YFP, GFP, or CFP; or uncolored). Twelve weeks after
initiation, the majority of tumors remain single-colored, with only 22%
(36 of 133) showing any evidence of a secondary color population present.
By 20 weeks after initiation, however, nearly all tumors (78%, 42 of 54)
have incorporated one or more secondary populations, readily identifiable
as streaks of a distinct color. FACS separation and sequencing of these
different colored populations reveals these populations are genetically
distinct: in preliminary analysis, the primary color population typically
carries the expected driver Hras Q61L mutation while the secondary
populations do not. The tumor thus appears to be incorporating
pseudo-normal tissue from its microenvironment during early growth.
Activation of the Confetti reporter in tumors post-initiation in
papillomas results in labeling of single cells with all 4 Confetti
colors, allowing subpopulations and their evolution to be studied at
later stages. These highly multi-color papillomas subsequently give rise
to single-color carcinomas and metastases, suggesting that the conversion
from a benign to malignant tumor is clonally driven. The Confetti mouse
is a valuable tool for studying the clonality and genetics of
subpopulations present in tumors, which need to be better understood in
order to improve the treatment of heterogeneous human tumors.

