Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monocarboxylate transporters as potential therapeutic targets in
human ovarian cancer


Introduction- Cancer cells have the ability to favour glycolysis for the
production of lactate even in the presence of sufficient levels of
oxygen. This is known as the warburg effect or aerobic glycolysis. As a
consequence of this glycolytic switch, there is an accumulation of
lactate within cells. Therefore, cells must remove this excess lactate in
order to prevent cell death via intracellular acidosis. In order to do
this cells use Monocarboxylate Transporters (MCTs), which are responsible
for the transport of lactate in and out of cells. MCT1 and MCT4 have been
found to be over expressed in many types of human cancers, including
ovarian cancer.Aims- The aim of this study was to assess how changing the
expression levels of MCT1 and MCT4 effects the growth and response to
therapy of four Human Ovarian cancer cell lines (Skov3, Caov3, OV90 and
Ovcar3).Methods- Cell lines were stably transfected to either over
express MCT1 (Skov3, Caov3, and OV90 cells), MCT4 (OV90 cells) or to
contain doxycycline inducible silencing of MCT4 (Skov3, Caov3 and Ovcar3
cells). The effect of changing the expression levels of MCT1 and MCT4 on
the function of these cell lines was assessed. Assays to look at changes
in cell proliferation, lactate accumulation and release, and the
cytotoxicity of Paclitaxel and Carboplatin were determined in both
normoxia (21% O2) and hypoxia (0.1/1% O2).Results- Over expressing MCT1
in the three human ovarian cell lines had no effect on cell growth or
lactate release in normoxia or hypoxia. Also when MCT1 was over expressed
in Skov3 and Caov3 cells there were no changes in their sensitivity to
Carboplatin or Paclitaxel. However, when MCT1 was over expressed in OV90
cells, they became slightly more resistant to Paclitaxel. Over expressing
MCT4 in OV90 cells also had no effect on cell growth in normoxia, but
significantly more lactate was released by these cells. Secondly, when
these cells were grown in hypoxia they survived for a greater period of
time than wild type cells. This correlated with a much higher amount of
lactate being released by these cells. Finally, these cells were more
resistant to Paclitaxel than both the MCT1 over expressing cell lines and
their wild type counterparts.Conclusions- Changing the expression levels
of MCT1 and MCT4 in Human Ovarian cancer cells have an effect on normal
cell function. This suggests that MCTs could be potential therapeutic
targets in ovarian cancer.

