Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and in vitro and in vivo characterization of a novel,
small-molecule Ras inhibitor class


Introduction: Mutations in ras genes that result in constitutive
activation of Ras proteins are key drivers of oncogenesis, but no
effective drugs have been developed that target these aberrant gene
products. Through iterative screening and chemical optimization using a
phenotypic assay designed to select for Ras inhibitors, we identified a
novel series of compounds that potently and selectively inhibit the
growth of tumor cells harboring activated Ras relative to cells lacking
activated Ras. Several compounds in the series have favorable drug-like
properties with strong antitumor activity in a mouse K-Ras mutant tumor
model.Methods: Viable cell number was measured using a luminescent
indicator of ATP. Disruption of Ras-Raf binding was determined by
pre-incubating GST-Raf beads with cell lysates in the presence of test
compounds for 30 min. Ras activation was measured by Ras pull-down and
western blotting using an anti-Ras antibody. Cell cycle arrest was
measured by DNA content. Antitumor activity was determined in a
subcutaneous mouse tumor model involving K-Ras mutant HCT116 colon
tumors. Mice were treated with Ras inhibitors administered ip for 14 days
bid at a dose of 2.5 or 5 mg/kg.Results: Low nanomolar concentrations of
DC070-547 inhibited the growth of multiple tumor cell lines harboring
activated K-Ras, N-Ras or H-Ras with a selectivity index greater than
100-fold over cells lacking activated Ras. Ras selectivity was confirmed
by transfecting human HT29 colon and H322 lung tumor cells that lack
activated Ras with mutant H-Ras, thus inducing sensitivity to DC070-547.
The compound also inhibited Ras-Raf binding as evident by Ras-pull down
assays of lysates from tumor cells treated with DC070-0547 at
concentrations that inhibit tumor cell growth. DC070-547 caused G2 phase
cell cycle arrest and induced apoptosis selectively in tumor cells
containing activated Ras. Cultured epithelial cells derived from normal
colon, mammary, and lung tissues were essentially refractory to
treatment.The Ras inhibitors were evaluated for antitumor activity in a
subcutaneous mouse model involving K-Ras mutant human HCT116 colon
tumors. Treatments were well tolerated and completely suppressed tumor
growth with the effect being sustained for at least six weeks after
treatment was discontinued. Complete tumor regression was also apparent
in some of the treated mice.Conclusion: While Ras is widely considered to
be non-druggable, we have identified a novel series of compounds that
potently and selectivity inhibit the growth of tumor cells harboring
activated Ras. With promising drug-like properties, these compounds
represent a first in class series of Ras inhibitors from which several
prospective drug development candidates have been identified.. These
results support further preclinical development and future Phase I/II
clinical evaluation in patients with Ras-driven cancers.

