Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Auristatin-based antibody drug conjugates activate multiple ER
stress response pathways resulting in immunogenic cell death and
amplified T-cell responses


Brentuximab vedotin (ADCETRIS) is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC)
directed against CD30. This ADC consists of monoclonal antibodies
conjugated to the auristatin monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) a
microtubule-disrupting agent. ADC antitumor activity is thought to be
primarily the result of intracellular payload release leading to mitotic
arrest and apoptotic cell death. We have recently demonstrated that
brentuximab vedotin induces surface expression of calreticulin and HSP70
as well as activation of the transcription factor ATF6 which are
classical hallmarks of immunogenic cell death (ICD) associated with
unfolded protein/ER stress response. In this study, we provide evidence
that additional ER stress response pathways are activated.Treatment of
CD30+ Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cells or xenografts with brentuximab vedotin
resulted in the phosphorylation of the ER-associated, unfolded-protein
response transmembrane protein inositol-requiring transmembrane
kinase/endonuclease 1 (IRE1). Activation of IRE1 was confirmed by the
increase in phosphorylation of the downstream effector Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK). Kinetics of tubulin disruption, ER stress induction,
evidence of ICD, mitotic arrest, and apoptosis was assessed. Onset of ICD
occurred concurrently with induction of ER stress response pathways
including induction of pIRE1 and pJNK. Interestingly, induction of ER
stress response and ICD preceded mitotic arrest and caspase activation.
These results indicate that brentuximab vedotin-mediated disruption of
the microtubule network contributes to ER stress, which maybe an
apoptotic mechanism mediated by auristatin-ADCs in addition to mitotic
arrest at G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Induction of ICD may also be a
class effect of the auristatin-based ADCs, as the small molecule payload
MMAE, was able to activate IRE1 and JNK and induced surface expression of
calrecutilin on target cells.Previously, brentuximab vedotin-killed HL
cells were shown to induce innate immune cell activation in vitro and in
vivo. Addition of ADC-killed tumor-like cells to autologous PBMCs results
in the expansion of INF-secreting cytotoxic T-cells. Via induction of ER
stress, tumor cells killed by auristatin-based ADCs may initiate an
antitumor immune response and provides a rationale for exploring
therapeutic strategies that combine ADCs with other immune stimulatory
regimens.

