Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of novel antibodies for understanding MUC16
cleavage and its pathological implications in cancer


Introduction: MUC16 (CA125) is a type I transmembrane mucin that exhibits
differential expression in multiple malignancies including ovarian,
pancreatic and breast cancers. It was initially predicted to undergo
cleavage in the penultimate and/or last sea urchin, enterokinase, and
agrin (SEA) domain (among a total of 56) to generate circulating CA125.
However, our recent studies demonstrated the presence of a unique
cleavage site that involves 12 amino acid residues proximal to
transmembrane segment. Upon ectopic overexpression, this cleaved
intracellular C-terminal (C-ter) fragment promotes tumor metastasis,
invasion and upregulates cancer stem cell inducing genes in cancer cells.
However, physiological presence of C-ter cleavage and its role in cancer
remains obscure since most available antibodies recognize the N-terminal
tandem repeat domain of MUC16. The present study aims to develop novel
antibodies against MUC16 C-ter fragment to dissect its role in tumor
development and progression.Methods: Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were
generated by immunizing mice with purified C-ter (114 amino acid) domain
of MUC16. MUC16 reactive hybridomas were screened by indirect ELISA.
Positive hybridomas were isolated, cloned and the antibodies were
purified from culture supernatant. The specificity of the newly generated
anti-MUC16 antibodies was determined using immunoprecipitation,
immunoblot, confocal, and FACS analysis. Finally, the reactivity of novel
antibodies was evaluated on mouse and human tumor tissues by
immunohistochemistry.Results: Two mAbs (3H1 and 5E6) showed specific
reactivity to recombinant MUC16 C-ter fragment in ELISA. Stringent
checkpoints were included such as expression analyses in MUC16 expressing
and non-expressing cell lines, histological reactivity in normal and
MUC16 expressing cancer tissues and MUC16 C-ter over expression
constructs to delineate the highly specific nature of these antibodies.
Epitope mapping studies using MUC16 C-ter constructs transfected into
HEK293T cells identified the epitope to most probably lie in a 61 amino
acid region just proximal to transmembrane domain. Interestingly, in
immunoblot and immunoprecipitation analysis, these mAbs identified a
unique 20kDa cleavage product in some but not all MUC16 expressing cancer
cell lines. This suggests the existence of a cell-context dependent
cleavage mechanism for MUC16. Both mAbs preferentially recognize
intracellular antigen as compared to cell surface exposed epitope.
Further, these exhibited strong reactivity in pancreatic and ovarian
cancer tissues in the same regions that stained positive for mAb
CA125.Conclusions: The novel mAbs exhibit unique specificity towards
cleaved MUC16 C-ter in cell lysates and tissues and hence can be valuable
reagents for studying the mechanisms and role of MUC16 cleavage in cancer
cells.

