Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer stem cell induction by COX-2 via
EP4/PI3K-AKT/NOTCH-WNT axis: EP4 as therapeutic target


Cancer stem-like cells (SLC) resist conventional therapies, necessitating
searches for SLC-specific targets. We established that
cyclo-oxygenase(COX)-2 expression promotes human breast cancer
progression by activation of the prostaglandin(PG)E-2 receptor EP4.
Present study revealed that COX-2 induces SLCs by EP4-mediated NOTCH and
WNT up-regulation. EP4 antagonist (EP4A) treatment ablated SLCs both in
vitro and in vivo. Ectopic COX-2 over-expression in MCF-7 and SKBR-3
human breast cancer cell lines (named MCF-7-COX-2 and SKBR-3-COX-2)
resulted in aggressive phenotypes: increased
migration/invasion/proliferation, EMT, elevated SLCs, evidenced by
spheroid formation for successive generations, increased ALDH activity
and co-expression of COX-2/SLC markers. These changes were reversed with
COX-2 inhibitor or EP4A, indicating dependence on COX-2/EP4 activities.
COX-2 overexpression or EP4 agonist treatment of COX-2 low cells caused
up-regulation of NOTCH/WNT pathway genes, blocked with PI3K/AKT
inhibitors. Supporting above findings, micro-array analysisshowed
up-regulation of numerous SLC-regulatory and EMT-associated genes in
MCF-7-COX-2 cells. MCF-7-COX-2 cells showed increased orthotopic
tumorigenicity and spontaneous multi-organ metastases in
NOD/SCID/IL-2R-deficient mice for successive generations with limiting
cell inocula. Orthotopic tumors showed significant up-regulation of
VEGF-A/C/D, Vimentin and phospho-AKT, down-regulation of E-Cadherin and
enrichment of SLC marker positive and spheroid forming cells. MCF-7-COX-2
cells also showed increased lung colonization in NOD/SCID/GUSB-null mice,
an effect reversed with EP4 knockdown or EP4A treatment. COX-2, EP4 and
ALDH1A expression in situ in human breast cancer tissues were highly
correlated with one other, more marked in progressive stage of disease.
High COX-2/EP4 expression was linked with poor survival. Thus EP4
represents a novel SLC-ablative target in human breast cancer. (Supported
by a grant of the OICR to PKL and a TBCRU fellowship to MM)

