Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-seq, exome-seq, functional RNAi screening and bioinformatics
analyses identify molecules promoting aberrant activation of classical
and alternative NF-kB pathways in head and neck cell lines


We previously observed aberrant activation of NF-kB in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), however, the signaling constitutively
activating NF-kB in solid cancers has not been well defined. Recently,
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project has investigated 279 HNSCC tissue
specimens, and uncovered significant genomic alterations of key molecules
involved in inflammation, NF-kB, and death pathways. These genetic
alterations include amplification of FADD and BIRC2/3, mutations of
caspase 8 and RIPKs in HPV(-), or deletion of TRAF3 in HPV(+) HNSCC
tissues. Using bioinformatics analyses and protein structural and
interactive tools, we identified 60 proteins that potentially interact
with these genetically altered molecules. More than 90% HNSCC tissues
studied in TCGA exhibited expression or genetic alterations of these
genes, of which FADD amplification and/or overexpression ranked first
with 37%. We searched this group of genes among more than 20 major cancer
types investigated by TCGA, among which HNSCC ranked the highest for
these alterations. To further investigate and identify experimental
models for functional studies of these genetic and phenotypic
alterations, we have performed RNA-seq and exome DNA-seq in 15 HPV(-) and
11 HPV(+) HNSCC lines, and compared them with three normal human oral
mucosa lines and 8 matched blood samples. Among the top 30 genes
identified from TCGA with the alteration rate greater than 8% in cancer
tissues, we found consistent expression patterns for 57% molecules in our
cell lines. To further test the function of these molecules, we
established HNSCC cell lines stably transfected with a vector that
contains NF-kB transcription factor response elements upstream of the
-lactamase reporter gene (Gene BLAzer). Using these NF-kB reporter cell
lines, genome-wide RNAi screening assays have been performed and the
regulatory and signaling molecules involved in NF-B and death pathways in
responding to TNF- have been identified. We further validated the
screening results by knockdown of 35 genes individually using two siRNAs
for each genes, and found that knockdown of 16 genes significantly
modulated TNF- and Lymphotoxin (LT) induced NF-B activity and/or cell
survival. We observed that TNF- and LT cross-activate classical and
alternative NF-B pathways and regulate key molecules that serve
differential roles in proliferation, survival and migration in HNSCC. Our
data help define key molecules modulating aberrant classical and
alternative NF-kB activation, as candidate molecular biomarkers for
diagnosis and prognosis and targets for further preclinical and clinical
investigation in HNSCC.(Supported by NIDCD/NIH intramural projects
ZIA-DC-000016, 73, 74; and NCI/NIH, under contract number
HHSN261200800001E).

