Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of conditional reprogramming to develop and characterize cell
cultures from patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of human lung and
ovarian cancer


Patient-derived xenografts (PDX) are widely recognized as a more
physiologically relevant preclinical model to standard cell line
xenografts. PDX models faithfully recapitulate the original patient
genetic profile, gene expression patterns and tissue histology. Despite
their benefits, PDX models are limited by their inherent variability,
lower throughput and lack of growth in vitro. The ability to generate
cell lines from PDX models would enable high throughput chemosensitivity
screens, ex vivo genetic manipulation and the development of novel
orthotopic models. Development of stable PDX cell lines remains a
challenge due to murine stromal outgrowth, lineage commitment and limited
differentiation potential. Conditional reprogramming (CR) cell technology
is a novel cell culture system facilitating the generation of stable
cultures without genetic manipulation (Liu, Am J Pathol, 2012). The
success of CR cell technology is dependent upon the combination of feeder
cell-derived factors and Rho Kinase (ROCK) inhibitor. CR cells,
therefore, represent a new class of progenitor-like cells, distinct from
the phenotype of embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells. The purpose of this study was to identify the advantages,
limitations and potential applications of CR technology for derivation of
PDX explant cell lines. Early passage human lung and ovarian PDX tumors
were cultured in CR conditions to create stable explant cell lines. Cell
lines were established from 5/8 (63%) PDX tumors and were expanded over 6
months in culture with varying morphologies and growth kinetics. Due to
normal outgrowth of murine stromal cells, early CR cultures contained
mixed populations and required murine depletion to enrich for human
cells. Key oncogenic mutations in a model of ovarian papillary serous
adenocarcinoma were preserved in the enriched tumor cell population.
While purified CR PDX cell lines were amenable to high throughput
chemosensitivity screens, in vitro chemosensitivity did not consistently
predict response in in vivo murine models. The CR PDX cell lines were
additionally assessed for genetic manipulation and ability to form tumors
in vivo. Collectively, these results demonstrate the applications of CR
technology for the generation of stable explant cell lines from PDX
models for preclinical studies.

