Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-X-C chemokine receptor 4 and cannabinoid receptor 2 interact to
abrogate CXCL12-mediated cellular response


Expression of C-X-C Chemokine Receptor 4 (CXCR4) encourages tumors cells
to migrate to distal organs expressing its cognate ligand, CXCL12, thus
facilitating metastasis. Thus, targeting the CXCR4/CXCL12 signaling axis
is a good strategy to inhibit the metastatic spread and progression of
cancer. It has been suggested that homo- or heterodimerization of GPCRs
causes decreased signaling through receptor complexes, representing
functional desensitization. In the context of cancer treatment, it is
plausible that CXCR4 signaling can be silenced through heterodimeric
association with other receptors, thereby inhibiting functions that would
lead to metastasis. Various studies suggest that cannabis, signaling via
cannabinoid receptors, have anti-proliferative and anti-metastatic
properties; though a biochemical mechanism describing how this phenomenon
has not been described. Weve confirmed that agonist-bound CXCR4 and
agonist-bound Cannabinoid Receptor 2 (CB2) form a heterodimer that
decreases cancer cell migration. Simultaneous treatment of the breast
cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, with CXCL12 and AM1241 (synthetic CB2
agonist), desensitized the intrinsic cellular CXCR4 response of cells to
migrate towards CXCL12. Furthermore, through co-immunoprecipitation and
proximity ligation assays (PLA), we determined increased interaction
between the two receptors upon co-stimulation of respective agonists. To
further delineate whether co-stimulation of both receptors led to
subsequent heterodimerization, CXCR4 receptor activity was inhibited by
an antagonist, AMD3100, or expression of endogenous CXCL12 was
downregulated by siRNA. An interaction was observed in simultaneously
treated AM1241/CXCL12 cells between CXCR4 and CB2, and surprisingly, in
AM1241-treated cells. However, upon pretreatment with AMD3100, and
CXCL12-siRNA, receptor association was no longer observed in
AM1241-treated cells, supporting the therapeutic notion that treating
tumors that endogenously secreted CXCL12 with an exogenous AM1241 can
induce dimerization. Moreover, when CXCR4 and CB2 were activated
simultaneously with various agonists, decreases in migration were
observed, confirming that the regulatory activity was receptor-based, not
agonist-based. Further, cells pre-treated with CB2 antagonist (AM630) and
combinations of CXCL12 and AM1241 the anticipated decrease in migration
was no longer seen. Finally, to determine whether simultaneously-treated,
dimerized receptors inhibited activity of respective receptors, calcium
mobilization assays showed that transiently activated calcium levels were
significantly lower in response to simultaneous treated cells when
compared to cells treated with their individual ligands. Therefore, a
physical interaction between CXCR4 and CB2 may inhibit the response to
CXCL12, leading to a loss in metastatic potential.

