Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of payer status on early stage laryngeal cancer survival


BackgroundIt is estimated that there will be 13,560 new cases of larynx
cancer and an estimated 3,640 people will die of this disease, in 2015.
There are many risk factors affecting survival outcomes in larynx cancer.
Previous studies on laryngeal cancer found several discrepancies for
mortality in patients with various racial and socioeconomic backgrounds.
However, further studies indicate that reduced survival outcomes for
African-American or uninsured patients are not affected by tumor biology
hinting that some disparities can be overcome through healthcare equity.
In the wake of the Affordable Care Act and its impact on insurance
coverage, evaluating the effect of insurance status on health outcomes is
urgently necessary. This study characterizes the relationship between
payer status and overall survival for larynx cancer patients by analyzing
data from the large National Cancer Data Base (NCDB).MethodsWe analyzed
data from the National Cancer Data Base of 22,177 patients with laryngeal
cancer of stage I and II who received laser surgery or radiation
treatment. The outcome variable was overall survival and the primary
predictor variable was payer status. Additional variables addressed and
adjusted for included sex, age, race, Charlson Comorbidity index,
education, income, distance traveled facility type, diagnosing/treating
facility, treatment delay, stage, grade and type of treatment
received.ResultsAmong these 22,177 patients, approximately 90% were over
age 50 years, and 80% of the patients were male. 48.5%, 39.4%, 5.4%, 3.8%
and 2.7% of patients had Medicare, private, Medicaid, uninsured, and
unknown status, respectively. There was 83% of patients received
radiation treatment only whereas 5.2% received laser surgery and 3.2%
received both laser surgery and radiation.In multivariate analysis, after
adjusting for secondary predictor variables, payer status was a
statistically significant predictor of overall survival.Relative to
privately insured patients, patients with Medicaid had a 76% increased
risk, no insurance had a 29% increased risk, Medicare had a 38% increased
risk and unknown insurance had a 25% increased risk of mortality.
Compared to patients without treatment (no radiation, no laser surgery),
patient with laser surgery, patients with laser and radiation therapy
were 77% and 76% less likely to die while patients receiving radiation
therapy was not significant different from no treatment.ConclusionWe
observed that payer status has a statistically significant relationship
with overall survival from laryngeal cancer. This remained true after
adjusting for other predictive factors. Medicaid Medicare and uninsured
patients had the highest mortality while privately insured patients had
the lowest mortality. Further research is necessary how the disparities
associated with different types of insurance result in inferior treatment
outcomes and the ways to address them.

