Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of tumor PD-L1 expression by epithelial-mesenchymal
phenotypic plasticity


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a molecular and cellular
program in which epithelial cells lose their well-differentiated
phenotype and adopt mesenchymal traits. This process occurs during the
progression of cancer to metastatic disease; tumor cells undergoing EMT
acquire invasive characteristics, and mesenchymal features can be highly
enriched among circulating tumor cells. EMT has also been associated with
the resistance to multiple therapeutic agents, and may ultimately lead to
relapse. Emerging research indicates that tumor cells undergoing EMT may
also exhibit resistance to killing by innate natural killer (NK) cells
and antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Furthermore, tumor
cells can evade immune destruction by upregulating the checkpoint
molecule PD-L1. Given the contribution of tumor cell phenotypic
plasticity to the susceptibility of tumor cells to immune attack, we have
evaluated the role of EMT in the expression of PD-L1. Using several
different cell line model systems, we devised an mRNA-based EMT scoring
method to rank tumor cells according to their phenotypic characteristics.
Our model systems included groups of isogenic cell lines in which
phenotype modulation was achieved via 1) TGF-1 treatment; 2) manipulation
of EMT genes by transfection; 3) isolation of single cell clones; and 4)
selection with chemotherapy. Scoring of the cell lines revealed the
existence of distinct epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes, as well as
an intermediate (also termed hybrid or metastable) phenotype in which
markers of both differentiation states are co-expressed within the same
cell line. Analysis of PD-L1 at the mRNA and protein level (antibody
clone MIH1) demonstrated that significant changes in PD-L1 expression
take place in response to tumor phenotypic modulation. Using multiple
systems, it was observed that acquisition of a distinct mesenchymal
phenotype associated with increased levels of PD-L1 expression, compared
to isogenic tumor cells exhibiting an epithelial phenotype (for example,
with tumor cells induced into the mesenchymal phenotype via TGF-1
treatment or E-cadherin knockdown). In contrast, acquisition of an
intermediate tumor phenotype characterized by co-expression of epithelial
and mesenchymal features resulted in significant loss of PD-L1
expression. This phenomenon was observed in tumor cells exposed to
chemotherapy in which acquisition of mesenchymal markers took place in
the presence of sustained levels of epithelial markers (including
E-cadherin). Altogether, our results highlight the importance of tumor
phenotypic plasticity on PD-L1 expression. We plan to utilize these
various models to understand the mechanism(s) of PD-L1 regulation by
phenotype modulation and also to evaluate the potential predictive value
of tumor cell phenotype, in conjunction with PD-L1 levels, on the
susceptibility of tumor cells to killing by immune cells.

