Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of NRAS isoform 2 overexpression as a novel
mechanism facilitating BRAF inhibitor resistance in malignant melanoma
(MM)


Activating mutations in BRAF are found in 50% of melanomas and are
associated with poor outcomes due to constitutive activation of the
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Treatment with BRAF
inhibitors (BRAFi), such as vemurafenib, is effective but resistance can
develop. A major mechanism of resistance involves feedback loop-mediated
increased expression of the NRAS gene. Recently, we discovered the NRAS
transcript is differentially spliced to give 5 novel isoforms (isos),
which differ in their expression, cellular localization and downstream
effects. We hypothesized that differential expression of one or more of
the isos may contribute to the development of BRAFi resistance. We
assessed iso-specific NRAS expression in 14 MM cell lines and
melanocytes, and noted a curious expression profile of iso2: while
undetectable in melanocytes and BRAFwt MM cells, its abundance was
increased in BRAFmut cells, and it was the only NRAS iso highly
overexpressed in 3 BRAFi resistant cell lines (pActivating mutations in
BRAF are found in 50% of melanomas and are associated with poor outcomes
due to constitutive activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway. Treatment with BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi), such as
vemurafenib, is effective but resistance can develop. A major mechanism
of resistance involves feedback loop-mediated increased expression of the
NRAS gene. Recently, we discovered the NRAS transcript is differentially
spliced to give 5 novel isoforms (isos), which differ in their
expression, cellular localization and downstream effects. We hypothesized
that differential expression of one or more of the isos may contribute to
the development of BRAFi resistance. We assessed iso-specific NRAS
expression in 14 MM cell lines and melanocytes, and noted a curious
expression profile of iso2: while undetectable in melanocytes and BRAFwt
MM cells, its abundance was increased in BRAFmut cells, and it was the
only NRAS iso highly overexpressed in 3 BRAFi resistant cell lines
(p<0.01). Iso2 is characterized by an additional exon (exon 3b) compared
to canonical NRAS iso1. To explore the possible role of NRAS iso2 in MM,
BRAFmut A375 cells were engineered to overexpress NRAS isos 1, 2 and
empty vector (EV). Iso2 overexpression led to significantly increased MM
cell proliferation in vitro, and surprisingly also increased
proliferation during treatment with BRAFi (pActivating mutations in BRAF
are found in 50% of melanomas and are associated with poor outcomes due
to constitutive activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway. Treatment with BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi), such as vemurafenib, is
effective but resistance can develop. A major mechanism of resistance
involves feedback loop-mediated increased expression of the NRAS gene.
Recently, we discovered the NRAS transcript is differentially spliced to
give 5 novel isoforms (isos), which differ in their expression, cellular
localization and downstream effects. We hypothesized that differential
expression of one or more of the isos may contribute to the development
of BRAFi resistance. We assessed iso-specific NRAS expression in 14 MM
cell lines and melanocytes, and noted a curious expression profile of
iso2: while undetectable in melanocytes and BRAFwt MM cells, its
abundance was increased in BRAFmut cells, and it was the only NRAS iso
highly overexpressed in 3 BRAFi resistant cell lines (p<0.01). Iso2 is
characterized by an additional exon (exon 3b) compared to canonical NRAS
iso1. To explore the possible role of NRAS iso2 in MM, BRAFmut A375 cells
were engineered to overexpress NRAS isos 1, 2 and empty vector (EV). Iso2
overexpression led to significantly increased MM cell proliferation in
vitro, and surprisingly also increased proliferation during treatment
with BRAFi (p<0.001). In a xenograft model, athymic nude mice with A375
tumors stably overexpressing iso1, iso2 or EV were treated with oral
BRAFi (50 mg/kg) or PBS for 21 days. Iso 2 overexpressing tumors did not
respond to in vivo treatment with BRAFi and grew faster than their iso 1
overexpressing and EV counterparts, as quantified by IVIS imaging, which
resulted in a significantly shortened survival of both BRAFi and PBS
treated iso2 mice. In contrast, overexpression of canonical iso1 did not
affect BRAFi sensitivity. Strikingly, shRNA-mediated knockdown of iso2 in
BRAFi resistant cells resulted in decreased survival compared to iso1 or
scramble knockdowns. Downstream signaling analysis utilizing immunoblots
and confocal microscopy indicated a decrease in MAPK signaling and an
increase in PI3K signaling in iso2 overexpressing cells compared to iso1
overexpressing cells. Protein complex immunoprecipitation of iso2 in
COS-7 cells validated a binding affinity of NRAS iso2 to both PI3K and
BRAF/RAF1. Since MAPK signaling is strongly reduced in iso2 expressing
cells, this may suggest an allosteric inhibition mechanism, which
prevents binding and activation of BRAF by canonical NRAS iso1.This study
indicates for the first time that NRAS iso2 may play a role in BRAFi
resistance by facilitating alternative survival signaling through the
PI3K pathway in the presence of MAPK pathway inhibition. Targeting NRAS
iso2 may be a beneficial treatment strategy in the prevention and
management of BRAFi resistance in melanoma.

