Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility and efficacy of a precision treatment approach for
triple-negative breast cancer in mouse models


15-20% of human breast tumors are triple negative breast cancer (TNBC),
an aggressive and deadly subtype of breast cancer that currently lack
targeted therapies, leaving chemotherapy as the only systemic treatment
option. There is a pressing need for a better understanding of disease
mechanisms of TNBC, and for the development of new treatment options.
While activating mutations of PIK3CA are frequently found in ER-positive
and Her2-amplified breast cancer, inactivation of lipid phosphatases is
more frequent in TNBC. Analysis of large human genomics data in TCGA
reveals that heterozygous-loss of INPP4B, a lipid phosphates in the PI3K
signaling pathway, is enriched in TNBC subtype, and strongly correlates
with loss of ER expression. Guided by human genomics information, we have
crossed INPP4B phosphatase deletion mice into TNBC mouse model to
determine whether INPP4B-loss cooperates with loss-of-function of p53
and/or Brca1 to promote tumorigenesis in vivo. Our results show
dose-dependent increase in tumor development frequency in K14cre;
Brca1flox/flox; p53flox/flox mice carrying INPP4B Phosphatase KO allele,
HET allele compared to INPP4B WT allele. Importantly, these tumors
resemble human TNBC in their pathology, histological patterns and gene
expression patterns, providing a valuable platform to test their
responsiveness to various therapeutic drugs, including PI3K-inhibitors.
Our goal is to generate data that form the basis for a phase I/II
clinical study that lead to substantially improved treatment strategies
for basal-like breast cancer. Toward this goal, we have banked the
endogenous tumors in a way allowing transplantation in nude mice, and
have performed randomized drug treatment studies. We found that tumors
that are heterozygous or deletion for INPP4B are more sensitive to
PI3K-inhibition, suggesting these tumors are more dependent on Pi3K
activation to thrive. Although tumors show partial response early on,
they inevitably relapsed, begging for an understanding of innate and
selected drug-resistant mechanisms. To this end, we have completed
large-scale RNAseq and whole exome sequencing (WES), and have performed
in-depth analyses on the mouse genomics data to identify genetic
alternations including chromosomal number variations (CNVs), mutations
and gene fusions. Focusing on gene-fusions, we found that by targeting
these fusions, we can achieve better treatment outcomes and in some
cases, even complete tumor remission. Significantly TCGA data analyses
revealed the presence of similar fusions in human TNBC patients and we
are in the process of investigating whether human cells carrying these
fusions respond equally well compared to their mouse counterparts. Our
approach of precision-medicine guided treatment optimization has lead to
substantially improved treatment outcomes.

