Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational signatures from RNA-seq data distinguish HPV(+) and
HPV(-) HNSCC


IntroductionHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most
common cancer worldwide, and an increasing percentage of HNSCC cases are
associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) which have improved prognosis
compared to HPV(-) HNSCC. Identifying distinctions between HPV(+) and
HPV(-) HNSCC may lead to improved prognosis or new treatments, such as
determining mutagen(s) that are driving accumulation of genetic variants
in each tumor. A recent approach uses the fact that different mutagens
cause different types of mutations, referred to as a mutagen's signature.
By comparing the mutations in a tumor sample with the mutagen signatures,
the mutagens responsible for most of the mutations in the tumor can be
identified. We hypothesized that mutational signatures could distinguish
HPV(+) from HPV(-) HNSCC tumors.Materials and MethodsWe performed
RNA-sequencing on 18 HPV(+) and 18 HPV(-) tumor samples collected from
HNSCC patients by the University of Michigan Head and Neck SPORE. Variant
calling was performed on each sample using a GATK best practices for
RNA-seq pipeline. These variants were then filtered to include only
variants that were both rare (IntroductionHead and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common cancer worldwide, and an
increasing percentage of HNSCC cases are associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV) which have improved prognosis compared to HPV(-)
HNSCC. Identifying distinctions between HPV(+) and HPV(-) HNSCC may lead
to improved prognosis or new treatments, such as determining mutagen(s)
that are driving accumulation of genetic variants in each tumor. A recent
approach uses the fact that different mutagens cause different types of
mutations, referred to as a mutagen's signature. By comparing the
mutations in a tumor sample with the mutagen signatures, the mutagens
responsible for most of the mutations in the tumor can be identified. We
hypothesized that mutational signatures could distinguish HPV(+) from
HPV(-) HNSCC tumors.Materials and MethodsWe performed RNA-sequencing on
18 HPV(+) and 18 HPV(-) tumor samples collected from HNSCC patients by
the University of Michigan Head and Neck SPORE. Variant calling was
performed on each sample using a GATK best practices for RNA-seq
pipeline. These variants were then filtered to include only variants that
were both rare (<5%) and predicted to have a functional effect. The bases
5 and 3 of each variant were extracted to identify its sequence context.
The observed mutations in each sample were then approximated by a
non-negative linear combination of previously reported mutagen
signatures. Certain signatures are associated with dysregulation of
particular pathways; this dysregulation was validated with expression and
mutation analysis of the RNA data.ResultsIn the studied HNSCC tumors,
signatures related to aging and impaired DNA repair were responsible for
the largest proportion of the mutations found. The signatures that were
significantly different between HPV(+) and HPV(-) tumors were associated
with APOBEC editing and defective DNA mismatch repair. Expression and
mutational analysis validated that APOBEC is more active in HPV(+) than
HPV(-) tumors. Interestingly, signatures associated with smoking were not
among the most relevant.ConclusionThe evaluation of mutational signatures
in HNSCC tumors identified the main sources of mutations for HNSCC. The
differences in mutational signatures between HPV(+) and HPV(-) identify
distinct methods of carcinogenesis for these two subtypes of HNSCC.

