Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of lipid metabolism through inhibition of acetyl-CoA
carboxylase with ND-646 leads to potent inhibition of breast cancer cell
growth in vitro and in vivo


Metabolic attenuation is a promising approach to cancer therapy and
rate-limiting steps in key biosynthetic pathways are particularly
attractive targets. Many cancer types are dependent on fatty acid
synthesis as a primary source of energy and for providing lipids for
expansion of cell and nuclear membranes in rapidly proliferating cells.
The rate-limiting enzyme in fatty acid synthesis, acetyl-CoA carboxylase
(ACC), has been shown to be highly expressed in human breast cancer. ACC
is thought to be critical for the growth and survival of cancer cells,
especially within a tumor microenvironment where exogenous fatty acids
might be limited. Effective therapeutic options for triple negative
breast cancer are limited and identification of robust targeted agents
without overt toxicity for this indication are especially needed. Dual
inhibition of the ACC isozymes, ACC1 and ACC2, results in concomitant
inhibition of fatty acid synthesis and stimulation of fatty acid
oxidation. We have identified ND-646, a potent, selective, allosteric
inhibitor of ACC with broad tissue distribution that binds to the ACC
biotin carboxylase domain and potently inhibits the dimerization and
enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50 = 3.5nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 4.1nM).
Profiling the potency of ND-646 in vitro in a panel of breast cancer cell
lines including triple negative and BRCA1 mutant cell lines demonstrated
potent inhibition of cell proliferation with IC50sMetabolic attenuation
is a promising approach to cancer therapy and rate-limiting steps in key
biosynthetic pathways are particularly attractive targets. Many cancer
types are dependent on fatty acid synthesis as a primary source of energy
and for providing lipids for expansion of cell and nuclear membranes in
rapidly proliferating cells. The rate-limiting enzyme in fatty acid
synthesis, acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), has been shown to be highly
expressed in human breast cancer. ACC is thought to be critical for the
growth and survival of cancer cells, especially within a tumor
microenvironment where exogenous fatty acids might be limited. Effective
therapeutic options for triple negative breast cancer are limited and
identification of robust targeted agents without overt toxicity for this
indication are especially needed. Dual inhibition of the ACC isozymes,
ACC1 and ACC2, results in concomitant inhibition of fatty acid synthesis
and stimulation of fatty acid oxidation. We have identified ND-646, a
potent, selective, allosteric inhibitor of ACC with broad tissue
distribution that binds to the ACC biotin carboxylase domain and potently
inhibits the dimerization and enzymatic activity of both ACC1 (IC50 =
3.5nM) and ACC2 (IC50 = 4.1nM). Profiling the potency of ND-646 in vitro
in a panel of breast cancer cell lines including triple negative and
BRCA1 mutant cell lines demonstrated potent inhibition of cell
proliferation with IC50s<100nM. The anti-proliferative effects were more
pronounced when cells were cultured in media containing delipidated
serum. Daily oral dosing of ND-646 at 25 mg/kg BID, 50 mg/kg QD, and 50
mg/kg BID in mice bearing orthotopic triple negative MDA-MB-468 breast
cancer xenografts led to tumor growth inhibition of 60-70% that
correlated with compound exposure and target engagement in the tumor.
Analysis of ND-646 treated tumors demonstrated disruption of tumor tissue
architecture and induction of apoptosis and necrosis suggesting a direct
effect on cell survival. These results provide further evidence that de
novo lipogenesis is an important mediator of breast cancer cell growth
and survival, and that selective inhibition of ACC is a viable
therapeutic strategy for treatment of breast cancer.

