Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of leg length with increased colorectal cancer
incidence in the atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) study


PurposeThere is growing evidence that taller people have an increased
risk of colorectal cancer, which is thought to be explained by an
increased production of growth hormones during puberty and/or a larger
pool of at-risk colonic cells. Long bone growth during puberty is, in
part, promoted by insulin-like growth factor-1, a higher circulating
level of which is a risk factor for colorectal cancer. Thus, we
hypothesized that long-bone growth indicated by leg length would be the
component of height that is more strongly associated with colorectal
cancer. To address this hypothesis, we evaluated the association of leg
length, sitting height and total height with colorectal cancer risk in
the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) prospective
cohort.MethodsThe ARIC participants included 14,605 men and women who
were cancer-free at baseline (1987-1989), and followed until 2006.
Information about demographic, lifestyle, and anthropometric
characteristics was obtained at baseline. Leg length was estimated as
standing height minus sitting height. Incident colorectal cancers (n =
344) were ascertained by linkage to cancer registries and supplemented by
hospital records.Statistical analysisCox proportional hazards regression
was used to estimate hazard ratios (HR) of colorectal cancer and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) across quartiles of height, leg length, and
sitting height. The final models were adjusted for age, sex, race, study
center, education level, waist-to-hip ratio, female hormone replacement
therapy use, and smoking status.ResultsParticipants with longer legs
tended to be male, African-American, and had higher education. Leg length
was correlated with total (Pearson r = 0.83), and sitting height (Pearson
r = 0.52). Participants in the highest quartile of leg length were at a
42% greater risk of colorectal cancer, relative to the lowest quartile
(95% CI, 1.01-2.00, p-trend = 0.04). After stratification by gender, leg
length remained associated with colorectal cancer risk in men (HR = 1.83,
95% CI, 1.11-3.05) but not in women (HR = 1.14, 95% CI, 0.70-1.83) for
the highest versus the lowest quartile of leg length (p-interaction =
0.16). The HRs for the highest quartiles of total height and sitting
height compared to the lowest quartiles were also increased, but the
associations were weaker (HR = 1.25, 95% CI, 0.90-1.74, p-trend = 0.10
and HR = 1.30, 95% CI, 0.95-1.79, p-trend = 0.18
respectively).ConclusionIn this prospective study, longer leg length was
more strongly associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer than
overall height or sitting height. While we cannot rule out that the
association between taller height and colorectal cancer risk may be
explained by a larger pool of colonic cells in taller people, these
findings support the prior observation that this association is driven by
biological mechanisms correlated to long bone growth during puberty, such
as insulin-like growth factor-1.

