Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polycomb group protein BMI1 protects neuroblastoma cells from DNA
damage-induced apoptotic death in cooperation with L3MBTL2


[Introduction] BMI1 is a polycomb protein and its overexpression has been
correlated with cancer development and aggressiveness. We previously
reported that v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene
neuroblastoma-derived homolog (MYCN)-induced BMI1 positively regulated
neuroblastoma (NB) cell proliferation via the transcriptional suppression
of tumor suppressors in NB cells (ONCOGENE, 2010). The role of BMI1 in
DNA damage repair pathways has recently been highlighted. The
ubiquitination of H2AK119 is also up-regulated locally at DNA damage
sites, namely those of double-strand breaks and UV-damaged lesions. BMI1
and other PcG proteins make foci at DNA damage sites and are involved in
DNA damage repair pathways; however, the exact role of PcG proteins in
DNA damage repair pathways remains to be elucidated.[Results and
Discussion] In order to evaluate the potential of BMI1 as a new target
for NB therapy, we herein examined the effects of BMI1 reductions on NB
cell differentiation and apoptotic NB cell death. BMI1 knockdown (KD) up
to 7 days in NB cells significantly induced their differentiation. BMI1
depletion up to 14 days significantly induced apoptotic NB cell death
along with the activation of p53, increases in p73, and induction of p53
family downstream molecules. BMI1 depletion in vivo markedly suppressed
NB xenograft tumor growth. A pathological analysis using the TUNEL assay
indicated the induction of apoptotic cell death. BMI1 reductions
activated ATM and increased -H2AX in NB cells. The recently identified
polycomb protein L3MBTL2 was clearly decreased in BMI1 KD NB cells. BMI1
KD-induced L3MBTL2 reductions occurred at the protein level. BMI1
interacted with Ring1b, but not with L3MBTL2. Furthermore, L3MBTL2 KD by
siRNA effectively accelerated apoptosis induced by the BMI1 inhibitor,
PTC-209, related to apoptotic cell death accompanied by Jun/EGR-1/p53
pathway activation in NB cells. In neuronal cells, NGF depletion induced
JUN pathway activation and apoptotic cell death. Furthermore, JUN
modulates myeloma cell apoptosis by interacting with EGR-1, which
down-regulates Survivin and triggers caspase signaling; JUN up-regulates
EGR-1 expression by binding its promoter, which suggests that EGR-1 is
the direct downstream target gene of the JUN transcription factor. In
solid tumors, EGR-1 regulates radiation-induced cell death via apoptotic
pathways including p53-dependent apoptosis.These results clarified, for
the first time, the cooperation between PcG BMI1 and L3MBTL2 in DNA
damage responses. Therefore, BMI1 and L3MBTL2 appear to be promising
targets in new therapies for NB tumors.

