Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increasing the efficacy of cancer stem cell-based vaccine in the
PD-L1/PD-1 blockade


We have previously reported the development of a strategy to target the
cancer stem cell (CSC) populations in melanoma and squamous cell
carcinoma using CSC lysate-pulsed dendritic cells (DCs). Using mouse
models we demonstrated that DCs pulsed with CSCs enriched by virtue of
their expression of the CSC marker ALDH (termed CSC-DC) significantly
inhibited tumor growth. However, CSC-DC vaccine therapy alone may not be
sufficient to overcome the immunosuppressive components of the tumor
microenvironment. CSC-mediated suppression of T cells has been reported
in a process involving the PD-L1/PD-1 axis. Immunologically targeting
CSCs while simultaneously blocking PD-L1/PD-1-mendiated immune
suppression may significantly enhance the outcome of current
immunotherapies of cancer. To test this hypothesis, we investigated the
effect of using anti-PD-L1 to block the immunosuppression during the
CSC-DC vaccination to augment the therapeutic efficacy of using each
regimen alone. We used 4T1 cell line, a mammary carcinoma syngeneic to
BALB/c mice, and found that 4T1 tumors contain approx. 6-10%
ALDEFLUOR+/ALDHhigh cells, and that these cells are enriched for tumor
initiating capacity compared to bulk or ALDEFLUOR-/ALDHlow cells.
Inoculating 4T1 cells into the mammary fat pad induces the development of
spontaneous pulmonary metastases. ALDHhigh 4T1 CSCs expressed PD-L1. 4T1
ALDHhigh CSC-DC vaccine + anti-PD-L1 administration significantly reduced
pulmonary metastases and prolonged survival compared with 4T1 ALDHhigh
CSC-DC vaccine or anti-PD-L1 administration alone. Anti-PD-L1
administration increased systematic anti-4T1 CSC immunity induced by
CSC-DC vaccine. This is evident by the increased production of total IgG
in the serum samples collected from the 4T1-bearing animals subjected to
4T1 CSC-DC vaccination with anti-PD-L1 administration. The
CSC-reactivity/specificity of the immune sera was demonstrated by their
specific binding to the ALDHhigh vs. ALDHlow 4T1 cells in flow cytometry.
Importantly, the immunological consequence of such binding was
Ab-mediated ALDHhigh 4T1 CSC lysis via complement dependent cytotoxicity.
In addition, CTLs generated from the splenocytes harvested from the hosts
subjected to 4T1 CSC-DC vaccination with anti-PD-L1 administration killed
ALDHhigh 4T1 CSCs significantly more than ALDHlow 4T1 cells. These
results are supportive of the conclusion that administration of
anti-PD-L1 as an adjuvant could significantly boost the therapeutic
efficacy of the CSC-DC vaccine, and that this effect was due to both
antibody and T cell-mediated anti-CSC immunity.

