Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the metastatic potential of exosomal NM23 signaling
using a triple negative breast cancer model in mice


Decades of research has established the idea that cancer cells of the
primary tumor prime the metastatic microenvironment prior to establishing
metastases at distant sites in the body. While this process is thought to
facilitate neocolonization of dislodged primary tumor cells, the
mechanisms by which cancer cells communicate to their remote targets
remain largely unknown. Our lab has previously shown that triple negative
breast cancer cells release exosomes carrying NM23, a nucleoside
diphosphate kinase (eNDPK) implicated in promoting angiogenesis and
pro-metastatic events extracellularly. To further elucidate the role of
eNDPK in breast cancer signaling, we are developing a novel murine model
that will allow us to examine its effects in vivo, as well as establish a
timeline for the occurrence of metastases.To establish our metastasis
model in mice, we first showed that injecting human MDA-MB-231 cells into
the mammary fat pad results in the formation of a primary tumor and
subsequent development of metastases in the lung. Treating mice with
inhibitors of NDPK activity reduces the size of the primary tumor and
prevents secondary tumor formation in the lung. To mimic the pulmonary
tumor microenvironment, we have isolated endothelial cells from the lungs
of 6-8 day old mouse pups using magnetic beads conjugated to the
endothelial cell markers CD54, CD102, or CD106. Purity of endothelial
cells was confirmed by immunofluorescence staining. In preparation for in
vivo experiments that demonstrate eNDPK targeting to lung endothelial
cells, we have 3D printed biocompatible polylactic acid (PLA) tubular
inserts that are capable of supporting lung endothelial cells encompassed
in a gelatinous cell scaffold. Inserts containing lung endothelial cells
are surgically introduced into the subcutaneous tissue of adult SCID
mice. Human MDA-MB-231 cells expressing GFP-tagged tetraspanin are then
injected orthotopically into the mammary fat pads of mice. After a period
of 7-21 days, the inserts are excised and analyzed for the presence of
GFP-labeled exosomes containing eNDPK and reorganization of the insert
microenvironment.Using this model for metastasis, we will be able to
confirm the involvement of eNDPK in cell-cell communication between
primary tumor cells and their targets in vivo. The significance of
uncovering the mechanism(s) by which cancer cells metastasize is
emphasized by the fact that recurrence of cancer at distant sites is
associated with the most negative outcome in women diagnosed with breast
cancer. Implication of eNDPK signaling in metastasis will lead to future
research in developing novel small molecule inhibitors. Further, eNDPK
can be used as a biomarker for the beginning stages of metastatic breast
cancer, replacing current unreliable early detection methods and
improving long-term survival outcomes.

