Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of an EphA2-targeted docetaxel nanoliposome in pancreatic
patient-derived models as monotherapy and in combination with gemcitabine


Pancreatic cancer remains one of the deadliest cancers with survival
described in number of months and weeks. Recent advances in the treatment
of pancreatic cancer led to the recent approval of a liposomal irinotecan
(ONIVYDETM (irinotecan liposome injection), previously MM-398). Given the
activity of taxanes in pancreatic cancer and the ability of nanoliposomes
to deliver drugs, we developed a novel EphA2-targeted nanoliposomal
docetaxel (MM-310) and evaluated its activity in patient derived
xenograft (PDX) models of pancreatic cancer as a monotherapy, as well as
in combination with gemcitabine. Additionally, we aimed to test the
predictive potential of key biomarkers that are linked to the MM-310
mechanism of action.Several PDX models developed at Roswell Park Cancer
Institute were screened for the expression of EphA2 (MM-310 target), CD31
(blood vessels), Massons Trichrome (fibrosis), CA XI (hypoxia), and
E-Cadherin (adhesion molecule that can potentially inhibit target
engagement). Eight EphA2+ PDX models were used to evaluate the activity
of MM-310 and compare it to clinically relevant agents including
nab-paclitaxel, liposomal irinotecan, oxaliplatin, and gemcitabine. We
also tested the combination potential of MM-310 and gemcitabine.MM-310
was able to statistically significantly control tumor growth in all
tested models with tumor regression in more than 85% of the models. When
compared with standard of care agents in tumor models, at equitoxic
dosing, MM-310 demonstrated greater activity to nab-paclitaxel in 80%
(4/5), gemcitabine in 100% (5/5), and oxaliplatin in100% (5/5), and
liposomal irinotecan in 80% (4/5). Gemcitabine is currently considered a
standard of care in pancreatic cancer in combination with nab-paclitaxel,
thus we conducted a study to evaluate the potential combination benefits
of gemcitabine with MM-310. The combination of suboptimal doses of MM-310
and gemcitabine led to significant tumor growth control which was greater
to either arm alone. Additionally, at equitoxic dosing of 50% maximum
tolerated dose, MM310 + gemcitabine showed greater effect than ABRAXANE
(paclitaxel protein-bound particles for injectable suspension) +
gemcitabine. Although we have excluded EphA2 negative models from these
studies, biomarker analysis showed that MM-310 effects are not correlated
with the EphA2 expression level, suggesting that a low level EphA2 might
be sufficient to mediate activity and that liposome delivery might be the
rate limiting step. Additional biomarker analysis will be conducted.In
conclusion, we found that MM-310 is highly active in several patient
derived models of pancreatic cancer and that it was equal or greater to
most standard of care agents. Future studies will aim at identifying
markers for differentiating response to MM-310 (EphA2 targeted
nanoliposomal docetaxel) and ONIVYDE (irinotecan liposome injection).

