Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of chemotherapeutic agents on the tumor immune
microenvironment


Immunotherapeutic agents have shown dramatic success in oncology in
recent years and several have been approved in melanoma and lung cancer.
One strategy for extending the benefit of immunotherapy is to evaluate
these agents in combination with standard of care chemotherapy, with the
goal of bringing the benefit of immunotherapy into earlier lines of
treatment.We have carried out a systematic evaluation of the effects of
different classes of chemotherapeutic agents (including alkylating
agents, platinum based agents, and taxanes) on the tumor immune
microenvironment of syngeneic murine tumor models (CT26 and MC38) in two
different strains of mice (BALB/c and C57BL/6). We found that different
chemotherapeutic agents caused markedly different changes in the
composition and cell phenotype of the tumor immune environment. The
majority of chemotherapeutic agents resulted in a mild to moderate
increase in CD8+ T cells in the tumor. Some agents also altered the
activation state of these CD8+ cells as measured by the level of PD-1 and
IFN-gamma. A subset of the chemotherapeutic agents resulted in profound
changes in the number of CD4+ cells, including regulatory T cells, as
well as changes in myeloid subpopulations including monocytes,
neutrophils, and macrophages. In addition to single agents studies, we
carried out combination studies of selected chemo agents with
simultaneous addition of anti-PD-L1. Several of these combinations caused
pronounced increases in efficacy above single agent treatment. We will
present the combination pharmacodynamic marker changes and efficacy of
these treatments.Our findings demonstrate that chemotherapeutic agents
can stimulate the tumor immune environment, at least transiently, through
multiple mechanisms. Different subsets of chemotherapeutic agents display
unique changes in the tumor immune infiltrate, and may require different
immunotherapeutic approaches. These findings provide a rationale for
testing immunotherapy-chemotherapy combinations in the clinic.

