Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In situ mass spectrometry using desorption electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry (DESI-MS) can detect specific lipid profiles across
breast cancer molecular subtypes


INTRODUCTION Lipid profiling as a source for biomarkers identification is
an evolving field with some enthusiastic results in cancer. Alterations
on lipid metabolism have been increasingly recognized as a hallmark of
cancer cells and may help to understand breast cancer carcinogenesis.
Analytical chemistry and Pathology have been recently combined in the
development of chemical microscopy using in situ mass spectrometry (MS)
and may help to decipher breast cancer molecular initiation and
progression. OBJECTIVE We aimed to use in situ Desorption Electrospray
Ionization Mass Spectrometry (DESI-MS) to investigate lipid profiles
across invasive breast cancer (IBC) molecular subtypes and related normal
parenchyma (NBP) and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). METHODS: We
selected frozen samples from 9 IBC with various ER/PR/HER2 status (ER 0
to 100%, PR 0 to 90%, HER2 0 and 3+, Ki67 10 to 70%). Unstained slides
obtained from frozen tissue at 10m were submitted to DESI-MS analysis
with no pretreatment and spatial resolution of 100m. Molecular profiles
(mass to charge [m/z] ratio versus signal intensity) were generated in
triplicate directly from tissues to detect changes from areas of
interest: IBC (and adjacent normal breast parenchyma and DCIS whenever
present) regions were identified by a breast pathologist on HE-stained
sequential slides. Experiment was conducted in full-scan mode and m/z
range of 100-1200. DESI mass spectra were obtained using a Thermo
ScientificTM Q ExactiveTM Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer in
the positive ion mode. The Biomap software was used to visualize the
images and to export the spectrums to metaboanalyst, where the data were
statiscally analyzed. RESULTS: The images obtained by lipid profiling
presented a direct correlation with HE stained slides, with some ions m/z
clearly overlaying areas of normal parenchyma, DCIS and invasive breast
cancer. The unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis showed all
technical triplicates remained grouped. All NBP but one clustered
together. Triple negative IBC and its related NBP formed a distinct
cluster from all other ER+ samples. The ER+/HER2 + tumor segregated from
other ER+/HER2- tumors. DCIS and IBC from ER+/PR+/HER2- tumor clustered
together. The Ions with m/z 186.9 and m/z 303.2 were consistently related
to NBP and IBC respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Chemical microscopy using
DESI-MS is a powerful tool to identify specific lipid profiles across
molecular subtypes of IBC and can contribute to understand breast cancer
carcinogenesis.

