Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of TP53 status and functional classification on molecular
profiles in breast cancer subtypes


Breast cancer is a multifaceted disease with several clinical,
pathological and molecular attributes contributing to disease prognosis
or treatment outcome. Treatment measures in breast cancer are based on
hormone/growth factor receptor -estrogen/progesterone receptor (ER/PR) or
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2) status. TP53 pathway
inactivation in breast cancer is well-established. Although TP53's
therapeutic relevance is well-recognized, it remains under-utilized in
patient-management, since all TP53 mutants are treated equally in the
diagnostic context. In reality, enormous heterogeneity exists in nature,
type and functional impact of TP53 variants. Therefore, understanding the
diversity of TP53 variants in breast cancer subtypes may enhance its
diagnostic utility in this cancer.We utilized clinical NGS data, obtained
using commercially available targeted panels, TruSeq Amplicon Cancer
Panel (Illumina) and Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 (Thermofisher)
to analyze tumor DNAs from cancer patients at the Advanced Molecular
Diagnostic Laboratory (Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada).
We focused on data from 105 advanced breast cancer patients. We
consolidated several schemes proposed in the literature to classify TP53
variants, and evaluated patient molecular profiling and pathology data
based on: (1) presence of TP53 variants; (b) coding effect; and (c)
transcriptional activity. We further investigated whether TP53 variants
were associated with reportable variant load, co-occurrence with other
molecular changes and hormone/growth-factor receptor status.In our study
group, 70.4% cases carried one or more variants. TP53 alterations were
prevalent (40.9%) in our cohort, followed by PIK3CA variants (36.2%).
15/105 cases (14.3%) carried variants in both genes. Unlike in other
cancer types, where missense TP53 variants predominate (e.g., colorectal,
72.6%), missense (49%) and nonsense/frameshift (42%) variants were
similarly distributed in breast cancers. Gain-of-Function (GOF) and
Loss-of-Function (LOF) TP53 variants were also equally distributed (32%
vs. 33%). However, TP53mut PIK3CAmut breast cancer cases were more likely
to carry missense and/or LOF variants (10/15 cases). TP53 variants were
also associated with hormone/growth-factor receptor status. A greater
proportion of ER- vs ER+, PR- vs PR+, and ER-PR-Her2- vs ER+PR+Her2-
breast cancer cases carried missense GOF TP53 variants respectively when
compared to missense LOF and variants of unknown significance taken
together(80-85% vs 50-55%; pBreast cancer is a multifaceted disease with
several clinical, pathological and molecular attributes contributing to
disease prognosis or treatment outcome. Treatment measures in breast
cancer are based on hormone/growth factor receptor -estrogen/progesterone
receptor (ER/PR) or human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2)
status. TP53 pathway inactivation in breast cancer is well-established.
Although TP53's therapeutic relevance is well-recognized, it remains
under-utilized in patient-management, since all TP53 mutants are treated
equally in the diagnostic context. In reality, enormous heterogeneity
exists in nature, type and functional impact of TP53 variants. Therefore,
understanding the diversity of TP53 variants in breast cancer subtypes
may enhance its diagnostic utility in this cancer.We utilized clinical
NGS data, obtained using commercially available targeted panels, TruSeq
Amplicon Cancer Panel (Illumina) and Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2
(Thermofisher) to analyze tumor DNAs from cancer patients at the Advanced
Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory (Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
Toronto, Canada). We focused on data from 105 advanced breast cancer
patients. We consolidated several schemes proposed in the literature to
classify TP53 variants, and evaluated patient molecular profiling and
pathology data based on: (1) presence of TP53 variants; (b) coding
effect; and (c) transcriptional activity. We further investigated whether
TP53 variants were associated with reportable variant load, co-occurrence
with other molecular changes and hormone/growth-factor receptor status.In
our study group, 70.4% cases carried one or more variants. TP53
alterations were prevalent (40.9%) in our cohort, followed by PIK3CA
variants (36.2%). 15/105 cases (14.3%) carried variants in both genes.
Unlike in other cancer types, where missense TP53 variants predominate
(e.g., colorectal, 72.6%), missense (49%) and nonsense/frameshift (42%)
variants were similarly distributed in breast cancers. Gain-of-Function
(GOF) and Loss-of-Function (LOF) TP53 variants were also equally
distributed (32% vs. 33%). However, TP53mut PIK3CAmut breast cancer cases
were more likely to carry missense and/or LOF variants (10/15 cases).
TP53 variants were also associated with hormone/growth-factor receptor
status. A greater proportion of ER- vs ER+, PR- vs PR+, and ER-PR-Her2-
vs ER+PR+Her2- breast cancer cases carried missense GOF TP53 variants
respectively when compared to missense LOF and variants of unknown
significance taken together(80-85% vs 50-55%; p<0.0001). Finally, TP53mut
cases were more likely to carry multiple variants in contrast to TP53wt
cases (37.2% vs. 12.9%).Taken together, we define a stratification
strategy for TP53 that takes into account the diversity of TP53 variants,
and demonstrate its application to molecular profiling and
clinico-pathological data in breast cancer.

