Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-cerebral pharmacokinetic monitoring of a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (theranostic 18[F]-PET/NIRF labeled dasatinib) delivered via
convection-enhanced delivery


Introduction: Convection enhanced delivery (CED) has been recently
explored as an advantageous therapeutic strategy for central nervous
system (CNS) tumors. One current limitation is the inability to
quantitatively monitor distribution of chemotherapeutic agents. The use
of surrogate tracers probably underestimates differences in distribution
and clearance owing to discordant features between contrast molecules and
therapeutic agents, including bioactivity, degradation, conductivity, and
diffusivity. Ideally, direct labelling of a therapeutic compound would
eliminate these concerns and afford a noninvasive method to monitor
critical pharmacokinetic information. This ability would pave the way for
designing infusion parameters and drug schedules that are expected to be
unique for CED-based therapy.Methods: The small molecule kinase inhibitor
dasatinib was modified with a dual-probe technology that utilizes a
boronate trap to conjugate 18[F] with a near-infrared fluorophore into a
single molecule, 1, allowing for visualization by positron emission
tomography (PET) and near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF). The novel
boronate trap allows for direct conjugation of 18[F] with minimal
disruption of dasatinib's mechanism of action, resulting in a small,
versatile probe with potential for other clinically relevant
targets.Results: The modified drug was first tested in vitro in a PDGF-B
driven p53 deficient DIPG tumor line from Nestin tv-a; p53 floxed mouse.
1 was shown to enter cells on fluorescence microscopy and inhibit cell
proliferation. Antagonist drug potency of 1 as evaluated on pontine
glioma in ATP-dependent luminescent cell viability, cell-permeant calcein
AM, and an MTS cell proliferation assays show that the IC50, of 1 is
10nM. In addition, infusions of 1 were performed via CED and intravenous
systemic delivery in a RCAS/tv-a PDGF-B driven with p53 deficiency Ntv-a
mouse model of high-grade glioma. Compared to systemic delivery, CED was
shown to be roughly 230 times more effective in delivery of the infusion
to the tumor site. Maximal glioma delivery occurred at 115 min post a 20
min infusion, with clearance occurring with a half-life of 45 min after
maximum delivery.Conclusion: Dasatinib was modified to give 1, an agent
that can be imaged non-invasively by fluorescence and positron emission
tomography (PET). The modified dasatinib showed little modification in
biologic activity when compared to unmodified dasatinib and exhibited
cytotoxic effects in vitro in glioma cell culture. CED shows a clear
benefit to intravenous delivery when the target site is in the CNS. The
dual-label probe technology's versatility and minimal biologic profile
lends itself to various clinical uses, including the study of different
therapeutic agents and delivery routes without the need to rely on
surrogate tracers.

