Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood-based profiling of patients with NSCLC using CLIA certified
cell-free DNA tests for EGFR, KRAS and BRAF point mutations and test use
in clinical practice


Nearly 80% of patients will not have mutation results available at their
initial oncology consult and as many as 1 in 4 patients will begin
treatment in advance of receiving their tumor mutation results. These
factors hinder diagnosis at the molecular level, which is an important
component in the decision to commence treatment with specific targeted
therapies. The goal of this study was to measure the utility of a
CLIA-certified Laboratory Developed Test (LDT) in the absence of a tissue
diagnosis. EGFR, KRAS and BRAF point mutations within the cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) isolated from the plasma of patients with advanced stages of
cancer were analyzed using Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) technology. The
specific tests detected the EGFR sensitizing mutations L858R and exon 19
deletion (E746 - A750) and EGFR resistance mutation, T790M, the KRAS
mutations G12C, G12V and G12D, as well as the BRAF V600E mutation. The
tests were comprised of three components: (i) a whole-blood collection
kit that ships at ambient temperature, (ii) cfDNA isolated from plasma
for analysis using ddPCR, and (iii) a secure laboratory information
management system (LIMS) for sample accessioning and report generation.
Test mutation status results were reported within 72 hours of blood
shipment from the physicians office. To date we have processed greater
than 2000 individual variant tests for patients with NSCLC. The
predominant tumor type for EGFR sensitizing mutations requested was NSCLC
(95%). Interestingly, even BRAF test orders were > 90% from NSCLC
patients. Additionally, the percentage of tests requested that were
positive for each mutation category were 12% for EGFR sensitizing, 20%
for EGFR resistance, 14% for KRAS and 1.8% for BRAF. Significantly, T790M
test orders were observed to have increased five-fold over the last three
months of testing. We have developed highly sensitive, 72 hour test to
results blood-based assays as a part of the GeneStratTM panel, that
expand the utility of laboratory testing for patients previously
diagnosed with cancer.

