Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin induces early onset and aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer


Background: During the past 30 years, pancreatic cancer (PC) has
constantly been the fourth leading cause of cancer death. PC is usually
advanced at the time of diagnosis, with an overall five years survival
rate of less than 5%. Obesity, characterized by high levels of leptin, is
pandemic in United States and a risk factor for PC. Notch abnormal
signaling is linked to carcinogenesis, tumor angiogenesis and self
renewal capacity of PC stem cells (PCSC). We have previously shown that
leptin induces proliferation of PC cell lines, increases Notch
expression, PCSC and tumorsphere formation. To test leptin effects in a
PC mouse model, a specific and potent signaling inhibitor bound to
nanoparticles, IONP-LPrA2 was produced by us.Hypothesis: High levels of
leptin induce early onset and multiplicity of PC xenografts, which is
abrogated by IONP-LPrA2 treatment.Methods: Human PC cell line MiaPaCa-2
was challenged with leptin or IONP-LPrA2. The expression of pluripotency
associated genes (STAT3, Oct4, Sox2 and NANOG) was evaluated. MiaPaCa-2
cells forming tumorspheres were treated with leptin or IONP-LPrA2 and
inoculated into CD1 nu/nu mice. Untreated tumorspheres were inoculated as
controls. A group of mice were injected twice a week with IONP-LPrA2.
Tumor onset and growth were assessed. PC xenografts were analyzed for
expression of Ki67 (proliferation marker), leptin targeted molecules
(Notch), PCSC markers etc.Results: Leptin induced the expression of PCSC
pluripotency markers. Moreover, leptin treatment of tumorspheres induced
early tumor onset and multiplicity. Also, leptin increased proliferation,
PCSC and oncogenic markers in PC xenografts. IONP-LPrA2 reduced leptin
effects. No changes of mice food intake and body weight were
observed.Conclusions: This observation might imply that obese patients
are at high risk to develop PC. Inhibition of leptin signaling may be
used as preventative or therapeutic strategy for PC, especially in obese
patients.Acknowledgements: this work was supported by DOD
W81XWH-13-1-0382; NIH/SBIR 1R41CA183399-01A1; Pilot Project Award from
MSM/Tuskegee University/UAB Cancer Center partnership grant 5U54CA118638;
PC SPORE Grant from UAB to RRGP, and facilities and support services at
Morehouse School of Medicine (1G12RR026250-03; NIH RR 03034 and 1C06
RR18386).

