Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amino acid profiles indicate dependence on different metabolic
pathways between leukemia subtypes


Despite the growing body of evidence that the tumor microenvironment
protects leukemia cells from chemotherapeutic stresses (1-3), the effect
of many extracellular metabolites remains largely unknown. To explore the
influence of extracellular metabolites on different leukemia subtypes,
cells were treated for 24 hours in vitro with either a supplemental amino
acid or amino acid derivative. From this initial screening, a subset of
metabolites were chosen for metabolomics analysis. Mass spectrometry
(UPLC-MS/MS) was performed on intracellular fractions to identify
metabolic differences that resulted from supplementation. Metabolite
profiles were also compared between leukemia cell types, namely AML,
pre-B cell ALL, and T cell ALL. Of the metabolites tested, lysine and
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate, an intermediate of tyrosine and phenylalanine
metabolism, had the greatest impact on global amino acid profiles. In AML
and T cell ALL cell lines, intracellular glutamate, glutamine, proline,
and aspartate were increased relative to their respective controls. These
amino acids can enter the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle as either
-ketoglutarate or oxaloacetate, suggesting a central role of the TCA
cycle in both AML and T cell ALL metabolism. Interestingly, these
metabolites were not significantly increased in pre-B cell ALL,
signifying the inverse it true for pre-B cells. This observation provides
metabolomics evidence that is consistent with a previous study that
reported downregulated expression of TCA cycle related genes in pre-B
cell ALL (4). Our findings indicate that uptake and metabolism of amino
acids and their derivatives is distinct for different leukemia types.
Moreover, supplementation with a single metabolite can result in global
changes in intracellular metabolite profiles, suggesting an influence not
only as an energy substrate, but on overall metabolic pathway activity.
Specifically, we conclude that the TCA cycle is more active in AML and T
cell ALL and can be modulated by changing the extracellular environment,
while pre-B cells are less sensitive to amino acid modulation.(1) Meads
MB, et al. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14(9):2519-2526.(2) Ayala F, et al.
Leukemia 2009;23:2233-2241.(3) Konopleva M, et al. Drug Resist Updat
2009;12:103-113.(4) Boag JM, et al. Leukemia 2006;20:1731-1737.

