Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib on stemness in small cell
lung cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most aggressive and metastatic form
of lung cancer with a 5 year survival rate of less than 7%. Typically,
patients are diagnosed with SCLC when the tumor has already widely
metastasized. Combination chemotherapy, generally platinum-based plus
etoposide is the mainstay first-line treatments for metastatic SCLC.
Despite being highly sensitive to first-line therapy treatments, most
patients with SCLC experience relapse with resistant disease within 2
years and die from systemic metastasis. Since there are no approved
therapies for the treatment of SCLC, discoveries of therapies that can
counteract the spread and relapse of SCLC are needed. Therapy resistance
in SCLC can occur through a variety of mechanisms, one possible mechanism
might be through the activities of cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) within
the SCLC cell population. Different markers, such as ALDH+, CD133+, and
uPAR+, are considered as markers of CSCs in SCLC. We used flow cytometry
and the Aldefluor kit to separate cells with high and low ALDH activity;
flow cytometry and fluorescently- labeled antibody against CD133 and uPAR
to separate CD133+ and uPAR + cells. We confirmed that ALDH+/CD133+ and
ALDH+/uPAR+ cells were capable of generating tumor spheres in the second
and third generations. When we compared SCLC cell lines that were
generated from untreated tumors (DMS-53 cell line) with those generated
from tumors that were heavily treated (H69 and DMS-114 SCLC cell lines),
we found that the percentage of CSCs in DMS-53 cell was significantly
lower than that found in H69 and DMS-114 SCLC cell lines. CSCs in SCLC
express a distinctive pattern of receptors, signaling molecules, and
transcription factors such as ALDHA1, CD133, uPAR, OCT-4, SOX2, STAT3,
PKM2, DNA-PK, HIF-1a, and HIF-2a; the upregulation of these factors was
determined through analysis of genes and protein expression levels.These
proteins are associated with cancer stemness, resistance to conventional
therapies, proliferation, and metastasis. Many of these proteins are
known to interact with the molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90
(HSP90) and therefore can be targeted simultaneously with HSP90
inhibitors. We used a new HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib, which is showing
considerable promise in late stage clinical trials for treatment of other
cancer types. Ganetespib used as monotherapy induced cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis and effectively inhibited growth of bulk SCLC cells and
CSCs growing as tumor spheres. Ganetespib at low nanomolar concentrations
significantly potentiates the effect of cisplatin and etoposide in vitro.
Further in vivo studies are needed to unravel role played by HSP90 in
therapy resistance and metastasis in SCLC.

