Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decoding >30 thousand individuals to analyze the most common
genetic disorder: Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH)


Background: Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH), one of the most common
single gene disorders that alter the body's ability to regulate iron,
causes excess iron deposition in liver, heart, pancreas, joints and
pituitary gland, with resultant cirrhosis, cancer, diabetes, heart and
joint diseases over time. HH can be effectively treated, but if
untreated, the increased iron storage can lead to severe organ damage,
and death. Therefore, early identification and treatment is imperative.
Most severe cases of HH result from a common mutation in the HFE gene
(C282Y), but other HFE mutations have also been identified (H63D and
S65C), associated with milder disease. Caucasians of northern European
descent are at highest risk, and there is 1 million people in the US with
these mutations, and 10% of Caucasians are carriers. Some individuals are
asymptomatic due to the low penetrance, and variable genotype-phenotype
correlations. Aims: To determine the prevalence of known HFE mutations,
identify potential novel variants, and compare the clinical & laboratory
findings with HH genotypes for genotype-phenotype correlations. Materials
and Methods: Through the collaboration of Geisinger Health System with
the Regeneron, 31,058 MyCode biobank participants were evaluated for HFE
gene mutations by analyzing exome sequence data from peripheral blood.
Results: Compared to controls, significant differences were noted in
males with C282Y/C282Y, C282Y/H63D, and H63D/H63D genotypes for ferritin,
serum iron, iron binding capacity (IBC), and transferrin saturation (TS),
while C282Y and H63D carriers did not show a significant difference for
ferritin, but did for other parameters when compared to non-carriers.
Slight differences were noted in females when compared to males, with TS
also being significant in C282Y/S65C, H63D/S65C, and S65C/WT females, but
not ferritin in C282Y/C282Y or IBC in H63D/H63D individuals. Cirrhosis,
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and oral cancers were more prevalent in
the C282Y/C282Y genotype. HCC, esophagus and urinary cancers were higher
in those with H63D/H63D, while, non-melanoma skin cancers were more
prevalent in H63D/WT, and uterine and urinary cancers were more prevalent
in the S65C/WT genotype. The patients diagnosed with ICD-9 code of HH
were significantly lower than the prevalence of these genotypes,
indicating a potential issue of underdiagnosis, or misdiagnosis. One
short coming of our evaluation is that the results have not been
confirmed by assessment of the medical charts. Conclusion: This large
scale genomic study allowed us to identify carriers of HH-associated
genetic variants, and uncover potential deficiencies in the current
screening algorithm. This will enable the implementation of processes to
promote precision medicine, minimize misdiagnosis/underdiagnosis, and
maximize outcomes in the management of HH patients.

