Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide haplotype association tests identified three candidate
loci associated with sporadic colorectal cancer risk in Singapore Chinese


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most frequent cancers and leading
cause of cancer mortality in the developed world. Twin study has
attributed about 35% of the etiology of sporadic CRC to genes. Hitherto,
more than 20 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci from genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) were associated with CRC risk. Most of these
index SNPs however have small effect sizes and often located in gene
deserts. Thus they are unlikely to be causal. Haplotype-based methods may
offer a more powerful approach to disease gene mapping. We previously
performed a GWAS on 2,000 ethnicity-, age-, and gender-matched Singapore
Chinese CRC patients and healthy controls using the Affymetrix SNP 6
platform. Sporadic patients were defined as aged 50 or more at the time
of surgery and with no dominant family history of CRC. Haplotype block
detection was performed in Golden Helix SVS after this SNP6 dataset was
filtered for genotype call rate (>95%), Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the
controls and principal component analysis. Block detection was performed
requiring strong linkage disequilibrium between block pairs, minor
allelic frequencies (MAF) of SNPs more than 0.01, the maximum number of
markers and length of the block at 30 and 160kb respectively.
Genome-wide, 73,333 blocks were computed using 336, 466 markers on 22
autosomes. Haplotype frequencies were estimated using the EM algorithm.
Chi-Squared and logistic regression with odds ratio tests of haplotype
association were performed using these pre-computed blocks on a
per-haplotype basis. Three candidate loci at chromosomes 3, 15 and 20,
each with 6 to 9 SNPs and sizes ranging from 4 to 15 kb achieved
genome-wide significance and encompass potential novel disease genes.
These loci are currently being validated in an independent replication
panel using the Fluidgm SNPtype assays and pooled analyses will be
performed.

