Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition through pan-MEK
inhibition in triple-negative breast cancer


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) presents a clinical challenge due to
the aggressive nature of the disease and a lack of targeted therapies.
Constitutive activation of the MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated
kinases (MEK) pathways has been linked to chemoresistance and metastatic
progression through distinct mechanisms, including activation of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here we proposed to
investigate dual inhibition of MEK1/2 and MEK5 as a more efficacious
method for intervention to target mesenchymal and highly metastatic
breast cancer cells than MEK1/2 or MEK5 alone through the use of a novel
pan-MEK inhibitor SC-151. Interestingly, TNBC cells demonstrated a change
in cell morphology indicative of mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition
(MET) and exhibited a significant decrease in migration potential
following pan-MEK inhibition. Additionally, immuno-compromised mice
inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells and treated with SC-151 demonstrated
decreased tumor volumes compared to vehicle-treated animals. To parse the
roles of MEK1/2 and MEK5 in EMT and tumorigenesis, we used the
CRISPR/Cas9 approach to knock out ERK5 expression in the TNBC cell line
MDA-MB-231. Similar to biological changes induced by pan-MEK inhibition,
loss of ERK5 promoted epithelial characteristics in TNBC cells at the
morphological and molecular level and impaired tumor formation in vivo.
Treatment of ERK5-ko cells with SC-151 further enhanced these effects in
vitro, suggesting that MEK1/2 and MEK5 play distinct roles in maintaining
the mesenchymal phenotype. Further analysis revealed that constitutive
activation of MEK5 abrogated the effects of SC-151 on the reversal of
EMT, highlighting the requirement for MEK5 inhibition in MET induction.
Taken together, these findings show that while the MEK5-ERK5 pathway may
be sufficient in EMT regulation, MEK1/2 signaling further sustains the
mesenchymal state of TNBC cells. Thus, dual MEK inhibition exerts optimal
effects in the reversal of EMT. These data present a novel compound and
viable therapeutic strategy to target both MEK1/2 and MEK5 in
phenotypically mesenchymal and clinically aggressive breast cancer cells,
warranting further investigation into mechanisms by which MEK1/2 and MEK5
individually modulate the EMT axis. Additionally, as MEK inhibition has
been shown to sensitize resistant cancer cells to targeted therapies,
synergistic and sensitizing effects of SC-151 combined with inhibitors of
alternative signaling pathways as well as kinases upstream of MEK will be
examined.

