Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular targets of NOSH-naproxen (AVT-219), a dual nitric oxide
and hydrogen sulfide-releasing hybrid, in a xenograft mouse model of
colon cancer


Introduction: Long-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) may prevent colon cancer, but can cause serious gastrointestinal
(GI), cardiovascular (CV), and renal side effects. Naproxen has a
relatively favorable CV profile, but is notorious for its GI toxicity. To
improve its safety profile, we developed NOSH-naproxen, where we linked
nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S) releasing moieties to the
native molecule, the rational being the observations that NO and H2S may
modulate some components of the local mucosal defense systems which
should lead to reduced GI toxicity. Indeed, we recently reported that
NOSH-naproxen displayed enhanced GI safety, with potent
anti-inflammatory, analgesic, anti-pyretic, and anti-platelet properties.
Here we describe the effects of NOSH-naproxen on the growth properties of
several human colon cancer cell lines, and on its molecular targets in a
xenograft mouse model of colon cancer.Methods: NOSH-naproxen was
synthesized by us with 1H-NMR verification. Colon cancer cell lines:
HT-29, HCT 15, and SW480; Cell growth: MTT. Xenografts: Male athymic nude
(NU/NU) mice (N = 15) were implanted s.c. in the right flank with SW480
cells, when the tumors reached an average sizes of 100 mm3, the mice were
randomly divided into 3 groups and gavaged daily with either vehicle
(0.5% CMC) or equimolar concentrations of NOSH-naproxen (100 mg/kg) or
naproxen (45 mg/kg). Tumor volume was measured every three days; after 30
days the mice were sacrificed, tumors collected, weighed, photographed
and stored in formalin for IHC studies.Results: NOSH-naproxen inhibited
the growth of HT-29, HCT 15, and SW480 cells with IC50 values of 90 10,
100 8, and 98 7 nM at 24 hr, respectively. The corresponding IC50s for
naproxen were 2800 165, 2950 215, and 3110 185 nM. This represents an
enhanced potency of 30,000-fold in the 3 cell lines at 24 h. In
xenografts, all the mice treated with naproxen died within 2 weeks from
what appeared to be GI bleeding. However, the NOSH-naproxen treated mice
did not show any overt signs of toxicity. At sacrifice,
NOSH-naproxen-treated mice had a mean reduction in tumor volume of 82%,
and a mean reduction in tumor mass of 55%. NOSH-naproxen inhibited growth
of these cancer cell xenografts as a result of reduced proliferation
(decreased PCNA expression), and induction of apoptosis (increased number
of TUNEL positive cells). NF-B, activated in untreated xenografts was
significantly inhibited by NOSH-naproxen. Other molecular targets
affected by NOSH-naproxen were: induction of iNOS, significant reduction
in FoxM1, and increases in p53.Conclusions: NOSH-naproxen is more potent
and efficacious than naproxen and appears to be significantly safer. It
targets parameters important in determining cellular kinetics,
inflammation, and signaling pathways important in the carcinogenic
process.

