Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IT-147: A stabilized polymer micelle formulation of epothilone D
for treatment of solid tumors


IT-147 is a formulation of epothilone D encapsulated in a stabilized
polymer micelle. Epothilones are a class of cytotoxic chemotherapeutics
that induce apoptosis via microtubule stabilization. Epothilone D is a
poor substrate for P-glycoprotein efflux pumps and has demonstrated
equivalent activity against drug-sensitive and multidrug-resistant human
cancer cell lines. This offers a distinct advantage over other
microtubule stabilizing agents such as taxanes, however clinical utility
is limited by a narrow therapeutic window due to dose limiting toxicities
such as peripheral sensory neuropathy, GI toxicities, and cognitive
abnormalities. We have optimized a lead formulation comprising 2%
epothilone D (w/w) encapsulated in a polymer micelle that is crosslinked
with iron to provide micelle stability upon dilution. IT-147 has an
average diameter of 70 nm. The iron-mediated crosslinking provides
pH-dependent release of epothilone D such that drug can be released in
the tumor microenvironment as well as in the endosome/lysosome upon
cellular entry. In addition, the geometrical arrangement of iron
molecules around the core of the micelle imparts superparamagnetic
properties that allow for imaging of intact nanoparticles by MRI. IT-147
demonstrates a low nanomolar IC50 against a panel of human cancer cell
lines in vitro. In vivo, IT-147 demonstrates a 4-fold increase in maximum
tolerated dose in a mouse model compared to epothilone D free drug.
Pharmacokinetics (PK) in a cannulated rat model for a 20 mg/kg epothilone
D dose demonstrates a 6.5-fold increase in area under the time versus
concentration curve (AUC), and a 14.3-fold increase in the terminal
half-life compared to free drug. Dose escalation of IT-147 to 30 and 40
mg/kg epothilone D in the rat PK model results in linear increases in AUC
from 53.5 h*g/mL at 20 mg/kg to 82.9 and 110.8 h*g/mL at 30 and 40 mg/kg,
respectively. Treatment with IT-147 at the MTD in an HCT116 tumor
xenograft model led to tumor stasis during the course of treatment, and
MRI imaging of mice treated with IT-147 demonstrates tumor accumulation
over 24 and 48 hours post administration. Taken together, data for IT-147
demonstrates successful encapsulation of epothilone D leading to a safer,
more effective formulation with the potential for MRI imaging as a
predictor for response.

