Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of anticoagulant and sample storage conditions on
circulating tumor cells enrichment by vortex


BackgroundCirculating tumor cells (CTC) have recently emerged as powerful
biomarkers for non-invasive diagnosis and prognosis of cancer [1]. The
rarity and fragility of these cells has proven to be a significant
impediment to their clinical use. Delay between phlebotomy and sample
processing, together with blood sample storage, can impact the integrity
of these cells and hamper their subsequent isolation. Addressing these
issues could allow shipping between clinical facilities and significantly
increase the use of CTCs. Here, we assessed the effects of various blood
anticoagulants on the isolation of CTCs using Vortex technology. Vortex
is a label-free, size-based technology that relies on the generation of
laminar flow microvortices where CTCs can be trapped [2], and released
off-chip, into a small volume compatible with various downstream
assays.MethodsTo evaluate the effects of delayed processing on capture
performances, samples from healthy donors were drawn into 4 different
blood collection tubes (BCT): K3EDTA, ACD-B, CellSave and cell-free DNA
Streck. Each BCT was spiked with MCF7 breast cancer cells and stored at
room temperature for up to 3 days (72H). On days 0, 1, 2 and 3, aliquots
of blood (0.5 ml; n = 3) from each BCT were diluted 10X and processed
through Vortex chip. Captured cells were stained (CK, CD45, DAPI) and
enumerated. Capture efficiency and purity were determined for each time
point and BCT. To simulate over-sea shipping and processing of patient
samples, larger blood volumes (6mL in EDTA, CellSave and Streck BCT) were
also tested after 48H. Capture performances and device clogging were
evaluated.ResultsSignificant differences were observed for capture
performances between the BCTs. Best results were obtained for CellSave
tube, with an efficiency of 19.8 2.5%, stable for up to 3 days, and a
purity ranging from 40.6 to 52.8%. In comparison, performances for
standard K3EDTA were maximal at 24H, with 19.1% efficiency decreasing to
10% at 72H. ACD-B and Streck showed lower efficiencies, reaching 4.6 and
9.7% respectively. Purity for EDTA, CellSave and Streck BCT was in a
similar range (48.4, 46.5 and 34.9% respectively). No significant device
clogging was observed between EDTA, CellSave and Streck BCT when larger
blood volumes were processed.ConclusionHere we demonstrate the ability to
isolate cancer cells spiked in blood for up to 48H post-phlebotomy, with
higher overall performances obtained with CellSave tube. Standard EDTA
BCT gives optimal performances up to 24H and would be the option to
select whenever viable cells are required. This suggests that Vortex
technology is compatible with various anticoagulants and preservatives
containing blood collection tube; the election would depend on the assay
performed downstream. Future work will include shipping blood samples
from remote sites and effect on CTC enrichment by Vortex technology.[1]
Ignatiadis et al. Clin Cancer Res 2015.[2] Sollier et al. Lab Chip 2014.

