Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis for cancer precision medicine using
patient-derived 2D and 3D cell models


Background: Preclinical models provide an essential tool to study both
cancer biology with particular relevance to identifying appropriate
therapies and new targets. Both Patient-derived xenografts and 3D methods
require significant time for the necessary amplification of the tumor
cells, which limits clinical utility. Even classical 2D cultures suffer
from their long time requirements for establishing a cell line with a low
efficiency (1-30%). Conventional cancer cell lines usually fail to
reflect the complex genotypes and phenotypes of the corresponding primary
tumor. Recently, we described the use feeder cells and a ROCK inhibitor
to induce the conditional reprogramming (CR) of adult epithelial cells
into a basal or stem-like state. The induction of these CR cells is
reversible, and the removal of feeders and ROCK inhibitor, coupled with
their placement in environments that mimick their native environment
(Matrigel, air-liquid interface (ALI), and the renal capsule in mice)
allows cells to differentiate normally. Importantly, the CR technology
can generate 2106 cells in a week from small biopsies, and can generate
cultures from cryopreserved tissue and from fewer than four viable cells.
A recent study utilized the CR method to initiate cultures from CT-guided
lung biopsies and identify combination of therapies (Science 2014). Three
recent reviews in Nature series highlighted CR method as one of the
next-generation patient-derived cancer models (Nat Rev Clin Oncol, 2014,
Nat Rev Genetics and Nat Rev Cancer 2015). Primary goal: The clinical
utility and standard protocols for generating patient CR cultures. We
therefore initiated study to examine whether CR cultures reflected the
biology and genotype of the original tumor and whether cultures might be
used to predict clinical responses. Procedures and Results: We first
worked out standard protocols for clinical sampling, storage, shipping,
freezing and the preparation of conditioned medium. CR methods were then
used to generate matched cultures from both tumor cells and adjacent
normal cells from patients with prostate cancer or lung cancer. CR
cultures were established efficiently from these tumors (>95% for
prostate and lung cancer CRCs). Following the rapid establishment of CR
cultures, they were then transferred 3D cultures. The data with Matrigel
3D and (ALI) demonstrated that CR cells reexpressed cell specific markers
and were well-differentiated. We also characterized them for their growth
properties, induction of tumors in immunodeficient mice, karyotype, and
their exome and transcriptome profile. Conclusion: CR cells, coupled with
sequential 3D culture conditions, appears to provide optimal conditions
for inducing the differentiation of normal cells and for differentiating
normal from tumor cells. Finally, this cell-based approach should be
useful for defining the functional heterogeneity of the respective
primary tumors and for evaluating appropriate therapies.

