Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtubule polymerizing effects of ellagic acid reduce efficacy
of taxane chemotherapy


Ellagic acid (EA) is a polyphenolic compound found in berries,
pomegranates and other foods, which has cancer preventive and therapeutic
properties. EA inhibits proliferation, induces apoptosis, blocks cell
cycle progression and inhibits ABC drug transporters. Based on these
anti-cancer activities of EA, we hypothesized that EA could enhance the
efficacy of taxane chemotherapy on prostate cancer cells and inhibit drug
resistance. We used castration-resistant 22Rv1, VCaP, and C4-2 prostate
cancer cells and androgen-independent PC-3 cells to study effects of EA
on efficacy of the taxane drug cabazitaxel (CBZ). Cells were treated with
EA (0.1 M - 30 M) and after 72 hr proliferation was measured using the
SRB assay. EA inhibited proliferation at levels greater than 10 M. At 30
M the greatest inhibition was observed in the most proliferative cell
lines (22Rv1: 66.7%, PC-3: 82.7%), with a more modest effect on the
slower growing cells (VCaP: 25.2%, C4-2: 31.7%). We next tested if growth
inhibitory concentrations of EA could enhance the microtubule stabilizing
effects of CBZ. In a cell-free assay, CBZ (1 nM - 1 M) dose dependently
increased tubulin polymerization, and EA (10 M) increased polymerization
by 61.0%. However, we observed an antagonistic response with the
combination of CBZ and EA, reducing polymerized tubulin by 13.9% compared
to CBZ alone. To confirm these results in cell culture, we treated 22Rv1
cells with EA (10 M) and CBZ (10 nM) and determined levels of polymerized
tubulin by western blotting. We observed a 1.6 fold increase in
polymerized tubulin by EA, a 5.5 fold increase by CBZ, which was reduced
to a 4.6 fold increase by combination of CBZ with EA. Contrary to our
hypothesis, these results suggest that EA may interfere with taxanes,
leading to a reduction in drug effectiveness. Additionally, the ability
of EA alone to induce polymerization suggests the possibility that the
growth inhibitory activity of EA is a consequence of its effects on
microtubule dynamics, potentially through an interaction with taxane
binding site of tubulin. This is consistent with our observation that EA
has the greatest growth inhibitory effect on very proliferative cell
lines, since microtubule targeting agents are most effective at killing
rapidly dividing cells. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence of
microtubule targeting as an anticancer mechanism of EA. We also studied
the effects of EA on drug efflux to determine if EA could inhibit
development of taxane drug resistance. We treated C4-2 cells with EA
(0.01 M - 30 M) and measured calcein retention as marker of the activity
of the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) pump. There was a dose dependent increase in
calcein retention by EA, with a 1.9 fold increase at the highest
concentration (30 M), suggesting an inhibition of P-gp pump activity with
increasing amounts of EA. Thus, EA may increase intracellular taxane
levels, but at the same time reduce their microtubule-polymerization
effects.

