Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hexavalent chromium induces H4K16 hypoacetylation by
NUPR1-mediated inactivation of histone acetyltransferase hMOF


Hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] is a well-established carcinogen linked to
respiratory cancer and has been found at half of US toxic waste sites. In
spite of considerable research efforts, the mechanism of Cr(VI)-induced
carcinogenesis remains largely unknown. A growing body of evidence
suggests that Cr is capable of inducing epigenetic changes, such as DNA
methylation, histone modification, and microRNA. Acetylation of histone
lysine residues neutralizes the positive charge from their side chains
and decreases the affinity between histone tails and DNA, which
subsequently leads to increased DNA accessibility and transcriptional
activation in the gene promoter region. However, the effect of Cr(VI) on
histone acetylation is still not clear. Here, we report that BEAS-2B
cells exposed to 5 or 10 uM of Cr(VI) for 24 hours resulted in a striking
and dose dependent decrease in H4K16ac. Co-treatment with Cr(VI) and
Benzo(a)pyrene diolepoxide (BPDE) induced further decrease in H4K16ac. Cr
(VI) transformed cells showed considerable decrease in H4K16ac compared
to the control cells, which further indicates the correlation between
Cr(VI) exposure and hypoacetylation of H4K16. H4K16 acetylation is known
as an important determinant in higher-order chromatin structure and
active gene expression. Male Absent on the First gene (MOF) is a H4K16
specific acetyltransferase. Our results indicate that Cr(VI) exposure
significantly reduced MOF activity while its expression levels remained
the same, thus suggesting that Cr(VI) may affect MOF activity rather than
its expression. Moreover, Nuclear protein 1 (NUPR1), a MOF inhibitor, was
increased in Cr(VI)-exposed cells. Depletion of NUPR1 in cells by small
RNA interference rescued Cr(VI)- reduced H4K16ac. Together, our results
indicate that Cr(VI) inhibits MOF activity through inducing NUPR1
expression which subsequently leads to H4K16 hypoacetylation. Since
hypoacetylation of H4K16 is a known hallmark of human cancer, the results
from our study presents strong evidence supporting the role of H4K16
hypoacetylation in chromium carcinogenesis..

