Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive and angiopreventive activity of a purified
polyphenol-rich extract from olive mill wastewaters


The presence of diverse phenolic molecules in dietary elements, has been
shown to prevent the occurrence of a variety of chronic and inflammatory
diseases. Olives and extra virgin oil, a basic component of mediterranean
diet represent an important source of these poliphenols, including
hydroxytyrosol. While the strong antioxidant potential of these molecules
has extensively investigated, their anti-angiogenic and chemopreventive
activities remain unknown. Here we assessed the anti-angiogenic and
chemopreventive activities exerted by an extracts from olive mill
wastewaters (OMWWs), termed A009, which represent a waste product from
olive oil industry, in vitro and in vivo on endothelial and different
tumour cell lines, as compared with hydroxytyrosol aloneThe ability of
A009 to affect cell proliferation and survival was evaluated on human
umbelical endothelial vein cells (HUVECs), six different tumor cell
lines, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 (breast), HT-29 and HCT-116 (colon) PC-3 and
DU-145 (prostate) and the murine CT26 CRC cells by MTT assay, while the
induction of apoptosis and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were assessed by
flow cytometry. Functional studies evaluated the capacity of OMWWs to
interfere with endothelial cell tube formation, migration and invasion by
morphogenesis and Boyden chamber assays, respectively. Finally, the
inhibition of angiogenesis and tumor cell growth was evaluated in vivo,
by the matrigel sponge assay and tumor xenograft.The A009 extract was
able to inhibit both HUVECs and tumor cell lines growth in a dose
dependent manner, exerting a stronger inhibitory effect as compared to
the pure hydroxytyrosol alone. This effect was directly associated with
the induction of apoptosis and ROS on HUVECs. HT-29 anc HCT-116 CRC cell
lines exposed to A009 decreased thei ability to release VEGF and IL-8.
Functional studies of HUVECs exposed to A009 demostrated impaired
migratory and invasive abilities as far as reduced capability to form
capillary-lile-structure in a dose dependent manner. Finally, A009s
interfered with angiogenesis and CT26 tumor cell growth in vivo.Our
results suggest that the polyphenol enriched extracts from olive oil
processing (OMWWs) A009, show promising angio-preventive and
chemo-preventive potentials. In particular, our data demonstrate that a
pool of specific polyphenols are characterized by stronger
anti-angiogenic/anti-tumor properties compared to hydroxytyrosol alone, a
well known polyphenol with anti-tumor activity.

