Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of APOBEC mutagenesis on the immune microenvironment of
lung adenocarcinoma (LUAC)


Introduction: It is currently unknown how specific mutational processes
that sculpt the genome of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) impact the
tumor immune micro-environment. APOBEC-mediated cytidine deamination has
emerged as a major source of somatic mutation across several epithelial
malignancies, including NSCLC. Among the 11 APOBEC family members,
APOBEC3B (A3B) is overexpressed in several cancers and has been
considered the dominant mutator deaminase. However, recent data have also
implicated APOBEC3A (A3A) as an important contributor to tumor somatic
hypermutation. In this study, we evaluated the relationship(s) between
A3B/A3A expression and the immune contexture of LUAC.Methods: Our
datasets include two large cohorts of chemotherapy-nave, early stage
LUAC: a) the TCGA collection of 431 LUACs with available RNASeq data and
b) the PROSPECT dataset of 183 LUACs with available array-based mRNA
expression data (Illumina platform) and automated IF-based quantitative
analysis of immune cell sub-populations for 107 tumors included in a
tissue micro-array (TMA). We have further extended our studies to include
two datasets of metastatic, platinum-refractory LUACs from the BATTLE-1
and BATTLE-2 clinical trials of targeted therapy. Finally, we have
analyzed an in-house panel of 78 comprehensively annotated NSCLC cell
lines.Results: Expression of A3B correlated significantly with the
expression of CD274 (PD-L1) in both the TCGA (r = 0.25, P = 1.49e07) and
PROSPECT (r = 0.168, P = 0.023) cohorts, as well as in our panel of NSCLC
cell lines (r = 0.283, P = 0.012). The correlation was stronger among
KRAS-mutant LUACs (r = 0.462, P = 7.64e08, TCGA). Within co-mutation
defined subgroups of KRAS-mutant LUAC, KP (KRAS;TP53) tumors expressed
significantly higher levels of A3B mRNA (P = 4.41e08, ANOVA). When data
were dichotomized into top and bottom tertiles for A3B mRNA expression,
A3B-high tumors expressed significantly higher levels of CD274 mRNA in
both the TCGA (P = 3.32e08, t-test) and PROSPECT (P = 0.0096, t-test)
cohorts. Importantly, A3B-high tumors displayed increased density of
intra-tumoral CD8+ T-lymphocytes (P = 0.03, Mann-Whitney test). Analysis
of chemo-refractory tumors from the BATTLE trials and assessment of the
impact of the A3B deletion polymorphism are underway and updated results
will be presented at the meeting.Conclusions: Elevated expression of A3B
is associated with a hot tumor immune micro-environment with engagement
of PD-1/PD-L1 axis immune checkpoints. Distinct mutagenic processes may
shape the tumor immune microenvironment and present opportunities for
targeted intervention with immunotherapy.

