Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-scale DNA methylation changes delineate uterine leiomyoma
subgroups


Symptomatic uterine leiomyomas (ULs) occur in as many as 20% of women.
These bening lesions are a major burden to women's health by causing
health complications such as abnormal bleeding, pain and infertility, and
they are a common cause of hysterectomy that is at present the only
curative treatment. Similar to other solid tumors, genetic and epigenetic
changes are likely to have value as predictors of UL clinical outcome, as
well as response to treatment. Recent findings from us and others have
provided evidence for existence of at least three distinct molecular UL
subgroups, each displaying a characteristic genetic driver aberration;
MED12 mutation, HMGA2 activation or FH mutation.We conducted DNA
methylation analysis of bisulfite sequencing data from 59 tumors and 38
normal myometrium samples on targeted genomic regions (84.5Mb) such as
CpG islands, shores and shelves, GENCODE promoters and DNaseI
hypersensitive sites from ENCODE data using Agilent SureSelect methyl-seq
target enrichment system. The studied samples consisted of 17
MED12-mutated, 11 HMGA2-upregulated and 6 FH-mutated tumors. Whole-genome
sequencing and expression array profiling had been performed previously
from the same specimens (Mehine, Kaasinen, et al. 2014).We developed a
data processing pipeline that makes use of: (i) Trim Galore tool for
quality control of sequencing data (ii) Bismark for alignment and DNA
methylation calling (Krueger & Andrews 2011).Hierarchical clustering of
all detected CpG sites revealed that MED12- and FH-mutated tumors cluster
according to the driver changes, and HMGA2-upregulated tumors cluster in
two separate branches. Global hypermethylation profile was detected in
FH-mutated tumors, which is compatible with previous reports in
paragangliomas (Letouz et al. 2013). Four tumors with COL4A5/COL4A6
aberration did not display uniform DNA methylation pattern and four
tumors without known genetic driver changes clustered among normal
myometrium samples; one of these tumors harbors a somatic TP53
rearrangement created through massive chromothripsis rearrangement event.
As myometrium samples showed uniform global DNA methylation by clustering
clearly separate from majority of the tumors, statistically powerful
comparison of UL subgroups with different genetic background to
myometrium samples was enabled. Furthermore, integration of
differentially methylated regions with significant expression changes
allowed us to characterize genes which are epigenetically activated or
silenced in different UL subgroups. All ULs displayed increased
methylation of genes enriched in developmentally related biological
processes.Our results provide strong evidence that the known UL subgroups
are distinguishable by global DNA methylation profiling. The role of the
identified epigenetically activated or silenced genes should be studied
further to allow better understanding of the biological processes related
to UL development and clinical outcome.

