Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DERL3 hypermethylation alters rhabdomyosarcoma cell metabolism


Physiological cellular activity requires a precise control of the
proteome. However, cancer cells have a distorted protein profile. It is
likely that intrinsic defects in protein homeostasis participate in human
tumorigenesis, such as alterations in de novo protein synthesis, or
defects in protein degradation. In this last case, the ubiquitin (Ub)
proteasome system (UPS) targets a variety of proteins, including
functional proteins that are no longer needed. Without appropriate
protein homeostasis maintained by the UPS, healthy cells can undergo
malignant transformation, and this observation has been therapeutically
exploited by the development of proteasome inhibitors as anticancer
agents. Many of the cytoplasm UPS-degraded proteins are retrotranslocated
from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In this regard, ER possesses a
quality control mechanism, termed the ER-associated degradation mechanism
(ERAD), that is induced in response to ER stress by a transcriptional
program, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), which leads to the
accelerated degradation of unfolded proteins. Within the ERAD pathway,
the Derlin proteins play a critical role. It has been proposed that
Derlins form an export channel in the membrane of the ER through which
the ERAD substrates pass to reach the proteasome.A previous study in our
lab has shown that DERL3 silencing by DNA methylation deregulate SLC2A1
(GLUT1) degradation, promoting the Warburg effect. SLC2A1 is a key
glucose receptor up-regulated in most solid tumors, allowing cancer cells
to get the glucose they need for tumor progression.In this study we use
an embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma cell line as a model to find out the role
of DERL3 in these tumors, as the percentage of promoter hypermethylation
is these tumors is approximately 60%. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is one of
the leading causes of cancer related deaths among children, being the
histological variant of embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma the most common soft
tissue sarcoma of childhood and adolescence, with 350 cases per year in
USA.The restoration of DERL3 expression in vitro promotes GLUT1
degradation and GLUT4 up-regulation, becoming cells sensitive to insulin.
Moreover, it has been shown that DERL3 confers sensitivity against an
ERAD related drug, Eeyarestatin I, opening a new approach for RMS
treatment. All together, these initial findings highlight the role of
DERL3 in RMS metabolism.

