Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anemarrhena rhizome and Schisandra chinensis inhibit viability and
promote apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cell lines


Pancreatic cancer has one of the highest mortality rates of any cancer,
with just a 6% 5-year survival rate. The current standard chemotherapy is
gemcitabine, alone or in combination with 5-fluorouracil. However, the
prognosis still remains poor due to apoptotic resistance, presenting a
need for an adjuvant therapy option that will induce apoptosis within
pancreatic tumor cells. Emerging evidence has supported the use of herbal
extracts as alternative or adjuvant treatments for pancreatic cancer. In
this study, we evaluated the effects on pancreatic cancer cells of a mix
of 8 herbal extracts, selected for their high clinical usage and
documented ability to alleviate pancreas-specific ailments such as type 2
diabetes, yet not examined for application in pancreatic cancer.The
objective of this study was to determine the inhibitory effects of
Astragalus membranaceus, Pseudostellaria heterophylla, Gypsum fibrosum,
Anemarrhena rhizome, Solomon's seal rhizome, Rehmannia, Schisandra
chinensis, and Cornus fruit extracts on pancreatic cancer cell viability
in combination (referred to as 8-mix) and individually on pancreatic
cancer cells. We also examined extracts previously demonstrated to
inhibit pancreatic cancer cells, Cordyceps chinensis and American
ginseng, as a control.The viability of pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell
lines (BxPC-3 and Panc-1) and the human pancreatic islet: Panc-1 hybrid
cell line (1.1B4) was evaluated in response to the 8-mix, C. chinensis,
and A. membranaceus via MTT assay. To further characterize which herbs in
the 8-mix were responsible for the reduction in cell viability, BxPC-3
and Panc-1 cells were assessed upon treatment with each individual herbal
extract via MTT assay following a 12 hour exposure. To examine the impact
of these herbs on a non-cancerous cell line, the T80 ovarian epithelial
cell line was also evaluated. We measured the apoptotic activity of the
8-mix and two most potent individual herbs within the mix using a
commercially available caspase 3/7 assay on BxPC-3 cells.Initial testing
showed significant inhibitory effects in all pancreatic cell lines
induced by the 8-mix in a dose-dependent manner. A. rhizome and S.
chinensis were the most potent inhibitors of pancreatic cancer cell
viability among the individual extracts. A. rhizome had the greatest
apoptotic activity in the BxPC-3 cells compared to S. chinensis, the
8-mix, and vehicle-treated controls. Within the non-cancerous ovarian T80
cell line, A. rhizome and S. chinensis significantly inhibited cell
viability.Taken together, our data suggests that A. rhizome induces
apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells and both A. rhizome and S. chinensis
significantly inhibit viability in numerous pancreatic cancer cell lines.
These herbs may therefore have potential as an adjuvant therapy in
combination with traditional chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of
advanced pancreatic cancer.

