Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of murine stromal components in patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) models of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer remains a lethal disease with only 3 - 8% of patients
surviving 5 years after initial diagnosis (WHO, 2012). Reasons for this
poor situation are advanced and inoperable tumor stages at time of
diagnosis and resistance to conventional therapies. One bottleneck in the
development of novel therapies is the restricted availability of
preclinical models of high clinical relevance.Since the desmoplastic
stroma has impact on the progression and treatment of pancreatic cancer,
we investigated the attributes of the murine stroma in patient-derived
xenografts that completely replaced the human surrounding tissue within a
few months after primary transplantation. We elucidated the functionality
of murine tumor microenvironment for growth and therapeutic response in a
cohort of well-characterized pancreatic cancer (PDAC) PDX. PDX are a
valuable tool for the prediction of therapy response, the identification
of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets or pancreatic cancer specific
pathways.In this study, 57 patient tumors were collected and immediately
transplanted into immunodeficient mice. So far, 14 out of 57 samples were
established as passageable pancreatic cancer xenografts (PDX). All
engrafted PDX are poorly or moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas.
Global gene expression analysis and determination of cancer associated
mutations revealed K-ras mutations in 13 and additionally p53 mutations
in 9 out of 14 PDX. Furthermore, chemosensitivity to standard of care
(SoC) drugs was determined by using clinically relevant and optimized
schedules and doses. The testing revealed that the response to
Gemcitabine (1/10 responder) was moderate within the PDX panel, while the
most efficient drug was Abraxane with 5 out of 10 responders. In general,
the response profile of all PDX closely reflected patient's situation in
the clinic. Cryo- and formalin-preserved tumor tissues of these
chemosensitivity studies were investigated for markers of desmoplastic
stroma (SPARC, alpha-SMA, FAP and collagen I). Immunohistochemistry and
real-time PCR revealed, that even the replacing murine stroma is
characterized by a distinct reactivate nature. Semi-quantitative analysis
of stromal components showed that the tumor surrounding tissue mass was
not significantly reduced due to therapeutic intervention. Though the
tumor burden was diminished under SoC, the mRNA expression level of SPARC
and FAP was unaffected in corresponding samples of the treatment groups
compared to vehicle-treated control. The same effect was found for
alpha-SMA and collagen I in immunohistochemically stained specimens.In
summary, this study revealed a functional tumor environment of murine
origin in patient-derived xenografts of pancreatic cancer and furthermore
an apparently inherent resistance of this stromal tissue towards
conventional therapy. Thus, targeting the tumor microenvironment should
be implicated into clinical decisions.

