Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS2:ERG fusion enhances osteoblastic phenotype of prostate
cancer bone metastases


Background: Bone metastases are the major cause of morbidity and
mortality in prostate cancer (PCa) patients. Recently, TMPRSS2:ERG gene
fusions produced by rearrangements along chromosome 21 was found in more
than 50% of PCa samples, resulting in androgen-dependent aberrant
expression of the functional ERG transcription factor. Interestingly, ERG
transcription factor has been previously shown to be involved in bone
development. This study is therefore focused on investigating whether
TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions are involved in PCa bone metastasis
development.Methods: We previously established cell clones overexpressing
TMPRSS2:ERG from two PCa cell lines, PC3 and PC3c. We first studied
induced bone lesion phenotype using in vivo intra-tibial injection
models. Secondly, we analyzed transcriptional changes induced by ERG
transcription factors in PC3c clones to identify potential target genes.
Then, direct target genes were further validated and investigated in
vitro using RT-qPCR, ELISA, siRNA and ChIP techniques. Importantly, using
a cohort of prostate carcinoma samples, we validated the expression
correlation between ERG and its target target genes expression in human
pathology.Results: Bone lesions induced in vivo by intra-tibial
injections of PC3 or PC3c cells are known to be osteolytic or mixed
(osteoblastic/osteolytic) respectively. Interestingly, intra-tibial
injections of PC3c clones expressing the fusion showed a statistically
significant increase of osteoblastic phenotype compared to control cells.
Furthermore, intra-tibial injections of PC3 clones expressing the fusion
showed a strong decrease of osteolytic phenotype, reinforcing our
previous result in PC3c clones.Among the genes identified by
transcriptomic study and dysregulated in PC3c clones expressing the
fusion, we have identified the ERG candidate target Endothelin-1 (ET-1),
which is known to be involved in osteoblast proliferation and in
osteoblastic metastasis formation in PCa. Indeed, we found that ET-1
expression was up-regulated in PC3c-TMPRSS2:ERG clones, and the
up-regulation was dependent on ERG expression levels. Importantly,
silencing of ERG resulted in decreased expression of ET-1. In silico
analysis of the promoter of ET-1 revealed the presence of several
potential binding sites of ERG. ChIP experiments followed by qPCR
demonstrated a direct binding to one of them. Moreover, in human PCa
samples, there was a significant expression correlation between ET-1 and
fusion gene TMPRSS2:ERG, reinforcing the direct functional link between
ET-1 and the fusion in PCa.Conclusion: Taken together, these results
strongly suggest that the TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion contributes to the
osteoblastic phenotype of PCa bone metastases and ET-1 is one of the
involved factors, directly regulated by the transcription factor ERG.

