Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the combination of the prodrug-mediated gene therapy
vector AdV-tk and immune checkpoint inhibitor for glioblastoma treatment
in a syngeneic mouse model


There has been a recent surge of interest in cancer immunotherapies due
to newly FDA approved immunologic treatments based on targeting immune
checkpoint inhibition pathways. Despite the dramatic responses in animal
models and early clinical human trials, particularly in melanoma, durable
clinical responses are observed only in approximately 30% of patients,
therefore combinatorial immune therapeutic approaches may be needed to
improve outcomes further. While the brain has traditionally been
considered to be an immune-privileged site, evidence supporting the use
of immunotherapeutics in brain tumors has been rapidly accumulating.
Given that virus-based cancer therapies can be immunostimulatory and
immune checkpoint inhibitors block the body's natural checkpoint (ICI)
response, the combination of these two approaches offers a potentially
advantageous interaction. AdV-tk is an immunostimulatory virus-based
approach that involves the intra-tumoral delivery of a non-replicating
adenoviral vector carrying the Herpes virus thymidine kinase gene
(AdV-tk) followed by administration of an anti-herpetic prodrug
(ganciclovir - GCV). This approach has shown benefit in clinical trials
of glioblastoma among other tumor types. The immunological component
results from the delivery vehicle being a virus, the mode of cell death,
through both necrosis and apoptosis, and the pro-immunogenic properties
of the thymidine kinase protein (TK). This approach has consistently
demonstrated anti-tumor immune stimulation and an increased intra-tumoral
CD8+ T-cell infiltrate. Not surprisingly, however, this immune
stimulation also leads to increased expression of immune checkpoint
inhibitory ligands on tumor cells, including PD-L1. Our initial in vitro
studies showed that the immune checkpoint ligand PD-L1 is expressed
across a panel of human and mouse conventional and stem-like
glioblastoma-derived cells (GSCs). After AdV-tk infection and GCV
treatment PD-L1 is consistently up-regulated both at protein and mRNA
levels, while no changes were detected after AdV-tk alone. In vivo
experiments in immunocompetent mouse models with GL261 glioma cell lines
demonstrate a significant improvement in survival when we combine
AdV-tk+GCV and anti-PD-1 antibodies. This data suggests that combination
of immune checkpoint blockade with AdV-tk treatment should be explored in
glioblastoma clinical trials.

