Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic alterations in molecular tumor subgroups of malignant
pleural mesothelioma


Background: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a very aggressive
neoplasm linked to asbestos exposure. In spite of research efforts to
develop more effective therapeutic approaches, its prognosis remains
poor, because of the absence of curative treatment. The identification of
molecular profiles by omic analyses is a powerful approach to better
define MPM subclasses and new targeted therapies. A recent transcriptomic
analysis allowed to define a robust MPM classification and to identify
two subgroups, C1 and C2, linked to histology and survival. The main
finding was to separate epitheloid MPM, the most frequent histologic
subtype, within these two subgroups. Epitheloid MPM with a worse survival
prognosis were classified in the C2 subgroup. To better define the
heterogeneity of MPM and establish a more precise classification, we
determined genetic alterations in C1 and C2 MPM.Material and Methods:
Using a gene candidate approach, we performed Next-Generation Sequencing
(Miseq, Illumina) in 84 MPM including 49 MPM primary cultures and 35
frozen tumors to identify genetic alterations in specific genes with a
200X depth. We selected 22 genes including key altered genes in
mesothelial carcinogenesis (NF2, CDKN2A, CDKN2B BAP1, TP53 and LATS2)
previously sequenced by Sanger method, genes mutated at low frequency in
MPM (KRAS, HRAS, EGFR) and genes recently suggested as altered in MPM
(CUL1, KMT2D, SETD2).Results: Previous mutations identified by Sanger
sequencing in our collection have been confirmed. The results showed an
enrichment in C>T transitions, which was already observed in an exome
sequencing study in MPM. We identified 93 variants inducing protein
structure modification. Among them, 70% were deleterious to the function
of the protein (deletion/insertion, splice-site mutation, substitutions
nonsense and damaging missense predicted by SIFT or Polyphen). For most
of the genes, the mutation frequency was consistent with literature data.
The highest alteration frequency was found in CDKN2A, CDKN2B, NF2 and
BAP1 genes (over 25%), lower frequencies were found in TP53, LATS2, KMT2D
and SETD2 genes (5% to 20%). The alteration frequency of four genes was
different between C1 and C2 tumor subgroups. BAP1 mutations were more
frequent in C1 MPM, as we showed previously. We also identified new
relevant mutations notably in the methyltransferases SETD2 and KMT2D that
are also associated to C1 MPM. Mutations in TP53 were significantly
associated with C2 MPM.Conclusion: We defined the genetic alterations
signatures of C1 and C2 tumor subgroups. Mutations in enzymes involved in
chromatin organization seem to be characteristic of the C1 subgroup.
Interestingly, TP53 mutations, which are known to provide tumor
aggressiveness, are found in the C2 subgroup gathering patients with the
worse prognosis. Ongoing analysis of 83 additional MPM would allow to
confirm statistically all the associations we observed.

