Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal heterogeneity and immune response in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in the US. Our
group and others has shown that CD8+ lymphocyte infiltration in the
ovarian tumor epithelium is associated with prolonged survival in
patients with high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). Despite the
increasing evidence on stromal involvement in tumor progression, the
underlying genetic composition of the stromal cells that could regulate
the infiltration and activation of CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in
ovarian cancer is not fully understood. How tumor heterogeneity
contributes to a different in immune response remains a challenge
question that needs to be addressed. The present study seeks to evaluate
the roles and to delineate the underlying mechanisms by which stromal
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) modulates immune response in ovarian
cancer, particularly immune suppression by CAF-derived protein factors.By
laser microdissection of tumor tissue samples from HGSOC patients, we
generated cell type specific expression profiles and identified a
CAF-specific gene signature for ovarian cancer. Genes expressed
exclusively by CAFs that are associated with differential immune response
were identified by comparing CAF expression profiles from HGSOC patients
with high and low tumor-infiltrated CD8+ T cell densities. Among the
differentially expressed genes identified, immunostaining results showed
a significant inverse correlation between stromal MFAP5 expression and
intratumoral CD8+ T cell density in HGSOC tissue samples (p = 0.006). The
results were further confirmed by correlating stromal MFAP5 protein
expression and intratumoral CD8+ T cell density. Our recent studies
showed that increased stromal MFAP5 expression is associated with poorer
survival in HGSOC patients and MFAP5 modulates ovarian caner invasion and
motility potential. Together with our preliminary data showing that MFAP5
modulates the expression of immune-related genes, we hypothesize that
stromal MFAP5 may generate an immunosuppressive microenvironment through
suppressing CD8+ T cell activation and trafficking in the ovarian tumor
tissue. Cell culture experiment showed that recombinant MFAP5 protein
treatment induced expression of CD47, an immune checkpoint protein, in
cancer cells and downregulated CXCL13, a chemokine essential for immune
cell adhesion, in endothelial cells. Using animal models, these findings
were further validated. Based on our data, animal studies will be
performed to further evaluate the efficacy of immune activation by
targeting stromal MFAP5 in ovarian cancer treatment.Delineating the
molecular mechanism by which MFAP5 modulates the immune responses in
ovarian cancer will help to design novel treatment modalities based on
stromal MFAP5 blockade, which will promote activation and trafficking of
cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and improve patient survival rates.

