Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel patient-derived xenograft and primary tissue culture cells
for preclinical study in sarcoma


Sarcomas are a group of malignant tumors displaying a wide diversity of
pathological appearances and clinical responses due to the mesenchymal
origin. Although certain sarcomas are characterized by the presence of
unique fusion genes and mutations, the molecular backgrounds for
tumorigenesis, metastasis, and resistance to treatments are remained to
be further clarified in sarcomas. To improve clinical outcome, precise
diagnosis followed by optimized therapy has long been desired in this
field. Recently, clinical trials for application and re-localization of
molecular targeting drugs have been conducted, and several drugs have
been proven to effective in sarcomas. Preclinical models are
indispensable to furthering our understanding of molecular background and
facilitate novel therapeutic strategy. However, because of low prevalence
the models are quite limited in sarcomas. To this end, we launched a
project to establish patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and primary
culture cells of sarcomas. From April 2014 through October 2015, we
implanted surgical tumor tissues from 76 sarcoma patients into highly
immune-deficient NOG mice, and banked them after three passages. The
identities of sarcomas were histologically confirmed by a certified
pathologist, and the utility of PDXs were confirmed by re-growing them
after storage in liquid nitrogen. 17 PDXs were prepared for preclinical
study including myxofibrosarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma,
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma,
osteosarcoma and clear cell sarcoma. Tissue cultures were also conducted
by utilizing surgical specimens or PDXs. 158 sarcoma tissue samples were
subjected to primary culture. Five immortalized cell lines, and 33
primary cultured cell lines with a minimum number of passages were
established. The former includes leiomyosarcoma and undifferentiated
pleomorphic sarcoma, and the latter includes additional 10 subtypes such
as myxofibrosarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor,
liposarcoma, osteosarcoma, clear cell sarcoma, etc. Moreover, the
molecular backgrounds of the established sarcoma PDXs and tissue cultured
cells were evaluated by targeted sequencing using an original cancer gene
panel (NCC oncopanel), which can detect targetable mutations and gene
fusions. Clinical and pathological observations of the donor patients
will be linked to the characters of PDXs and tissue cultures. The
applications of these in vivo and in vitro models for preclinical study
will be our next challenge.

