Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Passenger deletion of ENO1 as a collateral lethality target in
cancer


Large scale genomic characterization efforts such as TCGA have painted an
unprecedentedly detailed picture of the genetic alterations that underlie
tumorigenesis. Yet, the majority of genetic alterations are passenger
rather than driver events and are considered unactionable. We have
previously proposed that passenger or collateral deletions could serve as
pharmacologically targetable vulnerabilities Collateral Lethality, in
case passenger genes are homozygously deleted and member of a paralogous
gene family carrying out an essential housekeeping function. We have
presented proof-of-principal, whereby passenger deletion of the
glycolytic gene Enolase 1 (ENO1) as part of the 1p36-tumor suppressor
locus, renders glioma cells harboring such deletions highly sensitive to
ablation of its redundant paralogue, ENO2. While our original analysis
identified ENO1-homozygous deletions in Glioblastoma (GBM), recent
bioinformatics analyzes, backed by immunohistochemistry, show that
ENO1-homozygous deletions also occur in Hepatocellular Carcinoma and
Cholangiocarcinoma. In GBM, multisector analysis of primary and recurrent
tumors, indicate that ENO1 deletion is an early event which is
homogenously distributed through the primary tumor and persist during
recurrence. To pharmacologically exploit ENO1-deletion, we have pursued
two approaches. First, we have synthesized cell-permeable prodrug
derivatives of the natural Enolase inhibitor SF2312. The lead compound,
POMHEX, shows potent killing of ENO1-deleted glioma cells in the low nM
range while ENO1-restored isogenic or normal cells can tolerate M doses.
POMHEX has a short half-life yet can eradicate intracranial xenografted
ENO1-deleted tumors, provided extensive breakdown of the blood-brain
barrier. Our second approach to targeting ENO1-deletion consisted of
chemical biology screening of drug libraries for the ability to kill
ENO1-deleted but not isogenic rescued cells. We find that ENO1-deleted
cells show a dramatic sensitization to inhibitors of the mitochondrial
electron transport chain. These include tool compounds such as rotenone
as well as compounds not previously associated with mitochondria, such as
Mubritinib and an experimental anti-neoplastic agent previously described
as a HIF1-inhibitor, now known to inhibit mitochondrial Complex I. The
latter agent shows potent activity against ENO1-deleted intracranial
xenografts. The likely cause for this sensitivity is the inability of
ENO1-deleted cells to compensatory upregulate glycolysis in response
mitochondrial inhibition, the typical response of ENO1-intact glioma
cells and normal cells. Together, these data indicate that passenger
deletion of ENO1 is an encouraging drug-target and provide support for
collateral lethality as a viable therapeutic strategy, which, given the
large number of passenger deletions in the cancer genome, may be broadly
applicable.

