Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the immune response following treatment with
anti-CTLA-4 antibody, radiation therapy or the combination in a murine
model of breast cancer


While breast cancers are considered poorly immunogenic, several
approaches utilizing immunotherapies are being undertaken in the clinic
to evaluate their potential for improving outcomes. Radiation therapy
(RT) is a highly utilized clinical treatment modality in breast cancer,
is known to modify the tumor microenvironment and has been shown to
potentially synergize with immunotherapies. To evaluate this potential
synergy preclinically, we utilized the 4T1 murine mammary carcinoma model
to investigate the immune response following treatment with either the
9H10 clone of an anti-CTLA-4 antibody (9H10), RT (8Gy, QDx3) or the
combination of the two. Tumors were established in the mammary fat pad
and treatments initiated when tumors reached a mean volume of 63-72mm3.
We found that both monotherapies resulted in a period of stable disease
followed by tumor regrowth. The combination did not demonstrate added
benefit over either single agent treatment. As the 4T1 model is known to
be highly metastatic, with tumors seen in lung, liver and lymph nodes, we
closely examined each mouse at the time of euthanasia for evidence of
metastatic disease. None of the treatments effectively reduced
metastasis. To attempt to gain a better mechanistic understanding around
the lack of added benefit of the combination, we profiled different
immune cell subsets in the tumor by flow cytometry. We found that within
the tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), 9H10 antibody and RT treatment
resulted in an increased percentage of CD4+ T cells. Conversely a
decreased percentage of CD8+ T cells was observed. However, the greatest
effect exerted by 9H10 and RT was on the myeloid derived suppressive cell
(MDSC) population. Although RT slightly decreased the percentage of MDSC
within tumors and 9H10 had no effect, the two treatments synergized to
reduce the number of tumor-infiltrating MDSC. Interestingly, a similar
synergistic effect was observed when we analyzed the expression of the
proliferation marker Ki-67 within CD8+ T cells. We also found that RT,
and to a lesser extent 9H10, increased the percentage of CD45+ cells
expressing the T cell inhibitory receptors PD1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4. No
additive effect on the expression of these receptors was observed with
combined therapy. Taken together, our results suggest that anti-CTLA-4
treatment combined with RT triggers both pro- and anti-tumor signaling
pathways thus providing a possible explanation for the marginal
anti-tumor responses we observed with these therapies in this disease
model. Furthermore, this model could be very beneficial to evaluate other
agents either in combination with 9H10 or RT or as a triple combination
with both 9H10 and RT.

