Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide stimulates expression of miRNA-155 through the
BRCA1-dependent pathway


Previously we demonstrated that nitric oxide (NO), generated in
macrophages or released from the NO-donors, inhibits expression of the
breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1) in the different cell
lines (Yakovlev, Cancer Res., 2013). BRCA1 protein contributes to cell
viability in multiple ways, including homologous recombination repair
(HRR) of DNA double-stand breaks (DSBs), cell-cycle checkpoint control,
mitotic spindle assembly, and regulation of chromosome segregation. In
addition BRCA1 protein (in association with histone deacetylase 2)
epigenetically suppresses oncogenic microRNA-155 (miR-155) expression
(Chang, Nature Med., 2011). miR-155 is an established multifunctional
oncomiR, which regulates many pro-oncogenic pathways. miR-155 gene was
found to be over expressed in several solid tumors, such as thyroid
carcinoma, breast cancer, colon cancer, cervical cancer, pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma, and lung cancer, where it is considered to be a
marker of poor prognosis.We hypothesized that overproduction of NO can
stimulate expression of miR-155 through the BRCA1-dependent pathway.
A-549 (lung cancer) and MCF-10A (normal breast epithelial) cell lines
were incubated with different concentrations of NO-donor DETA NONOate (0
- 300M). After 24 or 48 hours of incubation cells were analyzed for the
BRCA1 and miR-155 expression. Both cell lines demonstrated significant
dose- and time-dependent downregulation of BRCA1 expression along with
significant stimulation of miR-155 expression. Cell lines infected with
adenovirus vector expressing the wild type BRCA1 abolished stimulation of
miR-155 in response to NO-donor treatment, compared with the cell lines
infected with an empty adenovirus vector.To analyze the effect of
NO-dependent stimulation of miR-155 expression, we measured the protein
levels of miR-155 targets: DNA mismatch repair (MMR) proteins - MSH2,
MSH6, MLH1; SH-2 containing inositol 5-polyphosphatase 1 (SHIP1); and
suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1). Western blot demonstrated
time- and dose-dependent amount decrease for all targeted proteins with
the one exception: expression level of SHIP1 protein in A-549 cell line
was undetectable even in the non-treated control.In future studies we
will investigate the role of NO-BRCA1-miR-155 pathway on the MMR capacity
and stimulation of microsatellite instability.

