Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of angiogenic factors in glioblastoma progression


Background & Purpose: Glioblastoma is the most malignant primary brain
tumor in humans and has a very low survival rate. The aggressiveness of
this cancer can be attributed to the presence of glioblastoma stem cells
(GSC), which are highly invasive and therapy resistant. Increased
aggressiveness of GSCs is attributed to the release of angiogenic
factors, which promotes the formation of new blood vessels that enhances
tumor cell survival and proliferation. The neovascularization also
provides a scaffold for tumor cells to migrate, enabling metastasis.
Therefore, identifying the altered expression of angiogenic factors is of
clinical importance. In this study, we examined the changes in the
expression of pro-angiogenic factors in GSCs as compared to the original
tumor from which they were derived. We also determined if differentiation
of GSC towards a less invasive phenotype decreased the levels of these
pro-angiogenic factors. Methods: GBM tumor cells were grown in complete
media containing 10% Fetal Calf Serum (FCS) and GSCs were grown in media
containing B27, heparin, EGF, and FGF. GSCs were differentiated by
growing them in media containing 10% FCS and B27 with vitamin A, for
about one week. We examined the expression of a panel of pro-angiogenic
factors in GSCs (33-GSC) and in the original tumor cells (33-T) from
which GSCs were derived. We then examined if differentiation of 33-GSC
decreased the levels of these pro-angiogenic factors. Changes in protein
levels were evaluated by immunofluorescence staining. The mRNA levels
were quantitated using real time Q-PCR. Results: Immunofluorescence
staining showed that the GSCs express higher levels of pro-angiogenic
factors examined (11 out of 16). GSCs were successfully differentiated
into astrocytes as indicated by morphology and GFAP expression. The
differentiation of GSCs into astrocytes was sufficient to cause decreased
expression of VEGF and c-MYC. Our data showed 27 fold increase in VEGF
mRNA levels, 63 fold increase in MMP2 mRNA levels, 11 fold increase in
MMP9 mRNA levels, and 2 fold increase in c-MYC mRNA levels in GSCs
compared to the tumor line, indicating the regulation of these
pro-angiogenic factors at transcriptional level. Conclusions: Increased
expression of pro-angiogenic factors in GSCs may render these cells to be
more aggressive and invasive, and suggests that differential expression
of angiogenic factors in GSC cells may play an important role in the GBM
progression, and therapy resistance.

