Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AXL inhibition leads to a reversal of a mesenchymal phenotype
sensitizing cancer cells to targeted agents and immuno-oncology therapies


Mesenchymal properties and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
contribute to the initiation and progression of many tumor types and
ultimately can lead to drug resistance and highly aggressive disease. It
is becoming increasingly clear that the more mesenchymal characteristics
cancer cells acquire the more resistant they become to standard
chemotherapy, targeted agents, and even immune checkpoint inhibitors. We
have been exploring the role of the receptor tyrosine kinase, AXL, and
its related TAM family members, in promoting the mesenchymal phenotype in
cancer cells and how these effects promote drug resistance and escape
from immune surveillance. TP-0903, a potent AXL inhibitor, leads to a
reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype in multiple cancer models.
Following TP-0903 treatment, we observed changes in mRNA expression using
RT-qPCR and protein expression using standard immunoblotting that are
consistent with a reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype. Upon treatment
with TP-0903 cancer cells possessed lower motility and a decrease in
anchorage-independent growth, both hallmarks of a mesenchymal cell. In
vivo models of erlotinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
were utilized to demonstrate TP-0903 single agent activity in highly
mesenchymal models; however, more importantly, treatment with TP-0903 was
able to sensitize this highly refractory model to erlotinib. AXL function
and tumor mesenchymal characteristics also provide mechanisms for the
cancer cells to evade immune surveillance. This is achieved by the role
that AXL plays in detecting neighboring apoptotic cells resulting in the
engulfment of dead cells (efferocytosis) and the associated debris in
order to prevent the immune system's exposure to auto-antigens under
normal physiological conditions or exposure to cancer-associated
neo-antigens in a tumor. Inhibition of AXL by TP-0903 can potentially
inhibit tumor-associated efferocytosis leading to a stronger immunogenic
response to the tumor. Indeed, results demonstrated synergy when TP-0903
was combined with an anti-PD-L1 agent in a syngeneic triple negative
breast cancer mouse model. Interestingly, during the evaluation of
TP-0903 in models of EMT, we detected dramatic change in the expression
of the retinoic acid (RA) metabolizing protein CYP26A1, suggesting that
AXL inhibition leads to changes in RA metabolism. Our data suggest that
AXL induces a transition to a mesenchymal phenotype in cancer cells
through the suppression of RA signaling and that TP-0903 can rapidly
reverse this phenotype by signaling through RA causing the cell to revert
to a more differentiated state. Due to its ability to reverse the
aggressive mesenchymal phenotype of cancer cells, TP-0903 is a promising
agent with the potential to have single agent activity and combined
synergy with targeted anti-cancer agents and immunotherapies.

