Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A single ddPCR assay to detect KIT exon 11 mutations in tumor and
cell free plasma DNA of patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumors


.IntroductionGastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are rare mesenchymal
tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. These tumors are characterized by
genomic mutations in the c-KIT gene that drive tumor growth and are
target for specific inhibitors. Mutations in exon 11 (single nucleotide
variations and deletions) are detected in approximately 70% of GIST.
Although unique for each patient, most variations cluster in two
different mutational hotspots each 25bp in size.The aim of this study was
to develop and test a single quantitative digital droplet PCR (ddPCR)
assay to detect exon 11 c-KIT mutations in both formalin fixed paraffin
embedded (FFPE) tissue and serial collected cell-free plasma DNA (cfDNA)
of GIST patients for diagnostic and treatment response
monitoring.Materials and methodsThe drop-off ddPCR assay for detection of
exon 11 mutations consists of two fluorescent (FAM and HEX) labeled
probes that each cover one of the 2 mutation hotspots. Since double exon
11 mutations are very rare in GIST, one probe will anneal to the
non-mutated sequence (reference probe), while the other probe will not
anneal. A decrease of one of the 2 fluorescent signals is considered as
the presence of a mutation (drop-off). For validation, ddPCR results from
tumor biopsies were compared with data from next generation sequencing
(NGS) using the IonTorrent platform. Pretreatment FFPE tumor material was
obtained from 29 (18 exon 11 mutated, 11 non-exon 11 mutated) GIST
patients treated in 2014 and 2015. Plasma samples were collected at
baseline (before start of treatment with imatinib) and at consecutive
time points during treatment.ResultsUsing the drop-off ddPCR assay on the
same DNA used for NGS, mutations in 17 of the 18 samples were detected.
Comparison of the allelic fraction of the mutation shows that ddPCR
analysis is very similar to NGS. In 11 control samples, who were
wild-type (4 samples) or had mutations other than c-KIT exon 11 (7
samples) no loss of signal was detected.CfDNA was analyzed of a 72-year
old representative patient with metastatic GIST carrying a c-KIT deletion
in exon 11 with a fractional abundance (FA) in tissue of 91%. We detected
the mutation using the drop-off ddPCR assay in the plasma sample
collected before start of imatinib treatment (FA 16%).Two weeks after
initiation of imatinib a rise in mutant allelic frequency was observed
(FA 61%) and a decrease after 4 weeks (FA 3%) of therapy.ConclusionThe
detection of multiple exon 11 mutations/deletions using a single ddPCR
assay could be used as a rapid prescreening method for the detection of
c-KIT mutations in FFPE tissue in GIST patients. Because of the
quantitative nature of this assay, ddPCR analysis might be used to
monitor response to treatment. The relevance of this drop-off assay for
treatment decision making seems promising and is currently validated on a
large series of cfDNA samples and a prospective study in GIST patients
(NCT02331914).

