Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CEBPD transcription factor, a marker of good prognosis in
breast cancer, becomes a signaling hub for promotion of cancer cell
stemness by hypoxia and interleukin-6


The transcription factor C/EBPdelta (CEBPD) is expressed in normal
mammary epithelial cells and high expression in breast cancer correlates
with hormone receptors and good prognosis (Mendoza-Villanueva et al.,
submitted). In the MMTV-Neu mouse model, deletion of CEBPD increases
tumor multiplicity, but paradoxically reduces metastatic progression,
suggesting that CEBPD has dual tumor suppressing and metastasis promoting
functions (Balamurugan et al., 2010). Here, we identify a molecular
mechanism for the tumor promoting function of CEBPD that may reach beyond
breast cancer. We show that CEBPD serves as a signaling hub that
integrates and amplifies pathways that promote stemness in breast cancer,
glioblastoma and embryonic cancer cells. This work identifies a mechanism
by which hypoxia and inflammation promote cancer stem-like cells (CSCs),
which are implicated in tumor progression and resistance. Our earlier
studies showed that CEBPD promotes inflammatory signaling and hypoxia
adaptation by inhibiting the expression of FBXW7 (Balamurugan et al.,
2010 and 2013), which can target several oncoproteins for degradation.
Using a variety of established breast and glioblastoma tumor cell
lines/xenografts, primary mouse mammary tumor cells and tissues, recent
patient-derived glioblastoma cell lines, as well as embryonic stem/cancer
cell lines, we find that deletion or depletion of CEBPD reduced the
number of stem cells as determined by surface markers, sphere formation,
limiting dilution xenografts, and by expression of stemness genes.
Mechanistic studies in culture models show that CEBPD is expressed in
CSCs and connects and amplifies both hypoxia (HIF-1) and inflammation
(IL-6/STAT3) pathways to increase Notch1/NICD expression and cell
stemness. CEBPD induces NICD expression transcriptionally through HIF-1
and at the level of the protein by inhibition of FBXW7-mediated
degradation. In addition to its known role as a target of STAT3 and
activator of IL-6 gene expression, we identified an additional role for
CEBPD in promoting expression of the IL-6 receptor. Furthermore, we found
that CEBPD also directly activates the expression of stemness-promoting
genes such as OCT4, Sox2, KLF4, Myc, Nanog, CD44 and CD133. Taken
together, this study provides novel insights into the molecular
mechanisms that promote cancer cell stemness. Because CEBPD integrates
and amplifies multiple stemness promoting pathways, CEBPD may represent a
unique point of vulnerability in cancer stem cells, strongly suggesting
that pharmacological inhibition of CEBPD signaling may effectively target
CSCs. Results from current efforts to pharmacologically downregulate
CEBPD in cancer stem cells will also be presented.

