Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-infiltrating cytotoxic T-cells are associated with improved
survival of colorectal cancer patients


Background: The immune response has been shown to impact the course of
colorectal cancer (CRC). Our goal was to examine the survival of CRC
patients in relation to tumor-infiltrating cytotoxic (CD8+) T lymphocytes
(CTL). We quantified CTLs in tumor epithelial and stromal tissues and
correlated them with clinicopathological characteristics and survival of
CRC patients in the Iowa Women's Health Study.Methods: Paraffin-embedded
tissue samples were available from 465 post-menopausal women diagnosed
with incident CRC in 1986-2002. Tumor microarrays were constructed and
immunostained with a CD8 antibody (Clone 144B; Dako). CTLs in tumor
epithelial and stromal tissues were categorized by an experienced
pathologist into non-detected; mild (1-10 cells per core); moderate
(11-29 cells); and strong infiltration (30 cells per core), and averaged
over cores per each person. We used Cox regression to estimate the hazard
ratio (HR) and 95% CI for total and CRC death in relation to each CTL
score after adjusting for age of diagnosis, SEER stage, grade, body mass,
smoking history and integrated molecular pathway for CRC. The tumors were
categorized by integrated pathway (traditional, alternate, serrated,
unassigned) based on the combination of phenotypes: microsatellite
instability (MSI) status, CpG island methylator (CIMP) phenotype; and
mutations in BRAF and/or KRAS genes (described in Samadder,
2013).Results: During follow-up until 2011, 31% of participants died from
CRC, 36% from all other causes, and 33% were alive (median follow-up: 8.4
y). The Spearman correlation coefficient between epithelial and stromal
CTL scores was 0.52. Both scores were inversely correlated with stage at
diagnosis and were higher in tumors characterized by MSI-high, CIMP-high
and BRAF mutation-positive status. The highest categories in the
epithelial and stromal scores were associated with statistically
significant decreases in total death (by 44% and 40%, respectively) and
CRC death (by 68% and 56%, respectively) compared to lowest categories.
After summing epithelial and stromal CTL scores, the combined HRs (95%
CI) in the highest versus lowest category were 0.55 (0.38-0.78) for total
death (p-trend = 0.0002) and 0.36 (0.20-0.63) for CRC death
(p-trendBackground: The immune response has been shown to impact the
course of colorectal cancer (CRC). Our goal was to examine the survival
of CRC patients in relation to tumor-infiltrating cytotoxic (CD8+) T
lymphocytes (CTL). We quantified CTLs in tumor epithelial and stromal
tissues and correlated them with clinicopathological characteristics and
survival of CRC patients in the Iowa Women's Health Study.Methods:
Paraffin-embedded tissue samples were available from 465 post-menopausal
women diagnosed with incident CRC in 1986-2002. Tumor microarrays were
constructed and immunostained with a CD8 antibody (Clone 144B; Dako).
CTLs in tumor epithelial and stromal tissues were categorized by an
experienced pathologist into non-detected; mild (1-10 cells per core);
moderate (11-29 cells); and strong infiltration (30 cells per core), and
averaged over cores per each person. We used Cox regression to estimate
the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% CI for total and CRC death in relation to
each CTL score after adjusting for age of diagnosis, SEER stage, grade,
body mass, smoking history and integrated molecular pathway for CRC. The
tumors were categorized by integrated pathway (traditional, alternate,
serrated, unassigned) based on the combination of phenotypes:
microsatellite instability (MSI) status, CpG island methylator (CIMP)
phenotype; and mutations in BRAF and/or KRAS genes (described in
Samadder, 2013).Results: During follow-up until 2011, 31% of participants
died from CRC, 36% from all other causes, and 33% were alive (median
follow-up: 8.4 y). The Spearman correlation coefficient between
epithelial and stromal CTL scores was 0.52. Both scores were inversely
correlated with stage at diagnosis and were higher in tumors
characterized by MSI-high, CIMP-high and BRAF mutation-positive status.
The highest categories in the epithelial and stromal scores were
associated with statistically significant decreases in total death (by
44% and 40%, respectively) and CRC death (by 68% and 56%, respectively)
compared to lowest categories. After summing epithelial and stromal CTL
scores, the combined HRs (95% CI) in the highest versus lowest category
were 0.55 (0.38-0.78) for total death (p-trend = 0.0002) and 0.36
(0.20-0.63) for CRC death (p-trend<0.0001). Additional adjustment for
surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and comorbidities did not markedly
change the associations. Finally, there was a statistically significant
quantitative interaction between stromal score and MSI status in relation
to total and CRC death (P for interaction were 0.02 and 0.0001,
respectively); HRs were lower for MSI-high than for MS-stable tumors.
There was also a significant interaction between smoking status (current
versus never) and epithelial CTL score: the HRs for total and CRC death
were lowest among never smokers with the highest score.Conclusions. Our
study further supports infiltration of tumors with CTLs as an important
prognostic factor in CRC.

