Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow-derived B-cell hybridomas from neuroblastoma patients
generate antibodies that bind to patients own tumors


Today antibody therapy is considered to be one of the most important and
successful strategies to treat a variety of cancers. For example, the
addition of antibodies such as Herceptin and Avastin to a chemotherapy
regimen has shown improved survival in the treatment of breast cancer and
colorectal cancer, respectively. Main problems with this kind of therapy
are that many patients are not candidates because their tumors do not
overexpress the drug target and that patient develop resistance to the
targeted drug. A method to rapidly develop different sets of therapeutic
antibodies would greatly contribute to the field of targeted anticancer
therapy. This work evaluated the feasibility of using residual clinical
material from pediatric neuroblastoma patients to generate antibodies to
autologous tumor. Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid
tumor in children, accounting for 8-10% of all childhood cancers. Most
patients with neuroblastoma are young and commonly present with
metastatic disease. Bone marrow aspirate from neuroblatoma patients was
the source material for the mononuclear cells and the tumor cells used in
present study. Tumor cells were cultured and xenograft tumors were
produced in mice. Hybridomas were generated by electrofusion of
stimulated bone marrow mononuclear cells with plasmacytoma P363.Ag8.653
under hypo-osmolar condition using Eppendorf Multiporator/Helix chamber.
Following hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine (HAT) selection and
monoclonal distribution, the culture supernatants were assayed for
immunoglobulin secretion by ELISA. The supernatants from the positive
clones were evaluated by immunofluorescence microscopy for binding to
cultured neuroblastoma cells and neuroblastoma xenograft tissue sections
derived from the same patient from which the hybridomas were generated.
The results demonstrated that multiple hybridomas of bone marrow
mononuclear cells secreted monoclonal antibodies that bound autologous
neuroblastoma cells. Further evaluation of the tumor-binding antibodies
on a panel of normal human tissues showed no binding to most of the
tissues in the panel. Successful outcome of these experiments demonstrate
the feasibility of generating human monoclonal antibodies from residual
marrow specimens that bind autologous neuroblastoma cells. However, it
remains to be determined whether these antibodies are bioactive and
whether this approach will be generally applicable in more patients with
neuroblastoma. It may be concluded that the strategy described here,
which exploits the cancer patient's own immune repertoire, has a great
potential for neuroblastoma target discovery and developing antibodies
with possible therapeutic and/or diagnostic utility in cancer.

