Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COSMIC: comprehensively exploring oncogenomics


COSMIC (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk) is an expert-curated database of
somatic mutations causing human cancer. Broad and comprehensive in scope,
its 75th release (Nov 2015) describes over 3.7 million coding mutations
across all human cancer disease types. Mutations are annotated across the
entire genome, but expert curation is focused on almost 200 key cancer
genes. Now encompassing the majority of molecular mutation mechanisms in
oncogenetics, COSMIC additionally describes 10 million non-coding
mutations, 1 million copy number aberrations, 9 million gene expression
variants and almost 8 million differentially methylated CpGs. This
information combines a consistent interpretation of the data from the
major cancer genome consortia and cancer genome literature, with
hand-curation of over 22,000 gene-specific literature publications.With
such a large volume of data, it is increasingly important to indicate
which information is most significant. All mutations in COSMIC are now
given a functional significance score, calculated using the FATHMM
algorithm. In addition, a mutation can also be tagged as low-impact if
they are described as a polymorphism in normal human genomes. All this
information is available for selection and exploration in the COSMIC
website (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk), and for download via COSMIC
Downloads (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/download). In addition to this
broad database, the Cancer Gene Census
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census) is a project within COSMIC aiming to
identify and characterize all genes known to cause cancer, currently
describing over 570 genes. This Census is now a priority focus of
development, with a dedicated curator explicitly defining the range of
genes driving cancer, including primary alleles and mechanisms and the
diseases which are induced, with detailed supporting evidence.In addition
to these analytical websites, expert-curated lists and now a GA4GH
Beacon, COSMIC also hosts a full Oncology Genome Browser
(http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/genome). This fully-featured system allows
the exploration of all cancer somatic mutation data collected in COSMIC
alongside genomic annotations including coding genes, ncRNAs, SNPs and
regulatory features. All data is vertically integrated, allowing
exploration of how these many genetic mechanisms might promote
oncogenesis, and how similar activating/inactivating mechanisms
correlate. Amongst many interesting examples, there is a clear cluster of
structural rearrangements immediately upstream of the BRD4 epigenetic
modifier gene, affecting a region of multiple transcription control
elements, and a substantial accumulation of abnormally hypermethylated
CpG islands in the HOXA gene cluster on chromosome 7 coinciding with a
group of HOTAIR and HOTTIP miRNAs. With multiple filters and selections
available, these visualizations will increasingly support the exploration
of how a variety of mutation mechanisms may act together to cause
specific cancer diseases.

