Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RNA binding protein HuR enhances exosome secretion in
colorectal cancer


Enhanced secretion of extracellular vesicles such as microvesicles and
exosomes by cancer cells has been recently recognized as a new means of
transferring oncogenic information within the tumor microenvironment.
Through their ability to carry specific RNA and protein cargo,
tumor-derived exosomes can directly impact neighboring cells to support
tumor progression. However, it remains unclear what regulates exosome
production in tumor cells and the factors influencing loading of
tumor-promoting RNA cargo. Our prior work has established that colorectal
cancer (CRC) cells and tumors overexpress the key RNA-binding protein HuR
early in GI tumor development. When overexpressed and present in the
cytoplasm, HuR can promote mRNA stabilization of tumor-promoting genes
through binding of 3UTR AU-rich elements (ARE). While the ability of HuR
overexpression to promote gene expression is well recognized, our
understanding of how HuR communicates this information within the tumor
microenvironment is limited. To test if HuR overexpression could impact
secreted exosomes, Tet-regulated HuR-inducible HeLa cells were used to
demonstrate that cytoplasmic HuR overexpression promoted a 4-fold
increase in exosomes produced. Furthermore, HuR was detected in exosomes
produced only from HuR-overexpressing cells. The presence of HuR in
exosomes directly impacted mRNA cargo, as selective uptake of
ARE-containing mRNAs was observed in exosomes derived from HuR
overexpressing cells. To test if these effects were seen in CRC cells
that endogenously overexpress HuR, exosome levels from CRC cells were
compared to normal primary human intestinal epithelial and myofibroblast
cells. When normalized to total cell numbers, CRC cells secrete 3-fold
greater exosome levels than normal cells and enhanced exosome production
was dependent upon HuR. Knockdown of HuR in CRC cells directly impacted
exosome secretion to levels observed in normal cells. HuR was also only
detected in exosomes produced from CRC cells. Using an inducible model of
RasV12-mediated transformation of intestinal epithelial cells, endogenous
HuR overexpression was observed associated with 4-fold greater levels of
exosomes containing HuR as cargo. These findings were reflected in vivo
where GI-tumor bearing APCMin/+ mice produced 3-fold more serum exosomes,
with HuR as exosomal cargo in APCMin/+ mice where as no expression of
exosomal HuR was detected in wild-type mice. This work has identified a
novel connection between HuR-mediated post-transcriptional regulation and
tumor-derived exosome production, along with providing the first evidence
indicating the presence of exosomal HuR as a serum-based CRC biomarker.

