Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KLLN protects genomic stability by maintaining H3K9 trimethylation
(H3K9me3) at the pericentric heterochromatin


Dysregulation in the maintenance of chromatin organization resulting in
genomic instability is a major driving force for inappropriate
development and carcinogenesis. Tumor suppressor genes play a critical
role in this regulation through the maintenance of epigenetic marks. Our
study focuses on the role of KLLN in the maintenance of pericentric H3K9
trimethylation (H3K9me3) and genomic stability. Germline hypermethylation
of KLLN resulting in decreased KLLN expression has been linked to Cowden
cancer-predisposition syndrome (CS) in PTEN mutation negative patients.
KLLN is a tumor suppressor gene necessary for p53-mediated apoptosis. The
protein mediates S-phase arrest and is known to have DNA binding ability.
Here, we first used chromatin immunoprecipitation-based sequencing
(ChIP-seq) to investigate regions of KLLN binding on the genome and
compared it to regions of H3K9me3 enrichment. We used H3K9 specific
histone methyltransferase (HMT) activity assay and immunoblotting to
measure levels of H3K9me3. Immunostaining was used to study the
localization of KLLN, and micronuclei frequency and aberrations in
chromosome number was used to assess chromosomal instability. Analysis of
ChIP-seq shows enrichment of KLLN binding in regions of H3K9me3.
Overexpression of KLLN using plasmid-based transfection correlates with
increased H3K9 methyltransferase activity and increased global H3K9me3,
while loss of KLLN expression through siRNA-mediated knockdown had an
opposite effect. We also established that KLLN localizes to pericentric
regions, and loss of KLLN results in dysregulation of pericentric
heterochromatin, with consequent chromosomal instability manifested by
increased micronuclei frequency and numerical chromosomal aberrations.
KLLN regulation of H3K9me3 could be correlated with its interaction with
deleted in breast cancer (DBC1). DBC1 is a known inhibitor of SUV39H1, a
H3K9 specific histone methyltransferase responsible for maintenance of
pericentric heterochromatin. We hypothesize that KLLN sequesters DBC1
through their interaction, thereby abrogating DBC1 inhibition of SUV39H1,
resulting in maintenance of pericentric heterochromatin and genomic
stability. Our study therefore suggests a critical role for KLLN in the
deterrence of tumor initiation and progression.SIGNIFICANCE: Our study
demonstrates a clear role for KLLN in maintenance of chromatin
organization thereby maintaining genomic stability, which begins to
uncover the basis of KLLN as a tumor suppressor and as a susceptibility
gene for inherited cancers.

