Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment of targetable mutations in the relapsed neuroblastoma
genome


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric tumor responsible for 15% of pediatric
cancer deaths. Patients with relapsed high-risk disease have less than a
5% chance of survival despite intensive cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens.
Personalized therapies targeted against driver oncogenes may improve
patient outcomes. However, genetic analyses of tumors biopsied at
diagnosis generally harbor few, if any, targetable mutations [Pugh et al.
Nat Gen 2013]. A recent study comparing the genetic profiles of tumors
from 23 NB patients before and after disease relapse showed that relapsed
tumors have a higher percentage of targetable mutations, particularly in
the ALK/RAS/MAPK pathway [Eleveld et al. Nat Gen 2015]. We performed a
retrospective study to further define the genetic landscape of diagnostic
and relapsed NB. A total of 151 NB samples from 11 institutions were
submitted for targeted sequencing of 236 genes commonly mutated in cancer
using the FoundationOne assay; 40 at diagnosis, 67 at disease relapse,
and 38 during primary therapy (i.e. second look surgery). Three patients
were biopsied at both diagnosis and disease relapse. Patients were
included in the study based solely on the availability of FoundationOne
data. We identified 38 unique genes with known oncogenic mutations in
this cohort. Of these, ALK was the most prevalent, with mutations
occurring in 13.8% of patients, and there was a higher frequency of known
oncogenic ALK mutations in relapsed disease (17% of patients) than at
diagnosis (7.7% of patients). Further, there were more unique genes with
known oncogenic mutations or gene amplifications in relapsed disease (25
mutated, 7 amplified) than at diagnosis (14 mutated, 2 amplified).
Patients with relapsed disease were more likely to have at least one
known mutation or gene amplification (60% vs. 41% of patients, P = 0.07).
ALK mutations in NB are targetable with available therapies, and of the
37 other mutated genes detected, 13 are potentially actionable, falling
within pathways that are targetable by drugs which are either currently
available or in clinical trials. Patients with relapsed disease displayed
a greater likelihood of having potentially actionable mutations (34% vs.
21% of patients). Of the 144 unique patients in this study, 21 were
reported to have received targeted therapy based on the sequencing
results and 14 outcomes were reported: while 10 patients showed
progressive disease, one patient had a complete response, one had a
partial response, and two had stable disease after targeted therapy. Our
data confirm recent evidence suggesting that NBs undergo substantial
mutational evolution during therapy, and as a result, relapsed disease is
more likely to be driven by a targetable oncogenic pathway. These data
support the conclusion that biopsy of relapsed NB has the potential to
benefit the patient. Prospective clinical trials to match sequencing
results to targeted therapies are required.

