Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous absolute quantitation of ATP-binding cassette
transporters in canine tissues via targeted proteomics


The dog serves as a useful model of spontaneously occurring cancer by
virtue of similar biology, therapies and mechansims of chemotherapeutic
resistance. The ABC transporters are a superfamily of membrane bound
proteins that are widely distributed across mammalian tissues and
constitute a substantial component of variability in anticancer drug
pharmakokinetics and tumor cell resistance. Thus a quantitative atlas of
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters across canine tissues is crucial
for improving our ability to extrapolate data from dog to human. We have
employed a quantitative proteomic approach based on multiple reaction
monitoring in tandem mass spectrometry that relies on detection of novel
peptide sequences following trypsin digestion of biological samples and
separation of peptides utilizing high-pressure liquid chromatography. The
14 proteins evaluated include P-gp, Bcrp, Bsep, Mrp1-6, Mrp7, Mrp9, and
the products of canine Abcg5 and Abcg8. Peptide sequences were identified
via an in-silico trypsin digestion of proteins and signature peptides
were generated for identification and quantitation using stable
isotope-labeled signature peptides as an internal reference. Signature
peptides were chosen based on lack of posttranslational modification
sites and known polymorphisms. Isolated brain microvessels, liver,
kidney, duodenum, jejunum, ileum and lung were collected at necropsy from
ten normal dogs and membrane fractions of each tissue were prepared.
Additional samples were collected for isolation of mRNA. Membrane protein
fractions were digested with trypsin and total protein concentrations
determined by BCA assay. Calibration curves for signature peptides were
prepared in a bovine serum albumin digestate and ranged from 0.25 fmol to
200 fmol on column. Quantitation of peptides in tissue samples was
performed via linear regression analysis of calibration curves with
extrapolation using at least two transitions for each peptide. Results
were obtained as femtomole of peptide per microgram of total protein in
the sample. Differential protein levels across tissues were compared to
quantitative real time RT-PCR results for the corresponding genes and
differences between tissues with each method were concordant. Our results
provide the first quantitative atlas of ABC transporters across normal
dog tissues and provide a framework for improved understanding of
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variability among dogs receiving
anticancer therapies. In addition, this panel will allow evaluation of
the potential role that each of these transporters plays in resistance to
chemotherapy in vitro and in vivo in dogs, a relevant preclinical model
of naturally occurring cancers.

