Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive endosteum in prostate cancer bone metastases: role of
tenascin-C in regulating cancer cell adhesion and proliferation


The objective of this study is to assess the regulatory roles of reactive
endosteum associated with foci of bone metastatic prostate cancer cells.
Previous studies evaluated tissue arrays of human prostate cancer bone
metastases and we identified a reactive endosteum spatially associated
with foci of prostate cancer cells on trabecular bone. Reactive endosteum
was characterized by elevated expression of tenascin-C, a glycoprotein
deposited in the extracellular matrix of reactive stroma at sites of
wound repair and in the primary tumor microenvironment in adult tissues.
In general, tenascin-C is stromal derived in adult tissues. Of interest,
tenascin-C is also deposited at sites of fracture repair and at sites of
Brodie abscess osteomyelitis-associated inflammation in human bone.
Tenascin-C has many diverse functions: it regulates cell adhesion,
migration and proliferation in different pathological states while
playing an important role in neuropatterning and osteogenesis during
development. Moreover, tenascin-C has been shown to regulate several
signal transduction pathways.To evaluate prostate cancer-bone
interactions, we developed an in vitro, 3D, osteogenic organoid model
composed of human mesenchymal stem cells induced to osteogenesis that
were combined with human prostate VCaP cells in organ culture. In this
model, foci of VCaP cells associated preferentially to regions of high
tenascin-C deposition. VCaP cells also preferentially bound to purified
human tenascin-C deposited on culture plates in a dose-dependent manner.
VCaP cells also exhibited an elevated growth rate on osteo-mimetic plates
coated with human tenascin-C as compared to control. Moreover, VCaP cells
preferentially bound to human tenascin-C coated bovine trabecular bone
cubes in vitro and initiated colony formation. Evaluation of potential
mediators identified integrin alpha 9 beta 1 as the key mediator of
attachment to human tenascin-C. Neutralization of this integrin inhibited
adhesion. Evaluation of potential signaling pathways have implicated
activation of EGF receptor (EGFR), Wnk1, and STAT6 pathways. Human
tenascin-C exhibits EGF-like repeats and fibronectin type III domains
that may mediate activation of these pathways. Of interest, adhesion and
growth of VCaP cells on tenascin-C also induced elevated tenascin-C
expression in these cells, a novel finding. Additional 3D organoid and in
vivo xenograft studies with other cell types support the finding of
induced expression of tenascin-C in epithelial cells associated with
reactive stroma or matrix.In summary, our studies characterize elevated
tenascin-C at sites of a reactive endosteum associated with metastatic
prostate cancer foci. Data suggests that tenascin-C mediates adhesion and
proliferation of cancer cells via activation of several pathways. These
data may aid in developing novel therapeutic approaches to treat
metastatic disease.

