Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of the potential biomarker
insulin-like growth factor binding protein acid-labile subunit for breast
cancer in African American women


Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in women, with an
estimated 40, 730 breast cancer deaths in the US in 2015. African
American (AA) women have a lower breast cancer incidence rate, but a
higher breast cancer death rate, than non-Hispanic White women. Research
indicates that breast tumor biology in AA women is different from that in
Caucasian women. AA women are more likely to be diagnosed with breast
cancer at an earlier age and with more aggressive form of the disease,
characterized by higher grade and negative estrogen and progesterone
receptor status. Because of the aggressive nature of these tumors and
current lack of targeted therapies, identification of novel relevant
protein markers is of great importance. The purpose of this study was to
validate serum proteins that were previously identified by serum
proteomic profiling in 22 serum samples by 2D-DIGE/MS analysis and a
subset of samples by shotgun LC/MS technology. Methods and new data: The
current study included serum samples from 15 African American breast
cancer patients and 12 healthy controls. Patients were grouped into
triple negative (TN), HER2 and Luminal A and B subtypes. Proteins of
biological significance were validated using western blot analysis. For
ceruloplasmin, and insulin-like growth factor binding protein acid-labile
subunit (IGFBP-ALS), one-way ANOVA was used to compare mean density among
the three groups. For Vitamin D Binding protein (VDB), a two-sample
t-test was used to compare the density between the groups. Due to the
small sample size, we have also conducted nonparametric tests. IGFBP-ALS
was significantly lower in triple negative breast cancer patients (p =
0.016) and in HER2 (p = 0.025) subtypes. There was no significant
difference in VDB protein in the luminal A and B subtypes (p = 0.98).
Future efforts will focus on validating the identified panel of
biomarkers to gain insight into their role(s) in the etiology of
aggressive breast tumors. Funded by Susan G Komen for the Cure and SEED
grant SPH.

