Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Electronic cigarettes induce significant DNA damage and reduce
cellular antioxidant levels


Background: Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of
mortality in the world and the main risk factor for lung and head and
neck cancer. E-cigarettes (ECs) are battery-operated devices that deliver
nicotine via inhaled aerosols. Although ECs are marketed as a less
harmful alternative to tobacco cigarettes and a smoking cessation aid,
the health risks posed by exposure to EC aerosols are unknown.
Nonetheless, the use of ECs has increased exponentially since 2003, with
EC users reporting inhaling on average 200 puffs a day. EC aerosols have
been reported to contain variable levels of genotoxins, including
carcinogenic substances and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Some toxins in
EC aerosols have been reported to reach the levels of similar to those in
tobacco smoke. However, the genotoxicity of EC aerosols has not been
characterized.Aims: (1) To determine the cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of
short and long-term exposure to EC aerosols on human epithelial normal
and cancer cell lines. (2) To evaluate whether exposure of EC aerosols
modifies the cellular total antioxidant capacity (TAC).Methods: EC
extracts were prepared from NJOY (12 or 18 mg/ml of nicotine) and Oakley
eGo-T (0, 12 or 18 mg/ml of nicotine). Standard tobacco extracts were
used for comparison. To assess the effects of short-term exposure, human
epithelial normal (NuLi-1) and cancer (UD-SCC1) cell lines were exposed
for 1 hour to various EC extract concentrations. To assess the effects of
long-term exposure, cells lines were exposed every other day for 2 weeks
to EC extracts. Cytotoxicity, DNA damage and TAC were evaluated at 1 h
and 2 weeks. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. DNA damage was
quantified using the primer anchored DNA damage detection assay (PADDA).
TAC was determined by the Antioxidant Assay Kit (Cayman). Data were
analyzed by Student's t-test.Results: At the range of EC extract
concentrations used in this study and expected to occur in EC users (1 to
100 puffs/5 L of blood), no cytotoxicity was observed for either normal
or cancer cells. However, significant levels of DNA damage were observed
in cancer cells exposed to 10 or more puffs/5 L of EC extracts and in
normal cells exposed to100 puffs/5 L. Long-term exposure to EC extracts
resulted in a significant decrease in TAC, a measure of free radical
scavengers.Conclusion: Even short-term exposure to low levels of EC
aerosols can cause significant DNA damage. Our study emphasizes the need
to further investigate the carcinogenic potential of EC aerosols and
highlights the importance of regulating EC use.Grant support: This work
was supported by the Oklahoma Tobacco Research Center (LQ). Dr. Queimado
holds a Presbyterian Health Foundation Endowed Chair in
Otorhinolaryngology.

