Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence of EZH2 dependent and independent mechanisms of
tazemetostat treatment emergent resistance in models of diffuse large B
cell lymphoma


Tazemetostat is a small molecule inhibitor of the histone
methyltransferase EZH2 and is currently in phase 2 clinical trials
including relapsed refractory Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas (RR-NHL) Diffuse
Large B Cell Lymphoma and Follicular Lymphoma. In the phase 1 clinical
trial RR-NHL patients demonstrated positive clinical activity with a
favorable safety profile. Acquired mutations in the D1 domain (I109K,
Y111D, Y111L) and the SET domain (Y661D) of EZH2 have recently been
reported as a mechanism of resistance to non-tazemetostat small molecule
EZH2 inhibition. Given the clinical activity observed in the phase 1
tazemetostat clinical trial and these reports of pre-clinical EZH2
inhibitor induced resistance we embarked on investigations of the
potential of tazemetostat to induce resistance in NHL cell lines. An EZH2
Y641F mutant DLBCL cell line WSU-DLCL2 was exposed to 1 M tazemetostat, a
dose which is 100 fold greater than the nave line's 11 day growth IC50.
After 8 weeks, growth of the tazemetostat treated cells matched that of
the control cells. Subsequent increases in dose of tazemetostat up to 10
M did not yield any changes in growth rate of the treated cells. EZH2
wild-type PMBCL cell line U2940 was exposed to a step wise increase in
tazemetostat concentration for 7 weeks and finally maintained at the nave
cell line 11 day proliferation IC50 of 10 M, with minimal effects on cell
growth. Tazemetostat resistant cell lines were screened for acquired EZH2
mutations using a full coding next generation sequencing assay, with a
mean depth of 17,126 across all positions. Sequencing results showed the
resistant U2940 had gained mutations in EZH2 similar to those previously
identified, a heterozygous Y661N mutation and a low frequency mutation of
Y111H, consistent with a subclonal mutation. These acquired mutations
have been reported to interfere with the binding of EZH2 inhibitors,
which supports the minimal reduction of H3K27me3 as measured by ELISA in
the resistant U2940 after treatment with tazemetostat. In contrast, after
induction of tazemetostat resistance WSU-DLCL2 retained equipotent
sensitivity to reduction of H3K27me3 by ELISA. Correspondingly,
sequencing of EZH2 in the resistant WSU-DLCL2 line did not identify any
additional mutations. These findings suggest continued target engagement
with tazemetostat in the resistant WSU-DLCL2, and that a novel bypass
mechanism may be engaged to confer resistance. In an attempt to identify
the mechanism of resistance in the WSU-DLCL2 line, whole exome sequencing
and RNA sequencing has been performed. Detailed mutational, gene
expression and pathway analysis will be performed on these data to
investigate mechanisms of treatment emergent resistance to tazemetostat.
Understanding these mechanisms may guide hypotheses for rational
combinations and provide direction for future preclinical and potentially
clinical studies.

