Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered mucus composition and bacterial dysbiosis promote
development of colitis following chronic Notch inhibition


Background. Intestinal mucus layer disruption and gut microflora
modification in conjunction with tight junction (TJ) changes can increase
colonic permeability that allows bacterial dissemination and intestinal
and systemic disease. Employing Citrobacter rodentium (CR) as a model
system to mimic the pathogenic mechanisms of Enteropathogenic and
Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli, we showed previously that a functional
cross-talk between the Notch and Wnt/-catenin pathways regulates
hyperplasia and/or colitis following CR infection. Aim: To test the
hypothesis that CR infection combined with chronic Notch inhibition will
alter the composition of the colonic mucus to promote dysbiosis, tight
junction disruption, loss of multipotent intestinal stem cells (ISCs) and
colitis. Material/methods: Immune-competent NIH:Swiss outbred mice were
infected with CR (108 CFUs) and treated with Notch blocker Dibenzazepine
[DBZ, i.p. @ 10mol/Kg body weight]. Mucus composition, fecal 16S rDNA
analysis and components of TJ integrity were measured and correlated with
changes in components of the Notch pathway. 6% Pectin diet served as a
SCFA-delivery system to the colon. Results: In the colons of
CR-infected/DBZ-treated mice, mucus analysis revealed dramatic
alterations in the composition of trace O-glycans and complex type and
hybrid N-glycans, compared to CR-infected alone that preceded alterations
in 16S rDNA microbial community structure. Indeed, mucin degrading and
colitogenic bacterium, Akkermansia muciniphila exhibited dramatic
increases in the feces of CR-infected and DBZ-treated mice. At the same
time, colons from CR-infected/DBZ-treated mice had decreased expression
of antimicrobial peptides Angiogenin-4, Retnl, Intelectin-1 and
Intelectin-2, respectively. Expression levels of both TJ and adherens
junction proteins (e.g., Claudin-5, ZO-1, ZO-2, E-Cadherin, -catenin)
also decreased significantly in the colonic crypts of
CR-infected/DBZ-treated mice that paralleled loss of Notch signaling.
Both C3H/HeN mice that exhibit exaggerated response to CR infection and
T- and B-cell deficient Rag-1 mice following CR-infection and
DBZ-treatment, exhibited dramatic increases in paracellular permeability,
goblet cell metaplasia and exacerbation of colitis. Chronic blockade of
the Notch pathway depleted colonic epithelium of ISC markers Dclk1 and
Lgr5 concomitant with exacerbation of colitis. 6% Pectin diet ameliorated
colitis by restoring barrier integrity via recruitment of Bacteroides
vulgatus, Streptococcus gordonii and Lactococcus lactis, bacteria with
potential anti-inflammatory functions. Conclusions: 1. These studies help
us delineate the mechanistic basis of colitis development in the
aftermath of chronic Notch inhibition. 2. Our findings also caution
against the use of Notch inhibitors for patients suffering from
colitis-associated colon cancer.

