Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the utility of natural and synthetic resveratrol
derivatives for bone regrowth following loss due to breast cancer
therapies


Many of the most widely used therapies for the treatment of breast cancer
have been associated with enhanced rate of bone loss, including
chemotherapies and hormone therapies, due to alteration of normal hormone
signaling. Bone loss is due to a shift in the balance between osteoblast
and osteoclast cells that are derived from a common precursor,
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), found in the bone marrow. Estrogen is an
important mediator of both hormone-responsive breast cancers and normal
bone development and regeneration, favoring MSC differentiation down the
osteoblast lineage. Stilbenes, defense compounds produced by plants
including red grapes, peanuts, and blueberries, have been popularized in
recent years based on observed health benefits. Resveratrol, the most
widely studied stilbene, has been credited with many health benefits
including cardiovascular health, anti-cancer and antioxidant effects, and
inhibition of obesity and diabetes. Many stilbenes, including resveratrol
can be classified as phytoestrogens due to their ability to bind and
alter the activity of the estrogen receptor. A series of 28 stilbene
compounds, including resveratrol and pterostilbene, were obtained by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture and screened for effects on MSC
differentiation. MSC were treated with stilbene compounds (both E and Z
isoforms) and cultured in either osteogenic or adipogenic differentiation
media for 7-21 days. Following differentiation, cells were stained with
(1) Alizarin Red S to identify calcium deposits or (2) Oil Red O to
identify lipid droplets. Several compounds were found to stimulate
osteogenesis while inhibiting adipogenesis and were selected for further
study and development. Realtime PCR for known genes associated with
osteogenesis (ALPL, RUNX2, OCN, OPN) and adipogenesis (ADIPOQ, GLUT4,
LEP, PPARG) were used to confirm differentiation and gain insight into
the mechanism of altered differentiation. Unlike estrogen, stilbenes do
not appear to negatively impact breast and reproductive organs. Stilbenes
thus represent a novel option for inducing a preferential shift of MSCs
toward the osteogenic lineage while potentially avoiding the negative
health effects of estrogen. Targeting the differentiation of MSC to favor
bone formation represents a viable target for the development of novel
therapeutics for bone loss following cancer treatment. Further,
identifying compounds that stimulate osteogenesis while repressing
adipogenesis could benefit other metabolic disorders like obesity
associated with increased breast cancer risk.

