Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo activity of a novel CDH6 targeting antibody-drug
conjugate, including population-scale ovarian PDX clinical trial


The Cadherin-6 (CDH6) gene was found to be frequently overexpressed in
ovarian and renal cancers, while featuring a lineage-restricted normal
tissue expression pattern. We hypothesized that based on the combined
observation of frequent overexpression of CDH6 in cancer and a restricted
normal tissue expression, CDH6 might be an ideal tumor antigen for
targeting using an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) approach. CHD6-ADC is a
fully-human anti-CDH6 IgG1, linked via sulfo-SPDB to the tubulin-binding
maytansinoid payload DM4. CDH6-ADC was evaluated across multiple
linker-payload combinations with the sulfo-SPDB-DM4 format being selected
based on a superior combined profile pertaining to activity, selectivity
and tolerability.To gain a broader understanding of CDH6-ADC activity in
vivo we profiled the lead candidate against a panel of 31 unselected
patient derived ovarian xenograft (PDX) models in a 111 PDX clinical
trial, similar to that described in Gao et al., 2015. In this unbiased
high throughput in vivo screen, CDH6-ADC demonstrated robust antitumor
activity, with an overall response rate of 39%. Responses were generally
durable beyond 150 days and were achieved at doses yielding exposures
anticipated to be achievable in humans and observed in PDX models
featuring a range of CDH6 expression level and degree of tumor
heterogeneity. Retrospective analysis of individual PDX responses and
molecular profiling data demonstrate that sensitivity to CDH6-ADC is
highly correlated to CDH6 transcript and protein levels. These findings
suggest an ability to prospectively identify patients most likely to
benefit from this novel targeted therapy. Furthermore, CDH6-ADC
demonstrated robust tumor regressions in a representative PDX xenograft
model that was refractory to carboplatin/paclitaxel standard of care
therapy. These data suggest that CDH6-ADC may benefit both treatment nave
patients and patients that have progressed on prior therapy containing
tubulin-targeting anti-mitotics. Extending beyond ovarian cancer, we
found CDH6 to be frequently overexpressed in renal cancer. CDH6-ADC was
active against RCC PDX models featuring patient relevant levels of CDH6
expression. Data described herein suggest that this novel ADC may be an
effective treatment for patients with CDH6 expressing tumors, including
ovarian and renal cancer - both indications with a high unmet medical
need.

