Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell mRNA quantification from 1000s of cells in healthy and
malignant tumor samples using a high-throughput droplet-based system


Advances in single cell RNA quantification techniques have enabled
comprehensive study of subpopulations of cells within a heterogeneous
population. The application of single cell quantification techniques to
oncology is helping to elucidate the complex variability in genetic and
epigenetic interactions that occur within tumor cells and their
microenvironment. However, current single cell RNA-sequencing methods are
limited by their reliance on costly infrastructure and laborious
experimental protocols. We developed the GemCode Platform, which combines
microfluidics with molecular barcoding and custom bioinformatics software
to enable 3 mRNA counting from thousands of single cells. Here we
utilized the GemCode Platform to profile primary cells from healthy
donors and cancer patients.Cell lines and cancer samples were obtained
from commercial sources. Single cells, reagents and a single gel bead
containing barcoded oligonucleotides were encapsulated into
picoliter-sized droplets using the 10X Genomics GemCode Platform. The
platform achieved extremely high cell loading efficiency (> 50%),
enabling the creation of libraries from precious samples. Lysis and
barcoded reverse transcription of RNAs from single cells were performed
inside each droplet. High quality next generation sequencing libraries
were finished in a single bulk reaction. The GemCode software suite was
utilized for processing, interactive analysis and visualization of single
cell gene expression data.We demonstrated single cell behavior through
mouse- and human cell mixing experiments with a low doublet rate of
40,000 peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy donors and
detected all major subpopulations (i.e., B cells, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T
cells, NK cells, dendritic cells, monocytes) in similar proportions to
those previously reported in the literature. Notably, the high-throughput
nature of the platform enabled resolution of finer sub-structures such as
CD4+ effector memory cells and CD4+ central memory cells. Experiments
comparing cells isolated from patients with hematologic malignancies
(such as CLL, AML and CML) with whole bone marrow from healthy donors
further demonstrate the power of single cell profiling for characterizing
disease-associated changes in complex tissues.We demonstrate the ability
to perform high-throughput gene expression profiling of mRNAs in single
cells. The high-throughput platform enables detection of rare cells in a
heterogeneous tumor population. Moreover, efficient cell loading enables
analysis of clinically relevant sample types with limited cell input. An
integrated single cell mRNA analysis will lead to novel insights into the
molecular characteristics of individual cancer cells and provide targets
for therapeutic intervention.

