Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of miRNAs 181a and 222 play a role in triple
negative breast cancer, and are targeted by entinostat


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of all breast
cancer in women. Clinically, this subtype is characterized by high
recurrence rates, poor prognosis, and lack of targeted therapies.
Therefore, there is considerable need to identify TNBC-specific
biomarkers that can serve as a diagnositc markers and therapeutic
targets. MIcroRNAs (miRNAs), may be such biomarkers. miRNAs are short,
non-coding regulatory RNA molecules that modulate the expression of
specific proteins by binding to target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and causing
either degradation of the mRNAs or inhibition of their translation to
protein. Thus, they play an important role in a variety of normal
cellular processes (e.g., differentiation, cell growth, cell death,
etc.), and in diseases, such as cancer. MiRNAs have been implicated in
breast cancer, but there is not consistent agreement as to which miRNAs
are involved in TNBCs, nor have molecular targeting drugs been identified
that could treat TNBCs by affecting miRNAs. Previous studies by our lab
and others indicate that miRNAs 181a and 222 are involved in
estrogen-receptor independence, cancer stem cells, and drug resistance
(ex. letrozole resistance). Thus, in this study, the expression of miRNAs
181 and 222 in TNBCs, the effect of inhibiting each miRNA on cell
viability and cancer stem cells, and the effect of histone deactylase
inhibitor entinostat on miRNA expression are explored. RT-PCR analysis of
miRNA expression in both HS578T and BT547 TNBCs and MCF-7 cells
(represents the least aggressive subtype), and in representative breast
cancer patient biopsy samples indicates that both miRNA 181a and 222 are
upregulated by at least 15-fold in TNBCs compared to MCF-7 (least
aggressive subtype). Specific inhibition of miRNA 181a via siRNA/miRNA
inhibitor in HS578T cells significantly decreased cell viability by at
least 80%, as determined by MTT assay, and cancer stem cells by 50%, as
determined by mammosphere assays. In addition, inhibition of miRNA 181a
produced morphological changes in HS578T cells, in which cells lost their
protrusions, became more round, and grew in colonies. Lastly, treatment
of HS578T cells or of patient derived xenografts with entinostat, which
is currently being explored as a TNBC-targeting drug, decreased miRNA
181a and 222 expression and produced similar results as miRNA inhibition
on cell viability, cancer stem cells, and morphology. Overall, these
results suggest that miRNAs 181a and 222 are overexpressed in TNBCs and
may play a role in regulation of cell viability and cancer stem cells.
They also indicate that HDAC inhibitor, entinostat, may be an effective
treatment for TNBCs through their action on miRNAs 181a and 222.

