Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanomechanical profiling of breast cancer: A novel tool for cancer
diagnostics and prognostics


A crucial point in making treatment decisions for cancer patients is the
assessment of tumor aggressiveness. Currently, for breast cancer,
established prognostic markers exist that are routinely assessed by
standard pathological examination. However, these parameters are often
not sufficient to stratify patients, especially those with early stages
of breast cancer and adjuvant therapy is frequently administered to
patients who might have been cured by surgery and anti-hormonal treatment
alone. The goal to avoid over- and under-treatment has led to an
intensive search for prognostic and predictive markers in early breast
cancer. Physical interactions between cancer cells and the extracellular
matrix (ECM) that occur at the molecular (nanometer) scale are crucial
for the metastatic process. Consequently, nanomechanical alterations of
cells and ECM due to cancer progression can serves as potentially
suitable markers of cancer aggressiveness that may help to optimize
treatment strategies.This motivated us to develop an atomic force
microscope (AFM)-based method for measuring nanomechanical (stiffness)
profiles of unadulterated tissues in native physiological buffer
conditions with an unprecedented stiffness sensitivity resolved at
nanometer-scale spatial resolution. An AFM utilizes a 10 nm-sharp stylus
or tip that makes 10000 miniscule indentations across tissue. In our
initial study using transgenic mouse model of human breast cancer we
could show that the softest nanomechanical phenotype (0.4 - 0.8 kPa)
present at the primary tumor site closely corresponded to the stiffness
of the metastatic lesions obtained from the lungs of the same mouse
(Plodinec et. al; Nature Nanotech. 2012).In this study, we have analyzed
human 187 breast cancer samples from breast biopsies and tumor resections
including primary breast cancers of various stage and grade, lymph node
metastases, and non-neoplastic breast parenchyma. Post-AFM samples were
fixed, paraffin embedded in an oriented manner and used for routine
histology. Data showed for all human breast cancer samples, distinct
stiffness phenotypes in comparison to the surrounding non-neoplastic and
morphologically normal breast tissue and revealed specific nanomechanical
profiles of phenotypes that lead to metastases. Interestingly, patients
presenting nanomechanical changes in the adjacent tissue, which was
histologically characterized as tumor free, typically exhibited local
and/or distant metastases.Overall, our findings demonstrate the first
application of nanomechanical profiling in a clinical setting that allows
for fast, on-site assessment of specimen and does not suffer from
inter-observer variability such as other markers (Obermann et al,
Pathologe, 2012). The relative size and distribution of nanomechanical
profiles can provide an indicator of cancer aggressiveness, and therefore
orientate therapy choice, and support patient follow-up.

