Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the dynamic interplay between genetically different
cancer cell clones in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma is the most frequent and aggressive brain tumor in adults.
Based on genomic data glioblastomas can be classified into at least four
subclasses: proneural, neural, classical and mesenchymal. However, recent
publications have shown that individual glioblastoma can be heterogeneous
and contain a mixture of these four subclasses. Moreover, it has been
shown in other studies that intratumoral communication between
genetically distinct cancer cell subclones in glioblastomas can affect
the overall tumor growth via secreted proteins. In this project we aim to
investigate the difference between protein secretomes from different
tumor cell clones from within genetically heterogeneous glioblastomas.For
this we have used the U343 cell culture system, consisting of U343MG,
U343MGa, U343MGa-31L and U343MGa-Cl2:6. These cultures were derived from
a single glioblastoma, and can be divided into at least two categories
based on their mutually exclusive expression patterns of FN1 and GFAP.
Here we show that these different cultures display different
characteristics with regard to matrigel invasion capacity, neurosphere
formation capacity, and gene and protein expression. Combinatorial
co-culture and conditioned media based experiments showed that the U343MG
culture elicit anti-proliferative effects on U343MGa-31L via secreted
factors. To identify proteins that are secreted by U343MG we have used
Secretome Protein Enrichment with Click Sugars (SPECS) followed by mass
spectrometry analysis. We detected 150 proteins by more than 2 peptides
in U343MG conditioned media. Several of these proteins were growth
factors and matrix proteins, including FN1. We are now performing a
combined secretome and gene expression analysis of all U343 cultures to
identify candidate secreted proteins that most likely are involved in the
observed signaling effects between U343MG and U343MGa-31L. Finally, a
functional genomic approach will be taken to experimentally pinpoint
mediators of these inter-clonal effects.This study shows that subclones
from a heterogeneous glioblastoma can display different phenotypic
characters and affect each other via secreted factors. Further knowledge
about cell-to-cell communication through secreted proteins in
glioblastoma may provide novel therapeutic targets.

