Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of the LCMS bioanalysis for clinical pharmacokinetics
of antibody drugs using Fab-selective limited proteolysis (nSMOL)


Monoclonal antibody drugs (mAbs) have become a major therapeutic strategy
in cancer care. The approved mAbs have been about 40 items, and a lot of
clinical trials have been now performing in the world. For precise cancer
therapy, overall pharmacokinetic (PK) information in blood or tumor
tissue will become the mainstream indicators for many clinicians.
Therefore, versatile and robust analytical technologies for the direct
detection of antibody will be important outcome in clinical applications.
The bioanalysis of mAbs using LCMS is a significant platform for the
selective quantitation or the feasibility of the multiplex assays for
combination therapy. For regulated LCMS bioanalysis independent of a
variety of mAbs or biological taxonomy sources, we have focused on the
two features: antibody structure-indicated analysis, and
complementarity-determining region (CDR)-targeting quantitation.Using the
previous LCMS bioanalysis by general proteomic method, the signature
proteolytic peptides of the mAb should be quantified from the massive
analyte and residual protease because immunoglobulin molecules are second
major protein in plasma proteome. The excess peptides will be cause to
decrease the selectivity and sensitivity. To address this issues, we have
recently reported the novel method for the selective proteolysis on the
Fab by limiting protease access to antibodies, which have named
nano-surface and molecular-orientation limited (nSMOL) proteolysis. nSMOL
chemistry is designed based on the unique features: (1) protease reaction
on nanoparticle surface; (2) Fc immobilization onto the resin, such that
the Fab is oriented outward to the solution; and (3) Fab-selective
limited proteolysis by making use the difference of the protease
nanoparticle diameter (200 nm) and the Ab resin pore size (100 nm). nSMOL
has made it possible to minimize the sample complexity while the
maintaining the sequence specificity in CDR.We are now performing the
bioanalytical validation for several mAbs in accordance with the
Guideline on Bioanalytical Method Validation in Pharmaceutical
Development. The results of validation study show that nSMOL is possible
to cover the clinical dose, and more accurate and sensitive than ELISA
and conventional proteomic approaches. For clinical feasibility test, we
measured the plasma concentration of Bevacizumab in patients with
recurrent non-small cell lung cancer according to nSMOL protocols.nSMOL
proteolysis coupled with LCMS bioanalysis is a novel method for the
clinical PK independent of a variety of monoclonal antibodies, and have
confirmed the clinical usability by the fully validated bioanalysis. This
analytical approach will be applicable for many new mAbs and biosimilar
drugs. Furthermore, the clinical trials based on LCMS may be expected to
aid acceleration of the development of many biopharmaceuticals.

