Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell senescence and antitumor potential of 7-epiclusianone in
human breast cancer cell lines cultured in monolayer and as spheroids


Brazilian flora is considered one of the most diverse in the world and
represents a source of new molecules with bioactivity against several
diseases. 7-epiclusianone, a prenylated benzophenone was isolated from
Garcinia brasiliensis, a plant named bacupari in folk medicine. Previous
studies showed that this compound has dose-dependent cytotoxic effect in
several cell lines derived from human cancers and antiproliferative
effect by inducing cell cycle arrest in G1/S and apoptosis in A549 lung
cancer cell line. The present study aimed to analyze the cytotoxic and/or
antiproliferative potential of 7-epiclusianone in human breast cancer
cell lines cultured in monolayer and as spheroids. Monolayer cell
cultures are commonly used for testing drug effects largely because of
their easy maintenance, but they do not represent the spatial
interactions of cells within a tumor. Spheroids in 3D cell cultures can
overcome some of those limitations thus mimicking the architecture of
solid tumors. Initially the 3D conditions were established for both cell
lines MCF7 and Hs578T. Spheroids were morphologically characterized by
light and transmission electron microscopy. MCF-7 spheroids showed
typical epithelial organization with cohesive cells, in accordance with
higher expression levels of E-cadherin compared to monolayer. In Hs578T
spheroids, cells assumed fibroblast-like morphology concentrically
organized, low E-cadherin expression and synthesis of extracellular
matrix components. The IC50 values of 7-epiclusianone were 20 M for Hs
578T cells and 6 M for MCF-7 monolayers cell cultures. At this
concentration, the compound treatment arrested monolayer cell cultures in
G0/G1. 7-epiclusianone reduced the mRNA levels for cyclins D1 and E in
line MCF-7, while only cyclin E mRNA in Hs 578T. The compound did not
change the microfilaments organization or the nuclear integrity, as
observed by laser scanning confocal microscopy. Interestingly,
7-epiclusianone treated cultures exhibit higher senescence indexes while
apoptotic cells were not detected. Altogether, these data suggest that
7-epiclusianone is a promising molecule against breast cancer cells. The
three-dimensional culture was more resistant to treatment with the
compound than the monolayer, therefore more comprehensive studies are
needed to understand better the effects of 7-epiclusianone on this type
of culture. (Supported by FAPESP and CNPq)

