Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phytotherapy boosts innate immunity to maximize cancer survival


We studied surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy in animals and found all
these modalities suppressed cancer growth but they also impaired the
immune functions of the animal host. We also studied phytotherapy (use of
plant chemicals) and found it to have no side effects and with more
lasting benefits. Using in vitro cell culture system with both malignant
and non-malignant cells, and immune cells (macrophages and natural killer
cells), we compared crude extract of Pacific yew and the chemotherapeutic
drug Paclitaxel derived from Pacific yew. The crude extract or the drug
was incubated separately with: human malignant ovarian cells,
nonmalignant ovarian cells, macrophages, and natural killer cells. Cell
viability was determined by MTT (methylthiazol tetrazolium) assay.
Results show the drug damaged all these four types of cells while the
crude plant extract only damaged the cancer cells showing its selective
toxicity for cancer cells. Study with other phytochemicals also shows
selective toxicity for cancer cells while enhancing the activities of
immune cells. Phytotherapy is thus a non-toxic chemotherapy and
immunotherapy. In our clinical observation, 160 men and women diagnosed
with five types of cancer (72 with breast cancer, 28 with prostate
cancer, 18 with colon cancer, 14 with lung cancer, 28 with ovarian
cancer) chose to use phytotherapy (a plant-based diet) plus lifestyle
modification. The five year survival of these patients were 90%, 89%,
83%, 86%, and 82%, respectively. Compared with five year survival data
from National Cancer Institute (www.seer.cancer.gov) for these five types
of cancer: 82%, 50%, 62%, 15%, and 45%, respectively, the phytotherapy
group exhibits greater cancer survival. Since numerous studies have now
revealed that cancer is attributable to our lifestyle habits the way we
eat, and the way we live, our data suggest that regardless of treatment
choices, a change in diet and lifestyle is likely to improve cancer
survival.

