Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene-targeted apoptosis as a novel therapeutic strategy for
HER2-positive breast cancer


The ability to target HER2-driven breast cancers using anticancer agents
with mechanisms of actions that are independent of the HER2 cellular
growth function, represents a powerful new tool to circumvent drug
resistance experienced with traditional HER2-targeted therapies. We have
discovered that manipulation of the balance between the DNA repair
response and apoptotic pathways provides an alternative strategy to
induce targeted apoptosis in HER2-amplified breast cancers. Our recent
finding that triplex-induced DNA damage can activate apoptosis in human
cells has yielded the opportunity to develop a new class of HER2-targeted
therapies. Here, we have uncovered the novel finding that triplex-induced
apoptosis only occurs when multiple triplex structures are formed, while
NER (nucleotide excision repair)-dependent repair prevails in the
presence of one or two structures. With this in mind, we have designed
sequence-specific DNA-binding molecules that create chromosomal triplex
structures and activate tumor-specific apoptosis through the induction of
excessive DNA damage at the HER2 locus. Importantly, this only occurs in
malignant cells with multiple copies of the HER2 gene. We have evaluated
the efficacy of the HER2-targeted triplex-forming molecules using cell
growth and apoptosis assays and demonstrate that these molecules are
particularly effective in eliciting tumor specific apoptosis in
HER2-amplified breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, these molecules
have the ability to suppress the growth and metastasis of human
HER2-positive breast cancers in a xenograft mouse model. Moreover, we
demonstrate that the NER protein, XPD mediates the survival-death
decision in response to triplex-induced DNA damage via a p53-independent
mechanism that involves phosphorylation of the H2AX tyrosine 142 residue,
which stimulates the signaling pathway to recruit pro-apoptotic factors
to the damage site. Our results establish an alternative and novel method
to specifically target HER2-positive breast cancers by exploiting the
cell's own DNA damage response machinery. This study introduces a new
paradigm for gene-targeted drugs that can be used in the treatment of
HER2-positive and drug-resistant breast cancers with minimal potential
for toxicity to normal tissue.

