Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms underlying estrogen-induced inflammation in
estrogen-deprived breast cancer cells


Inflammation is critical for estrogen (E2) to undertake apoptosis in
E2-deprived breast cancer cells. However, it remains unclear how E2
induces inflammation. Here, we demonstrate that E2 increases lipid
metabolism and accumulates unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
in E2-deprived breast cancer cells. These two major alterations result in
different inflammatory responses. E2 rapidly increases lipid metabolism
related genes such as fatty acid desaturase 1 (FADS1) and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein beta (CEBPB) to modulate adipose inflammation related
factors, e.g. IL6/IL6R after two hours treatment, which regulate the
cellular proliferation or differentiation. Simultaneously, accumulation
of the unfolded protein activates unfolded protein response (UPR)
sensors, protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) and
inositol-requiring protein 1 alpha (IRE1) within few hours after exposure
to E2. Importantly, inhibition of PERK, rather than IRE1, is able to
completely prevent E2 from induction of late event inflammatory genes
associated with apoptosis, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
superfamily members, BCL2L11 (Bim), and HMOX1,which are activated by E2
after 48 hours. Consistently, nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-B) is activated
when TNF is maximal after E2 treatment. Further examination revealed that
an anti-inflammatory agent, dexamethasone (Dex), activates glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) transcriptional activity and blocks E2-induced apoptosis.
These effects can be reversed by the knockdown of GR. A notable
mechanistic change is that Dex effectively blocks the phosphorylation of
PERK and produces equivalent inhibitory effects on the
apoptosis-associated inflammatory genes as the PERK inhibitor. However,
Dex has an additional potential to activate lipid metabolism and are
additive with E2 to elevate FADS1 and adipokine IL6/IL6R. All of these
data, for the first time, describe the mechanisms underlying E2-induced
inflammation in E2-deprived breast cancer. It provides important
information to restrict the clinical use of glucocorticoids, which will
undermine the beneficial effects of E2-induced apoptosis in estrogen
deprived breast cancer patients.

