Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hexyl-benzyl-biguanide (HBB) potently and selectively inhibits
CYP3A4 epoxygenase activity and inhibits EET stabilization of
mitochondrial respiration in ER+HER2- breast cancer cells, inducing
glycolysis and pyruvate biosynthesis


Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) promotes ER+HER2- breast cancer cell
proliferation and survival, in part, by biosynthesis of
epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). EETs are known to regulate
mitochondrial function in non-transformed cells, but the roles of CYP3A4
and EETs in regulation of breast cancer bioenergetics are unknown.
Hexyl-benzyl-biguanide (HBB) is useful probe of CYP3A4 epoxygenase
activity and selectively inhibits EET biosynthesis (IC50 = 9 uM vs. IC50
= 50 uM for CYP2C8). HBB caused depolarization of mitochondria in MCF-7
cells, while ()-14,15-EET provided partial protection. The soluble
epoxide hydrolase (sEH) inhibitor t-AUCB ameliorated inhibition of oxygen
consumption rates (OCR) by HBB (20 uM), while there was no effect on
extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), indicating that the primary
effect of HBB is on OCR. At 30 minutes, HBB added to MCF-7 cells
transiently suppressed phosphorylation of pyruvate kinase muscle isozyme
2 (PKM2) on Tyr-105, which has been reported to favor enzymatically
inactive dimer over active tetramer. Suppression of phosphorylated PKM2
correlated with subsequent PKM2 tetramer formation and increase of
intracellular pyruvate and extracellular lactate at 1 hour. The
()-14,15-EET regioisomer reduced the pro-glycolytic PKM2 tetramer at 1
hour, suggesting that HBB may promote PKM2 tetramer, in part, through
reduction of EET. Prolonged exposure to HBB (20 uM) in cultured cells
activated phosphorylation of PKM2 on Tyr-105, but there was increased
cellular necrosis correlating with reduced mitochondrial respiration and
reduction of ATP stores, indicating that loss of respiration was the
dominant effect. HBB inhibited the ER+HER2- MCF-7 xenograft, similar to
CYP3A4 silencing. HBB promoted phosphorylation of intratumoral PKM2 on
Tyr-105, consistent with long-term exposure to HBB in cultured MCF-7
cells. Notably, MCF-7 tumor response to HBB did not correlate with
phosphorylation of AMPK-alpha on Thr-172, a marker of AMPK activation.
Metformin (5 mM) exhibited no effect on PKM2 or its phosphorylation in
cultured MCF-7 cells. Together, these results indicate that part of the
inhibitory effect of HBB on ER+HER2- breast cancer is mediated through
inhibition of respiration.Significance: These results establish HBB as a
useful chemical probe of respiration, with indirect effects on PKM2
regulation. HBB may also be useful as a potential therapeutic candidate
for ER+HER2- breast cancer.

