Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel conditionally active biologic anti-Axl antibody-drug
conjugate demonstrates anti-tumor efficacy and improved safety profile


Axl is a TAM family receptor tyrosine kinase that has been implicated in
the pathogenesis of many cancer types. The high level of expression on
the cancer cell surface has made it an attractive target for antibody
therapeutics. However, Axl is expressed on many normal tissues and has
been implicated in wide ranging requisite biological processes including
response of endothelial cells to vascular injury, hematopoiesis, and
regulation of immune responses. This normal tissue expression may limit
Axl as a target for antibody-drug-conjugates (ADC). Conditionally Active
Biologics (CAB) technology is a proprietary platform that selects
antibodies that bind to target antigen in the context of diseased
tissues, but not normal tissues, by taking advantage of the unique cancer
microenvironment that is produced largely as a result of the Warburg
effect. Using our CAB technology, we have identified anti-Axl Abs that
reversibly bind to recombinant Axl and Axl expressing cells under
conditions that are present in the tumor microenvironment but not in
normal tissues.CAB-Axl antibodies were then conjugated to a model toxin
payload to generate CAB-Axl-ADCs. The CAB-Axl-ADCs were active against
Axl positive human tumor xenografts with tumor stasis observed at 1mg/kg
weekly and tumor regressions observed at 1 mg/kg twice a week dose
levels. A non-specific IgG-ADC showed minimal efficacy at the same dose
levels. Single dose studies in cynomolgus macaques have demonstrated that
CAB-Axl-ADC has reduced liver toxicity and immune system effects compared
to Axl-ADCs that bind to Axl under normal conditions.In conclusion, our
data is consistent with our work on CAB-EGFR antibodies, and suggests
that ADCs generated using the CAB technology provides biologics with
increased therapeutic index. Specifically, the CAB-Axl-ADC is an
excellent candidate for evaluation as a treatment for human cancers that
are Axl positive.

