Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol inhibits lung cancer brain metastasis through inhibition
of STAT3 signaling pathway


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States,
and metastasis to lymph-node (LN) and distal organs especially brain
leads to sever complications and are the major cause of death. Preventing
lung cancer development and metastases is important strategy to reduce
lung cancer mortality. Honokiol (HNK), a natural compound present in
magnolia bark extracts, has a good bioavailability profile and recently
has also been shown to readily cross both the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
We previously demonstrated that HNK can prevent and inhibit squamous lung
cancer cell carcinoma both in-vitro and in-vivo. In the current study, we
evaluated the anti-metastatic effects of HNK in both LN and brain murine
models of lung tumor metastasis. The H2030-BrM3 (BR-brain seeking) lung
tumor cells stably transfected with luciferase and GFP were
orthotopically injected into lung for LN metastases, or directly to the
left ventricle of mouse heart for brain metastases, LN or brain
metastasis was monitored using a non-invasive IVIS bio-luminescent
imaging system. To test the efficacy of HNK in preventing tumor cells
migrating to LN or brain, mice were given 10 mg/kg per body weight HNK by
aerosol (for lung to LN metastasis model) or oral gavage starting the day
after tumor cell injection, our results reveal that HNK significantly
prevented the metastasis of lung cancer cells to LN and brain. Our
results demonstrate that HNK decreased LN metastases incidence to 30%
compare to 100% in control mice, and inhibited brain metastasis near 70%
compare to control. Furthermore, analysis of HNK's mechanism of action by
utilizing both RNA sequencing and receptor tyrosine kinase assay suggests
that its effect is primarily mediated by inhibiting STAT3 pathway. HNK
specifically inhibits STAT3 phosphorylation, and knock-down STAT3 totally
abrogated the anti-metastasis effects of HNK in brain metastatic lung
cancer cell lines, PC9-BrM3 and H2030-BrM3. These finding suggest that
HNK could provide novel chemopreventive or therapeutic options for
preventing both lung tumor progression and lung cancer brain metastasis.

