Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting eEF-2Kinase by thymoquinone in triple negative breast
cancer


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) constitute a heterogeneous subtype
of breast cancers that present a significant challenge for the treatment
and management, and have a poor clinical outcome. Eukaryotic elongation
factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K) is an atypical calcium/calmodulin
(Ca2++/CaM)-dependent Ser/Thr-kinase that regulates peptide chain
elongation by phosphorylating its substrate elongation factor 2 (eEF2),
resulting in decreased protein translation. Recently, we have reported
that eEF-2K expression is significantly upregulated in TNBC cell lines
and is associated with poor survival and worse prognosis, indicating that
eEF-2K is a potential therapeutic target in TNBC. Moreover, we
demonstrated that eEF-2K promotes TNBC cell proliferation,
invasion/migration, and tumorigenesis. Its inhibition by systemically
administered liposomal siRNA resulted in marked inhibition of tumor
growth and enhancement in the efficacy of chemotherapy in orthotopic TNBC
mouse models (Tekedereli 2012). Currently, there are no reported
inhibitors of eEF-2K. Natural dietary poly phenolic compounds have been
shown to inhibit various cancers by regulating various kinases and
molecular targets, with both in-vitro and in-vivo activity. Thymoquinone
(TQ) is an active ingredient isolated from Nigella sativa and has been
investigated for its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer
activities in several in-vitro and in-vivo models. However, the mechanism
by which TQ mediates its effects not well understood. Here, we
investigated if TQ inhibits eEF-2K in TNBC cells. We demonstrated, for
the first time, that treatment with TQ decreases the expression of eEF-2K
in a dose dependent manner as wells as its downstream targets, resulting
in decreased proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion of
TNBC cells. Furthermore, eEF-2K knockdown by siRNA recapitulates the
effects of TQ, including cell proliferation, migration/invasion, and
correlated events. Additionally, TQ treatment inhibits Src activity and
other molecular targets, and induces significant apoptosis in TNBC cells
in a caspase independent manner. Currently, we are investigating the
downstream effects of TQ by RPPA analysis and its in-vivo efficacy in
orthotopic xenograft mouse models of TNBC. Overall, our studies suggest
that TQ could present a novel therapeutic strategy in targeting eEF-2K
and inhibition of TNBCs.

