Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent inhibition of the cell proliferation and induction of
apoptosis in lymphoma cells by the anthelminthic drug niclosamide: in
vitro data


Background: Niclosamide, an anthelminthic drug, has demonstrated
anti-cancer potential in variety of malignancies. However only a limited
number of studies have been performed in lymphoma models, therefore we
hypothesized that niclosamide may also have anti-cancer potential on
B-cell lymphomas.Materials and Methods: Established B lymphoma cell lines
were exposed to different concentrations of niclosamide and IC50 was
calculated using GraphPad Prism 6.0 software. Cell viability and
proliferation were assessed by CellTiter-Blue and trypan blue exclusion
assays. Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry following Annexin-V/
propidium iodide staining. Gene expression changes were studied using
GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array 2.0. Colony forming assays were
performed in methylcellulose. Ultrastructural cellular changes were
studied with electron microscopy. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from individuals without active cancer and from patients with
different hematologic disorders, were also exposed with
niclosamide.Results: Treatment with niclosamide resulted in time-and
dose- dependent apoptosis, cytotoxicity and inhibition of proliferation
in different lymphoma cell lines including vincristine-refractory cell
line. The IC50 of lymphoma cells lines is as follows: Daudi: 0.33 M;
HBL-2: 0.57 M; KOPN-8: 0.72 M; Ramos: 0.53 M and SU-DHL4-VR: 0.45 M.
Niclosamide also inhibited clonal growth in semi-solid media. Gene
expression changes were studied in Daudi and KOPN-8 cells treated with
2.5 M Niclosamide for 3 and 6 hours. 96 genes were consistently
overexpressed, 59 down-regulated. 10 genes involved in the tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) pathway and 10 genes involving the DNA damage pathway were
overexpressed. 13 out of the 59 down-regulated genes were involved in
mitochondrial function. Electron microscopy showed that filopodia
increased and lipid vacuoles developed whereas mitochondria were less
numerous in KOPN-8 cells. The viability of PBMCs from 8 individuals
without lymphoma was unchanged when incubated with niclosamide, whereas
niclosamide showed significant cytotoxicity in a patient with mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL).Conclusion: Niclosamide effectively inhibits the
proliferation of B lymphoma cell lines, including vincristine-refractory
lymphoma cells, and induces apoptosis at concentrations non-toxic to
PBMCs. Interestingly, niclosamide exhibited cytotoxic activity against
MCL cells - a finding worth testing further in this difficult-to-treat
disease. The mechanism of action of Niclosamide may involve the TNF
receptor pathway, mitochondrial function and DNA damage response pathway.
We plan to elucidate further specific mechanism(s) of action, and
evaluate synergistic effects with other antineoplastic agents, and
perform in vivo studies.

