Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in gene-specific DNA methylation in blood DNA as a
biomarker for early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma in populations
at risk


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most prevalent type of primary liver
cancer, is the second leading cause of cancer death worldwide. It is
estimated that early HCC detection would increase the cure rate from 5%
to 80%. Approximately 85% of individuals with HCC have underlying liver
cirrhosis which is the main risk factor for developing HCC. Every year up
to 5% of cirrhotic patients are diagnosed with HCC. The biggest challenge
that physicians face today is to distinguish cirrhotic patients that will
develop cancer from those that will not. Thus, early detection biomarkers
that can be implemented as screening tools in populations at risk are of
high interest.In our previous genome-wide study, we demonstrated that
blood DNA has different DNA methylation patterns specific to HCC samples
collected before diagnosis (pre-diagnostic) compared to healthy
individuals without cancer. We established 10 differentially methylated
probes corresponding to 10 genes that distinguish pre-diagnostic HCC
blood samples from healthy controls. In the current study using
pyrosequencing, we tested the diagnostic potential of these probes in
blood samples from a prospective cohort of cirrhotic patients without HCC
at the time of blood collection. Twenty eight of these patients developed
HCC within 4 years of follow-up. These 28 cases were matched with 23
cirrhotic controls on gender, age, ethnicity, hepatitis C, and
diabetes.Five out of the 10 tested probes distinguished cirrhotic
patients who subsequently developed HCC (cases) from those who stayed
cancer free (controls) (pHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most
prevalent type of primary liver cancer, is the second leading cause of
cancer death worldwide. It is estimated that early HCC detection would
increase the cure rate from 5% to 80%. Approximately 85% of individuals
with HCC have underlying liver cirrhosis which is the main risk factor
for developing HCC. Every year up to 5% of cirrhotic patients are
diagnosed with HCC. The biggest challenge that physicians face today is
to distinguish cirrhotic patients that will develop cancer from those
that will not. Thus, early detection biomarkers that can be implemented
as screening tools in populations at risk are of high interest.In our
previous genome-wide study, we demonstrated that blood DNA has different
DNA methylation patterns specific to HCC samples collected before
diagnosis (pre-diagnostic) compared to healthy individuals without
cancer. We established 10 differentially methylated probes corresponding
to 10 genes that distinguish pre-diagnostic HCC blood samples from
healthy controls. In the current study using pyrosequencing, we tested
the diagnostic potential of these probes in blood samples from a
prospective cohort of cirrhotic patients without HCC at the time of blood
collection. Twenty eight of these patients developed HCC within 4 years
of follow-up. These 28 cases were matched with 23 cirrhotic controls on
gender, age, ethnicity, hepatitis C, and diabetes.Five out of the 10
tested probes distinguished cirrhotic patients who subsequently developed
HCC (cases) from those who stayed cancer free (controls) (p<0.05,
Mann-Whitney U test). The highest differences were observed at CpG sites
located within BARD1 whose methylation was consistently lower in cases
vs. controls. Using this probe, 22 cases were correctly identified as
cases (79% sensitivity), whereas only 6 controls were falsely included
into cases (74% specificity). Analysis of the panel of the 5 probes
increased sensitivity to 86% with a threshold of 2 positive probes, while
maintaining 74% specificity. Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC)
curve analysis confirmed high predictive value for the 5 probes in the
cirrhotic population [Area Under the Curve (AUC) = 0.80]. The established
DNA methylation biomarkers have better values of performance compared to
current recommended methods for HCC surveillance, such as serum
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) that can miss up to 40% of patients.Our results
establish the possible diagnostic value of gene-specific DNA methylation
in blood DNA for HCC early detection in populations at risk such as
individuals with liver cirrhosis. This study was supported by Showalter
Trust and PCCR Awards granted to BS.

