Meeting: 2016 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery, semisynthesis, and structure-activity relationship
studies of hirsutinolide derivatives as new STAT3 inhibitors and
anti-glioma agents


Clinically, natural product has played a pivotal role in anticancer drug
discovery and development. Cancer chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy due to
glioma treatment are not ideal, frequently cause unwanted adverse
effects, and justify further research and development of alternative,
novel, safe, and effective agents. In our continued efforts to identify
new signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and
antiglioma agents with enhanced efficacy and specificity, we have
initiated a collaborative and multidisciplinary natural product drug
discovery project and the goal was to isolate, semisynthesize, and
evaluate the potential of Vernonia cinerea-derived phytochemicals as
STAT3 inhibitors with therapeutic remedy of human glioma and may be even
more effective than the existing ones. To date, our preliminary studies
have been conducted and resulted in the discovery of a class of
sesquiterpene lactone hirsutinolide series with an ,-unsaturated--lactone
ring as new STAT3 inhibitors. Specifically, on the basis of encouraging
biological data and to expand the existing structure activity
relationship (SAR) of isolated natural hirsutinolide analogues, chemical
modifications were performed using conventional Steglich esterification
protocol to produce a series of semisynthetic hirsutinolide derivatives
in moderate to high yields. Thus far, biological evaluation revealed that
several semisynthetic analogues showed low micromolar inhibitory
activities against constitutively-active STAT3 and malignant glioma
phenotype. SAR showed that a bulky and lipophilic ester functionality at
position 13 is essential for STAT3 inhibition as well as whole cell based
anticancer activity. A lipophilic side chain at position 8 also plays an
important role in anticancer activity and may contribute a detrimental
effect on specificity. In addition, the methoxy group at position 1
enhances the cell-type specificity and selectivity. Finally, selected
promising lead candidates also demonstrated in vivo efficacy following
oral gavage delivery, inhibiting human glioma tumor growth in
subcutaneous mouse xenografts. Together, natural and chemically modified
hirsutinolide-type sesquiterpene lactones represent a promising natural
product class of new anticancer agents for the treatment of malignant
human glioma.

